PROVINCE OF ACEH
QANUN OF BIREUEN REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BISMILLAHIRRAHMANIRRAHIM
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MOST GRACIOUS, THE MOST MERCIFUL, BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY ALLAH,

REGENT OF BIREUEN,
Considering: a. that women as noble and dignified beings need to be empowered in their capabilities and have the right to receive protection in accordance with Islamic Shari'ah;
b. that based on Article 231 of Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning the Governance of Aceh, it states that the Regency Government is obligated to advance and protect the rights of women and children and to undertake dignified empowerment efforts;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Qanun concerning the Protection of Women;
In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 48 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Bireuen Regency and Simeulue Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 176, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3897) as amended by Law Number 8 of 2000 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 75, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3963);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning the Governance of Aceh (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 62, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4633);
6. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery for Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
9. Supreme Court Regulation Number 3 of 2017 concerning Guidelines for Adjudicating Cases of Women Facing the Law;
10. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children;
11. Qanun of Aceh Number 6 of 2009 concerning the Empowerment and Protection of Women (Regional Gazette of Aceh of 2009 Number 06, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Aceh Number 28);
12. Qanun of Aceh Number 9 of 2019 concerning the Implementation of Handling Violence Against Women and Children (Gazette of Aceh of 2019 Number 17, Supplement to the Gazette of Aceh Number 119);
With Joint Approval

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BIREUEN REGENCY
REGENT OF BIREUEN
DECIDES:
To Establish : QANUN ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Qanun, what is meant by:
1. Region is Bireuen Regency.
2. Regency is Bireuen Regency which is part of the provincial region of Aceh led by a Regent.
3. Regency Government is the Government of Bireuen Regency as the administration of affairs carried out by the regency government and the Regional House of Representatives of Bireuen Regency in accordance with their respective functions and authorities.
4. Regency Government is the element of the administration of Regency Government consisting of the Regent and regency apparatus.
5. Regent is the Head of Bireuen Regency Government who is elected through a democratic process conducted based on the principles of direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair in accordance with the laws and regulations.
6. Regional House of Representatives of the Regency hereinafter abbreviated as DPRK is an element of the administration of Bireuen Regency government whose members are elected through general elections in accordance with the laws and regulations.
7. Woman is a person (human being) who has reached the age of 15 years who menstruates, is pregnant, gives birth, and breastfeeds.
8. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by giving consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving just and equal relations with men.
9. Victim is a woman who experiences threats of violence and or violence inside and or outside the household and or becomes an object of trafficking/exploitation, and or discrimination in all its forms and aspects.
10. Threat of Violence is any act of non-physical misuse, using or not using means unlawfully, that can cause danger to the body, life, freedom and human rights of women.
11. Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of freedom unlawfully, whether within or outside the scope of the household.
12. Discrimination Against Women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status on the basis of equality between men and women.
13. Women's Rights are all rights possessed by every woman which are part of human rights.
14. Special Protection is protection given to women and children in emergency situations, women and children in conflict with the law, women and children from minority and isolated groups, women and children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, women and children who are trafficked, women and children who become victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, women and children victims of violence both physical and/or mental.
15. Society is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
16. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
17. Labor Force is every person who is capable of performing work to produce goods and/or services either to meet their own needs or for society.
18. Worker/Laborer is every person who works by receiving wages or remuneration in other forms.
19. Person with Disability is every person who experiences physical, intellectual, mental, and/or sensory limitations for a long period of time who in interacting with the environment may experience obstacles and difficulties to participate fully and effectively with other citizens based on equal rights.
20. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is or has occurred.
21. Rehabilitation is a series of actions carried out by authorized parties in their field to restore the physical, mental and psychosocial condition of women to their original condition.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of women is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for the values of Islamic sharia and Acehnese customs that are responsive to women;
b. legal certainty;
c. public interest;
d. respect for human rights;
e. justice and gender equality;
f. non-discrimination;
g. professionalism, accountability and transparency; and
h. protection and fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 3
The protection of women has the objective to:
a. strengthen regional policy and budget support in the framework of optimizing the implementation of women's protection;
b. reinforce the commitment of policy makers at the regency, sub-district and gampong levels in the framework of increasing efforts and guarantees of protection for women;
c. improve coordination, integration, synchronization, and synergy between SKPK with all stakeholders including religious organizations, professional organizations, academics, the private sector and the wider community in efforts to improve the quality of women's protection;
d. build public knowledge and awareness to support efforts to protect women;
e. increase the institutional capacity and human resources of UPTD PPA;
f. provide guarantees to women to be able to fulfill their rights as human beings in all aspects of life;
g. provide a sense of security to women in all aspects of life; and
h. reduce the rate of violence against women.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 4
The scope of regulation in this Qanun includes:
a. principles and objectives;
b. women's rights;
c. protection of women;
d. obligations and responsibilities of the Regency Government;
e. support of the gampong government;
f. strategies and mechanisms for implementing the protection of women;
g. community participation; and
h. awards.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General

Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and preserve her life, as well as improve the standard of welfare in her life;
b. practice religious teachings in accordance with Islamic sharia;
c. obtain justice, a sense of security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
d. obtain protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
e. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, establish a family and continue offspring;
f. obtain fair and equal treatment in carrying out her roles and functions both in family life, society and participate fully in every process of making, determining and implementing development policies;
g. obtain education and teaching at all types, levels, and pathways of education, without any obstacles and pressure in order to improve her skills and quality of life;
h. receive information and knowledge for women about health, especially reproductive health comprehensively; and
i. obtain special protection in the implementation of her work or profession against matters that threaten her safety and/or health related to reproductive function.
(2) Every woman in her capacity as a wife, while in the bond of marriage has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband over all matters relating to her marital life, relations with her children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) In addition to the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), a woman as a wife has the right to receive material and spiritual support from her husband.
(4) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities from her former husband over all matters relating to the child, taking into account the best interests of the child.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 6
Every woman with disability, has the right to obtain: a. education in all units, pathways, types, and levels of education; b. work and decent livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education, and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. accessibility for the purpose of her independence;
e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life; and
g. other rights as regulated in laws and regulations.

Third Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 7
Every female victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. respect for dignity and worth as a human being;
b. health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. determine her own decisions in handling the case of violence she experienced;
d. obtain information;
e. obtain a guarantee of confidentiality;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. complaint handling;
h. obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
i. assistance; and
j. obtain empowerment after her case has been completely handled.

Fourth Part
Special Treatment

Article 8
(1) Every woman who is in a condition of disability, elderly age, and/or pregnant, has the right to obtain facilities and special treatment related to access to public services.
(2) Every elderly woman, and every woman with a physical disability and/or mental disability, has the right to obtain care, education, training, and special assistance at the expense of the Regency Government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.
(3) Every woman who is involved with narcotics, either as a perpetrator or a victim, has the right to receive fair treatment both in the law enforcement process and in the rehabilitation (recovery) process.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
Implementation of Protection of Women

Article 9
Implementation of protection for women is provided to:
a. women as housewives;
b. women heads of household;
c. women domestic workers;
d. women workers/laborers;
e. women with disabilities;
f. women who are homeless;
g. women who are former correctional inmates;
h. women victims of violence;
i. women victims of conflict; and
j. elderly women.

Paragraph 1
Women As Housewives

Article 10
The implementation of protection for women as housewives as referred to in Article 9 letter a, in the following cases: a. physical and spiritual support;
b. the head of the family provides special protection to the housewife during pregnancy; and
c. the housewife who has given birth must receive protection from the head of the family to reduce the burden as a housewife.

Article 11
A housewife who performs work outside the home must receive protection from the head of the family in the form of granting permission and being able to provide a domestic worker.

Paragraph 2
Female Head of Household

Article 12
(1) Women heads of households as referred to in Article 9 letter b are widows whose husbands have died and, due to divorce, must receive protection.
(2) The implementation of protection for women heads of households as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination and negative stigma, and to provide economic empowerment for women heads of households.
(3) Women as heads of households as referred to in paragraph (2) receive the right to protection against:
a. discriminatory actions and efforts to weaken the function of women as economic pillars of the family;
b. strengthening of capacity and recognition as heads of households in their environment; and
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.
(4) The implementation of protection for women as heads of households whose husbands have died as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. women as heads of households obtain 1/8 (one-eighth) of the total remaining assets of their husbands if they have children; and
b. women as heads of households obtain 1/4 (one-quarter) of the total remaining assets of their husbands if they do not have children.
(5) The implementation of protection for women as heads of households as a result of divorce as referred to in paragraph (1), during the iddah period, the former husband is responsible for providing a place to live and maintenance.

Paragraph 3
Women Domestic Workers

Article 13
(1) The implementation of protection for female domestic workers as referred to in Article 9 letter c, in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel treatment, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity, and exploitation in employment relations.
(2) Female domestic workers as referred to in paragraph (1) must receive protection from employers in the form of:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security; and
c. a guarantee not to commit discrimination, cruel treatment, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity, and exploitation.

Paragraph 4
Women Workers/Laborers

Article 14
(1) The implementation of protection for female workers/laborers as referred to in Article 9 letter d, is to provide protection from acts of economic exploitation and cruel, inhumane treatment and to ensure proper appreciation for work.
(2) Female workers/laborers as referred to in paragraph (1) must receive protection from employers in the form of:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security; and
c. a guarantee of not being subjected to discrimination, inhumane treatment, treatment degrading human dignity, and exploitation.

Paragraph 5
Women with Disabilities

Article 15
(1) The implementation of protection for women with disabilities as referred to in Article 9 letter e, in the context of providing protection and prevention, against forms of discrimination including freedom from cruel treatment, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity, and freedom from exploitation.
(2) Women with disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1) receive the right to protection for:
   a. guarantee of continuity and personal self-development;
   b. accessibility to information, legal assistance, mobility, social services; and
   c. early intervention efforts including treatment and rehabilitation for the improvement of their function and capacity.

Paragraph 6
Homeless Women

Article 16
(1) The implementation of protection for homeless women as referred to in Article 9 letter f, is in the context of providing protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the absence of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection for:
a. decent housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration registration;
d. opportunities to obtain education and skills to improve economic status; and
e. access to information and legal consultation services.

Paragraph 7
Women Former Inmates of Correctional Institutions

Article 17
(1) The implementation of protection for women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in Article 9 letter g, is in order to provide protection from obstacles to adjusting themselves in community life, so that they can carry out life normally.
(2) Women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
b. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Paragraph 8
Women Victims of Violence

Article 18
(1) The implementation of protection for women victims of violence as referred to in Article 9 letter h shall be carried out in the context of providing legal protection and/or health recovery.
(2) Protection for women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. legal assistance;
b. assistance following the occurrence of acts of violence;
c. rehabilitation and social reintegration; and
d. health services.

Article 19
(1) Every victim as referred to in Article 18 has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage, and confidential handling from individuals, groups, or institutions, whether from the Regency Government or the community.
(2) In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain health services and assistance, both psychological and legal, and to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as a woman.

Paragraph 9
Women victims of conflict

Article 20
The implementation of protection for women victims of conflict as referred to in Article 9 letter i, through:
a. providing a sense of security;
b. fulfillment of the basic needs of women victims of conflict;
c. eliminating trauma; and
d. providing the services needed for victims.

Paragraph 10
Elderly Women

Article 2 1
(1) The implementation of protection for elderly women as referred to in Article 9 letter j, in order to carry out their social functions and play an active role appropriately in their social life.
(2) Protection for elderly women as referred to in paragraph (1) prioritizes protection by their children and heirs.
(3) If elderly women do not receive services from their children and heirs and/or do not have children and other heirs as referred to in paragraph (2), then the protection of elderly women becomes the responsibility of the Regency Government.
(4) Elderly women as referred to in paragraph (1) receive the right to protection in the form of:
a. basic health services to maintain and improve health status including gerontological/geriatric services,
b. use of facilities and accessibility of public facilities and infrastructure; and
c. government administrative services.

CHAPTER VII
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
OF THE DISTRICT GOVERNMENT
Part One
General

Article 22
(1) The Regency Government has the obligation and responsibility for the protection of women.
(2) The efforts for the protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services; and
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) The protection of women as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the laws and regulations.

Article 23
(1) In implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and empowerment for female victims, the Regency Government may cooperate with the community and/or community institutions.
(2) The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 24
The Regent, in implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women, shall undertake efforts to:
a. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women among regency apparatus;
b. cooperate with Regencies/Cities within one Province, and cooperate among Regencies/Cities in other Provinces in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
d. strengthen institutional capacity for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women;
e. facilitate services for the protection of women;
f. provide services for the protection of women;
g. implement affirmative action for the protection of women; and
h. develop a data system for the protection of women.

Article 25
(1) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against women in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about victims of violence and laws and regulations;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for victims of violence;
d. fostering support from religious leaders and customary leaders to build public awareness of the importance of protection for women;
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for victims of violence; and
f. preparing reports on the implementation of protection for women victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence against women, the Regency Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing institutions and facilitating the implementation of integrated services for victims by involving community elements; and
b. encouraging public awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women, the Regency Government undertakes efforts as follows:
a. conducting socialization regarding regulations and policies concerning violence against women for gampong officials, customary leaders and religious leaders;
b. providing counseling to immediately report to local authorities if violence against women occurs;
c. establishing a network in efforts to prevent violence; and
d. other efforts deemed strategic to prevent the occurrence of violence against women.

Article 26
(1) The district government is obligated to provide social assistance for women experiencing social problems and disaster victims. (2) The district government must provide the right to social security for poor women and women with limited capabilities

Second Part
Women's Protection Institution

Article 27
(1) The Regency Government establishes a women's protection institution.
(2) The women's protection institution as referred to in paragraph (1) also handles protection for children.
(3) The women's protection institution as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented by establishing UPTD PPA.
(4) The Regency Government must guarantee the availability of adequate facilities and infrastructure, human resources, and budget to realize the operations of UPTD PPA.
(5) Further provisions regarding UPTD PPA are regulated by the Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
GAMPONG GOVERNMENT SUPPORT
Article 28
(1) The Gampong Government supports efforts to protect women by:
a. issuing gampong-level regulations on the protection of women;
b. disseminating regulations related to the empowerment and protection of women to the community;
c. encouraging the realization of a gampong environment that is friendly towards women;
d. building community awareness, including customary leaders and religious leaders at the gampong level, to be concerned about issues of violence against women;
e. allocating a budget to support women's empowerment and protection programs; and
f. establishing a system for handling violence against women at the gampong level.
(2) The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e, above may be developed in accordance with the gampong's financial capacity, the problems, and the needs of women.

CHAPTER IX
STRATEGY AND MECHANISM FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 29
(1) The Regent integrates policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women into the regency development planning.
(2) The integration of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women must be set forth in planning and budgeting documents which include the Regional Long-Term Development Plan (RPJPD), Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD), Strategic Plan of Regency Work Unit (Renstra-SKPK), Regency Government Work Plan (RKPK), and Work Plan and Budget of Regency Work Unit (RKA-SKPK).
(3) The Regency Work Unit whose duties and functions handle women's empowerment affairs facilitates the integration of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women into the preparation of the planning documents as referred to in paragraph (2).
(4) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (3), the work unit whose duties and functions handle women's empowerment in the region coordinates with the Regional Development Planning Agency (BAPPEDA).

Part Two
Strategy

Article 30
(1) The protection of women is implemented by integrating Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) and a data system consisting of a disaggregated database, gender data, and integrated violence data, based on applicable laws and regulations.
(2) The Regency Work Unit that handles the empowerment and protection of women coordinates with other Regional Apparatus Organizations (OPD) in order to realize the implementation of integrated protection of women.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out within the framework of strengthening synergy in policy formulation, support for programs and activities, as well as monitoring and evaluation.

Third Part
Mechanism

Article 3 1
The mechanism for implementing the protection of women is carried out through the following stages:
a. formulation of policy, program planning and activities;
b. budgeting of programs and activities;
c. implementation of programs and activities; and
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Article 32
(1) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning as referred to in Article 31 letter a, is implemented through:
a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of disaggregated data;
b. coordination and synchronization of the preparation of program and activity planning with related SKPK; and
c. determination of programs and activities in planning documents.
(2) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning is further regulated in service standards and standard operating procedures.
(3) The budgeting of programs and activities as referred to in Article 31 letter b, is implemented through general budget policy as set forth in the APBK.
(4) The implementation of programs and activities as referred to in Article 31 letter c, is implemented through:
a. implementation of programs and activities as set forth in the SKPK budget document; and
b. coordination and synchronization of the implementation of programs and activities with related SKPK.
(5) The implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as referred to in Article 31 letter d, is implemented through:
a. periodic monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs and activities that have been carried out; and
b. preparing periodic reports annually that are submitted to the Regent.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 33
(1) The community may participate in the protection of women.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals and/or organizations.
(3) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) may be carried out by:
a. providing input and suggestions to the Regency Government related to policies, programs and activities for the protection of women;
b. monitoring Regency Government policies related to the protection of women;
c. initiating or proposing new policies that need to be established by the Regency Government in efforts to optimize the protection of women;
d. assisting gampong apparatus in implementing efforts for the protection of women as regulated in this Qanun;
e. conducting socialization regarding the elimination of violence against women;
f. providing information and/or reporting the occurrence of violence against women to law enforcement institutions or the authorities; and
g. monitoring the performance of law enforcement officers in handling cases of violence against women.

Article 34
To guarantee the best service for women victims of violence, the community whether individually, in groups of people or institutions may coordinate with UPTD PPA.

Article 35
(1) The Regency Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women from acts of violence.
(2) Such participation is carried out both internally and externally.
(3) Internal participation as referred to in paragraph (2) may include: a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women;
b. building an internal system for women to handle issues of violence against women; and
c. providing social assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.
(4) External participation as referred to in paragraph (2) may include: a. providing special opportunities for women victims of violence to work in the company;
b. creating special education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women victims of violence who have been withdrawn from education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of violence.

CHAPTER IX
AWARDS
Article 36
(1) The Regency Government grants awards to State Apparatus who are deemed to have commitment and succeed in carrying out the task of women's protection.
(2) The Regency Government grants awards to Community Organizations, the Private Sector and Individuals who are deemed to have made innovations and succeed in supporting women's protection efforts.
(3) Awards are also given to Gampong Governments who are deemed to have commitment and succeed in supporting women's protection efforts.
(4) Further provisions regarding the granting of awards as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 37
All costs for the implementation of planning policies, programs and activities related to the protection of women are sourced from:
a. the Regency Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other sources that are legal and non-binding.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE, MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 38
(1) The Regent through the Regional Apparatus responsible for women's empowerment affairs shall conduct guidance and supervision over the protection of women.
(2) The forms of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows:
a. providing socialization to the community and business sector regarding women's protection policies;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding women's protection, and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitating capacity building of women's protection implementing institutions;
d. facilitating forums for women's participation, women's organizations and organizations for persons with disabilities;
e. facilitating rehabilitation and reintegration services for women victims of disasters and victims of violence;
f. coordinating the participation of the business sector and other institutions, including international assistance for women's protection; and
g. providing awards to the community and business sector both individually and institutionally who have made efforts in women's protection.

Article 39
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women, the Regency Government conducts monitoring.
(2) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to identify developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of regional apparatus implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women.
(4) Monitoring is conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs and activities.

Article 40
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the following year.
(3) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 4
(1) The implementing regulations of this Qanun in the form of Regent Regulations shall be stipulated no later than six (6) months from the promulgation of this Qanun.

Article 42
This Qanun shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Qanun is ordered by placing it in the Official Gazette of Bireuen Regency.
Enacted in Bireuen on 24 loit

BIREUEN
k AULIA SOFYAN Promulgated in Bireuen on TA AjufW lozi

REGIONAL SECRETARY
BIREUEN REGENCY
IBRAHIM
BIREUEN REGENCY GAZETTE YEAR 2022 NUMBER W
REGISTER NUMBER OF QANUN OF BIREUEN REGENCY, ACEH PROVINCE: (3/47/2022)

EXPLANATION
OF
QANUN OF BIREUEN REGENCY
NUMBER 3 OF 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
1. That Islamic Shari'a grants a high and noble position to women. Women have the same position as men as servants of Allah and dignified creatures. In the Al-Qur'an and the Hadith of the Prophet SAW, no teachings or activities have ever been found that lead to discrimination and exploitation of women. In fact, one of the missions of the Prophet SAW in this world is to elevate the dignity and honor of women from a very low and degrading condition.
2. That Law Number 44 of 1999 concerning the Implementation of Aceh's Special Status and Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning the Governance of Aceh have provided a foundation for the empowerment and protection of women, which is an important activity because the condition of women so far has been quite concerning in terms of education, economy, health, labor, law and even threats of violence, exploitation, discrimination, pornography and pornographic acts, which are often targeted at women.
3. The Bireuen Regency Government deems it necessary to have a Qanun of Bireuen Regency concerning the Empowerment and Protection of Women; it is expected that every woman can be empowered and receive protection without discrimination, and also that the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) which already exists in Bireuen Regency has a Juridical Foundation as one of the implementers of empowerment and protection of women in Bireuen Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear ÿ

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Sufficiently clear

Article 4 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE BIREUEN REGENCY GAZETTE NUMBER 127 >