REGENT OF BANGLI
PROVINCE OF BALI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGLI REGENCY
NUMBER 18 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BANGLI,

Considering : that with the enactment of Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 Concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 Concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, it is deemed necessary to prevent and overcome violence against Women and Children through legal protection for Women and Children victims of violence;
that based on the consideration as referred to in letter a, mentioned above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of :

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
Law Number 69 of 1958 concerning the Establishment of Second Level Regions Within the First Level Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);
Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
Law Number 24 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Laws and Regulations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
Law Number 16 of 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 104, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5246);
Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 02 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 2036);
Regional Regulation of Bali Province Number 3 of 2003 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Bali Province Number 3 of 2001 concerning Desa Pakraman (Regional Gazette of Bali Province of 2003 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bali Province Number 3);
Regional Regulation of Bangli Regency Number 11 of 2016 concerning Government Affairs (Regional Gazette of Bangli Regency of 2016 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bangli Regency Number 9);
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANGLI REGENCY
REGENT OF BANGLI
DECIDES :
TO ESTABLISH
: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: Region is Bangli Regency.
Regional Government is the Government of Bangli Regency.
Bupati is the Bupati of Bangli.
Regional House of Representatives hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bangli Regency.
Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Woman is an adult human of female gender and a person recognized by law as a Woman.
Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a Child in the womb.
Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child committed by parties who should be responsible for the Child or those who have power over the Child.
Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences misery and/or suffering as a result of violence and/or threat of violence.
Social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social function properly.
Return is an effort to return victims of Violence from the Regional territory to their area of origin.
Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
Legal Aid is legal services provided by assistants/accompanying persons and law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power of attorney, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.
Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of acts of violence.
Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) is an integrated service unit established by the Regency government to provide services to Women and Children victims of violence comprehensively including complaint services, health rehabilitation; social rehabilitation; return; social reintegration, and legal aid.
Minimum Service Standards hereinafter referred to as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal aid, as well as return and social reintegration for Women and Children victims of violence.
Desa Pakraman is a customary law community unit in Bali Province that has a unified tradition and code of conduct for the social life of the Hindu community passed down through generations within the bond of Kahyangan Tiga or Kahyangan Desa which has a specific territory and its own assets and has the right to manage its own household;
Social Protection House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE OF REGULATION
Article 2
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, is implemented based on the principles of: respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
justice and gender equality;
non-discrimination;
best interests of Victims; and legal certainty.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to:
1. prevent all forms of violence against Women and Children;
2. protect Women and Children and provide services to Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
3. empower Children Victims of Violence.

Pasal 4
The scope of Regulation on Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence includes: rights of victims;
obligations and responsibilities;
institutional arrangements;
minimum service standards;
social protection houses;
monitoring and evaluation;
reporting;
guidance and supervision;
community participation; and financing.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 5
Every Woman and Child Victim of Violence has the right: to have their dignity respected as a human being;
to obtain protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on the determination of a Protection order from the Court;
to Recovery of physical, psychological and sexual health services in accordance with the suffering experienced by victims of violence;
special handling related to the confidentiality of victims;
assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
spiritual guidance services; and to make their own decisions.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
(1) The Regional Government has the authority and responsibility for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
   a. implementing policies for the protection of Women and Children victims of violence based on laws and regulations;
   b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the protection of Women and Children victims of violence;
   c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of violence;
   d. allocating budget in the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of violence;
   e. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of violence.

Article 7
The community has the obligation and responsibility to provide Protection to Women and Child Victims of Violence.
The obligation and responsibility of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in the form of:
1. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against Women and Children;
2. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against Women and Children to the authorized parties;
3. providing emergency assistance; and
4. providing protection to victims of violence.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 8
In providing protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence in the Region, the Regent may establish PPT.
The establishment and development of PPT shall be adjusted to the development of priority needs, and the financial capacity of the Region as well as the institutional and personnel capacity available in the region.
PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may accommodate institutions/work units that provide services for victims of violence such as P2TP2A, safe houses, social protection houses for Children, trauma center protection houses, women's social protection houses, shelters and other service activities in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
The forms of services implemented by PPT include: complaints;
health rehabilitation;
social rehabilitation;
Legal assistance;
return; and social reintegration.
In providing protection for Women and Child victims of violence, PPT is obligated to: provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to victims;
organize protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, return, social reintegration and Legal assistance;
cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for victims;
network with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperate with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or trauma centers owned by the government, community, or other institutions for health recovery of victims;
provide convenience, comfort, and safety for victims;
maintain confidentiality of victims;
provide fulfillment of legal assistance for victims; and in this case where integrated service delivery is carried out in a networked manner, PPT remains responsible for the entire referral process of services needed by victims.
The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be implemented in accordance with SPM.

Article 9
(1) Community institutions may establish PPT.
(2) In the establishment of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), it shall be guided by the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Provisions regarding the membership composition, duties and responsibilities of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VI
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS
Article 10
The MSS for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to guarantee that Women and Children victims of violence receive the minimum services needed.
The MSS for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence includes services for: handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against Women and Children;
health services for Women and Children victims of violence;
social rehabilitation for Women and Children victims of violence;
law enforcement and legal assistance for Women and Children victims of violence; and repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children victims of violence.

Article 11
SPM as referred to in Article 10 has performance indicators including: coverage of Women and Children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
coverage of Women and Children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at Puskesmas and at Hospitals;
coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for Women and Children victims of violence in integrated service units;
coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for Women and Children victims of violence in integrated service units;
coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of violence against Women and Children;
coverage of Women and Children victims of violence who receive legal aid services;
coverage of repatriation services for Women and Children victims of violence; and coverage of social reintegration services for Women and Children victims of violence.
The determination of performance indicators for SPM in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes minimum targets that must be achieved by integrated service units in stages.

CHAPTER VII
SOCIAL PROTECTION HOUSE
Article 12
The Regional Government is obligated to establish a Social Protection House and/or Safe House.
The Social Protection House and/or Safe House as referred to in paragraph (1) guarantee the implementation of health rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, and social reintegration.
In the event that a victim experiences trauma or illness that endangers themselves as a result of acts of violence requiring immediate assistance, the Regional Government is obligated to provide first aid no later than 7 (seven) days after the complaint is filed.
For the implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may utilize social protection houses and/or Safe Houses owned by the community or other social service institutions.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 13
The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children victims of violence.
The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children victims of violence in the Region.

Article 14
Monitoring is conducted through coordination and direct monitoring of related Regional Apparatus on a regular basis.
Monitoring is conducted from the planning stage up to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children victims of violence for the current year.

Article 15
Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children for the following year.
The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING
Article 16
The Regent is responsible for preparing a report on the implementation of SPM in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence and submitting it to the Governor with a copy submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted annually.
The form of reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 17
The Regent provides guidance for the development of PPT.
The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: provision of implementation instructions;
guidance;
supervision; and monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of services for Women and Children victims of violence, officials, as well as the community.

Article 18
The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Regency area.

CHAPTER XI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 19
In providing protection to Women and Children victims of violence, the community may: establish family partners at the kelurahan/village level in coordination with Desa Pakraman;
establish Women and Children protection units within community organizations;
conduct independent socialization of Women and Children's rights;
provide first aid to victims; and report to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, Desa Pakraman, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XII
FUNDING
Article 20
Funds for the implementation of protection for Women and Children Victims of violence, are sourced from: regional revenue and expenditure budget; and other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 21
In the event that the PPT as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) has not yet been established, the existing P2TP2A shall continue to carry out the duties and functions of integrated services for women and children victims of violence in the Region.

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 22
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bangli Regency.
Enacted in Bangli on 30 December 2016

REGENT OF BANGLI,
I MADE GIANYAR
Promulgated in Bangli on 30 December 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BANGLI REGENCY.
IDA BAGUS GDE GIRI PUTRA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANGLI REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 18
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGLI REGENCY, BALI PROVINCE:
(18, 141/2016)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGLI REGENCY
NUMBER 18 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
GENERAL
Violence against Women and Children is one form of act that violates human rights. As is known, the human rights of Women and Children have been guaranteed and regulated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and the Law on Human Rights. Therefore, the protection of the rights of Women and Children from violence should be respected, upheld, and enhanced in order to elevate human dignity, without discrimination, and to ensure the welfare and justice for Women and Children.
Violence is any unlawful act, with or without the use of means, against the physical and psychological condition that causes danger to life or the body, or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually, or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against Children is any act against Children that results in the emergence of misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, or psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of Children. Women and Children victims of violence have not yet received adequate services, therefore minimum services are needed for victims of violence.
In order to prevent and overcome violence against Women and Children in Bangli Regency so as to avoid violence, threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for Women and Children victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.
This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for Women and Children victims of violence, specifically in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance, and supervision of Women and Children victims of violence in Bangli Regency.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Paragraph (1) What is meant by adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure is adjusted to the minimum service standards and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration that apply.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by implementing officers or functional officers includes health workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers provided by relevant agencies or institutions.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANGLI REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 15