GOVERNMENT OF MADIUN REGENCY
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN REGENCY
NUMBER 5 OF 2008
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF MADIUN,
Considering : a. that until now the number of violence against women and children remains high, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
b. that based on the consideration as referred to in letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence which is stipulated by Regional Regulation of Madiun Regency.
In View of : 1. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of 1950 Number 19, Supplement to State Gazette Number 9);
2. Law Number 6 of 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of 1974 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3039);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3134);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3668);
5. Law Number 23 of 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of 1992 Number 100, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3495);
6. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);
9. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4235);
10. Law Number 10 of 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of 2004 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4389);
11. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4419);
12. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4437) as amended by Law Number 8 of 2005 (State Gazette of 2005 Number 108, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4548);
13. Law Number 33 of 2004 concerning Financial Balance between Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette of 2004 Number 126, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4438);
14. Government Regulation Number 6 of 1988 concerning Coordination of Vertical Agency Activities in the Regions (State Gazette of 1988 Number 10, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3373);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Government Affairs/Authorities (State Gazette of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4737);
16. Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
17. Presidential Decree Number 88 of 2002 concerning National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
18. Presidential Decree Number 61 of 2003 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 1998-2003;
19. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 9 of 2005 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of 2005 Number 4 Series E);
20. Regional Regulation of Madiun Regency Number 1 of 2006 concerning Medium-Term Regional Development Plan of Madiun Regency for 2006 – 2009 (Regional Gazette of 2006 Number 1 Series E).
21. Regional Regulation of Madiun Regency Number 2 of 2008 concerning Government Affairs Which Are the Authority of Madiun Regency (Regional Gazette of 2008 Number 1 Series E);
With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MADIUN REGENCY and

REGENT OF MADIUN
DECIDES
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN REGENCY CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
2. Regent is the Regent of Madiun.
3. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age and has never been married, including those in the womb.
4. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
5. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, psychological, sexual, and economic to the victim.
6. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.
7. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
8. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and certain purposes.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
10. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is, or has occurred.
11. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
12. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and general services.
13. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children.
16. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (servants, drivers, and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are: 1. Respect for the rights of victims.
2. Justice and gender equality.
3. Non-discrimination.
4. Best interests of victims.
5. Respect for the rights of women and children.

Article 3
The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence based on gender and the best interests of the child that occur in the household and/or public sphere.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage, and confidential handling, whether by individuals, groups, or institutions, both from the Regency Government and non-government.

Article 5
In the event of violence, every victim has the right to receive assistance both psychologically and legally as well as to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence and legislation;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values towards women and children;
c. conducting socialization of legislation related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government has the obligation to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional

Article 7
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of PPT;
(2) Provisions regarding PPT will be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 8
(1) Forms of services for victims organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to standard operating procedures which will be further regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Principles of Service

Article 9
The provision of services to victims shall be conducted free of charge, promptly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatorily, and with a guarantee of confidentiality.

Article 10
The PPT Manager is obligated to provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 9.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE
Article 11
Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT.
- 6 -

CHAPTER VII
SANCTIONS
Article 12
(1) Every person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children, thereby causing violence to occur, lets violence occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the applicable laws and regulations;
(2) Officials appointed to administer protection who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities shall be subject to administrative measures or sanctions;
(3) PPT administrators who carry out service duties that violate the principles of service may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the PPT’s internal mechanisms.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 13
Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation insofar as concerning its implementation shall be further regulated by a Regent Regulation

Article 14
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Madiun Regency.
Enacted in Madiun on 11 April 2008

REGENT OF MADIUN
DJUNAEDI MAHENDRA, SH, M.Si Promulgated in Madiun on the 9th of June 2008

REGIONAL SECRETARY
Ir. SUKIMAN, M.Si Pembina Utama Muda

NIP 010 170 361
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 4/E
In accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
S O E N T O R O , SH.
Supervisor

NIP 010 212 869
EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN REGENCY
NUMBER 5 OF 2008
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL EXPLANATION
The State has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual and economic security; this is philosophically stated in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution, that the first purpose of the establishment of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and the homeland of Indonesia.
Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it is obligated to comply with these provisions. Likewise, in the fourth amendment of the 1945 Constitution, Chapter XA of the 1945 Constitution concerning Human Rights, it states that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the Government.
Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women of 1999 it is stated that Women as Mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures of God Almighty so they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.
From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE EXPLANATION
Article 1: Sufficiently clear
Article 2: - Respect for the rights of victims is intended to ensure the fulfillment of victims' rights.
- Gender justice is a process to become fair toward men and women.
- Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, socio-cultural, defense and national security activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
- Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
- The best interests of the victim are all actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Article 3: What is meant by gender-based violence is actions based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men.

Article 4: What is meant by obtaining protection is obtaining protection from individuals, groups or institutions, both governmental and non-governmental; obtaining information about the existence of complaint centers, PPT and matters related to the fulfillment of their rights; and being involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and the development of case handling.

What is meant by integrated services are services that include medical, medico-legal, psychosocial and legal.

What is meant by continuous handling is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume their life in society including the restoration of their good name.

Article 5: What is meant is to receive psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and throughout the judicial process.
Article 6: Sufficiently clear.
Article 7: Sufficiently clear.
Article 8: Sufficiently clear.
Article 9: Sufficiently clear.
Article 10: Sufficiently clear.
Article 11: Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Paragraph (1): Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2):
 a. What is meant by officials appointed to implement protection are the Heads of Agencies/Services/Institutions in the Madiun Regency Government in accordance with their duties and functions who are incorporated in the PPT forum.
 b. Their obligations and responsibilities are:
  - Providing medical services
  - Providing medicolegal services
  - Providing psychosocial services
  - Providing legal services

Article : 13 Sufficiently clear
Article : 14 Sufficiently clear