Considering
In view of
II.

GOVERNMENT OF BANGKALAN REGENCY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKALAN REGENCY

NUMBER 6 YEAR 2009
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN
AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BANGKALAN,

Considering:
a. that until now the number of violence against women and children in Bangkalan Regency is still high, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
b. that in connection with the consideration referred to in letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence through a Regional Regulation.

In view of:
1. Law Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions Within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 41), as amended by Law Number 2 Year 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
2. Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 100, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment Occupation) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for The Elimination of The Worst Forms Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
10. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
11. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4419);
12. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4437), as last amended by Law Number 12 Year 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
13. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
16. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
17. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
18. Presidential Decree Number 40 Year 2004 concerning the National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 2004-2009;
19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2006 concerning Types and Forms of Regional Legal Products;
20. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 16 Year 2006 concerning Procedures for Drafting Regional Legal Products;
21. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 17 Year 2006 concerning Regional Gazette and Regional News;
22. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 53 Year 2007 concerning Supervision of Regional Regulations and Regional Head Regulations.

With the Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANGKALAN REGENCY
and

REGENT OF BANGKALAN
DECIDES:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Regional Government of Bangkalan Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Bangkalan.
3. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
4. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering, whether physical, sexual, economic, social, or psychological, to the victim.
5. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
6. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
7. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or for certain purposes.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
9. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is or has occurred.
10. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
11. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in a Hospital, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
12. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
13. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, as well as mother and her children.
15. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (a domestic helper, a driver, and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2 The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. respect for the rights of victims.
b. justice and gender equality.
c. non-discrimination.
d. best interests of the victim.
Article 3 The objective of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence based on gender equality and the best interests of the child, for violence that occurs in the household and/or public.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4 (1) Every community or individual has the right to report incidents of violence against children and women.
(2) Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage, and confidential handling, provided by individuals, groups, or institutions, whether from the Regional Government or non-government.
Article 5 In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain assistance both psychologically and legally as well as to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6 (1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of: a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence as well as laws and regulations;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values towards women and children;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government has the obligation to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional
Article 7
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT forum.
(2) PPT Bangkalan may forward case referrals from sub-districts in Bangkalan.
(3) Provisions regarding PPT shall be further regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Form and Mechanism of Services Article 8 (1) The forms of services for victims organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services, which are a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services, which are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to standard operating procedures (SOP) which will be further regulated by a Regulation of the Regent.

Part Three
Principles of Service

Article 9
The provision of services to victims shall be carried out free of charge, promptly, safely, empathetically, without discrimination, easily accessible, and with a guarantee of confidentiality.

Article 10
PPT managers are obligated to provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 9.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE
Article 11
Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have expertise in the relevant field to provide counseling, therapy, and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have worked together with PPT.

CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS ON SANCTIONS
Article 12 (1) Every person who intentionally fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
(2) If officials appointed to provide protection do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
(3) PPT managers who carry out service duties that violate service principles may be subject to sanctions in accordance with PPT internal mechanisms.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 13 This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bangkalan Regency.
Enacted in Bangkalan on the date of 7 August 2009 •