REGENT OF PURBALINGGA
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PURBALINGGA REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
THE REGENT OF PURBALINGGA,

Considering : that every person has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain a sense of security, free from all forms of acts of violence, discrimination and human rights violations;

that the number of victims of gender-based violence and children has increased so that victims must receive protection from violence and/or threats of violence both inside and outside the household;

that victims of violence need to have their dignity and honor protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination and to provide legal certainty;

that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children;

In View of :

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas Within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 42);
Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Laws and Regulations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
Law Number 16 of 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 104, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5246);
Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Administration and Cooperation in the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
Government Regulation Number 18 of 2016 concerning Regional Apparatus (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 114, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5887);
Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 03 of 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Child Victims (Regional Gazette of Central Java Province of 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);
Regional Regulation of Purbalingga Regency Number 12 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Purbalingga Regency (Regional Gazette of Purbalingga Regency of 2016 Number 12, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Purbalingga Regency Number 30);
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
PURBALINGGA REGENCY
REGENT OF PURBALINGGA
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD VICTIMS.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: Region is Purbalingga Regency.
Regional Government is the Regional Head as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
Regent is the Regent of Purbalingga.
Sub-district is a part of the Regency Region led by a Sub-district Head.
Sub-district Head is the leader of the Sub-district who is under and responsible to the Regent through the Regional Secretary.
Regional Apparatus is the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
Implementation of Protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the Integrated Service Center.
Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights, the consequences of which are and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children, the consequences of which are and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological, and economic violence.
Victims of Gender-Based Violence are people who because of their gender experience physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
Child Victims of Violence are children who receive harsh treatment both physically, psychologically, economically, socially, sexually, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
Victim Recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of gender-based violence and children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
Companion is a Social Worker who has professional competence in their field.
Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of strengthening victims of gender-based violence and children to resolve the problems they face.
Social Reintegration is the process of preparing victims and communities that support the reunification of victims into a family environment or family substitute that can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection for victims of gender-based violence and children in accordance with determined operational standards.
Regional Action Plan is the foundation and guideline for regional apparatus, vertical agencies, and the community in carrying out activities for the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children.
Integrated Service Center for Protection of Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children hereinafter abbreviated as PPT PKBGA is a special service place for victims of gender-based violence and children carried out cross-functionally and cross-sectorally as one unified implementation so that victims receive maximum service in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
Complaint Service Unit at Sub-district Level hereinafter abbreviated as UPPTK is a special service place for victims of gender-based violence and children located at the sub-district level so that victims receive maximum service in an integrated and comprehensive manner.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The Principles of Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children are: non-discrimination;
best interests of victims;
justice and gender equality;
victim protection;
survival and development of children;
respect for the views of children;
transparency;
integration;
empowerment; and confidentiality of victims.

Article 3
The Objectives of the Implementation of Gender-Based and Child Victim Protection are to: prevent all forms of gender-based violence and violence against children, occurring within the scope of households and/or communities;
provide protection in the form of complaint services, health services, social rehabilitation services, legal aid and enforcement services, as well as repatriation and social reintegration services; and endeavor to increase community participation.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Forms of violence are: physical violence;
psychological violence;
sexual violence;
neglect; and/or other violence.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 5
The Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, is carried out by: PPT PKBGA; and

UPPTK.
Principles in the implementation of protection, consist of: fast, safe, and empathetic;
guarantee of confidentiality;
easily accessible; and free of charge.

Part Two
PPT PKBGA
Article 6
PPT PKBGA as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter a is established by the Regent in accordance with Laws and Regulations.
Membership of PPT PKBGA as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of: elements of Regional Government;
vertical agencies;
non-governmental institutions;
health service institutions;
law enforcement apparatus;
professional personnel;
companion volunteers;
social workers;
religious leaders; and social rehabilitation services.
Membership of the PPT PKBGA Team as referred to in paragraph (2) is determined by Regent's Decree.

Article 7
The implementation of PPT PKBGA is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus.

Article 8
The technical aspects and mechanism of integrated services shall be regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

Article 9
PPT PKBGA as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter a has the duties of: pursuing prevention;
providing complaint services;
providing health services;
providing social rehabilitation services;
providing legal assistance and enforcement services;
providing repatriation and social reintegration services;
conducting coordination and cooperation;
pursuing increased community participation; and conducting monitoring and reporting.

Paragraph 1
Prevention Efforts

Article 10
Prevention Efforts as referred to in Article 9 letter a include:
1. conducting communication, information, and education about gender-based and child violence;
2. disseminating laws and regulations related to gender-based and child violence.

Paragraph 2
Complaint Services

Article 11
Complaint Services as referred to in Article 9 letter b include:
a. direct complaint services;
b. complaint services through telephone;
c. complaint services through letter;
d. complaint services from referrals;
e. victim outreach services; and
f. complaint services through social media managed by PPT PKBGA and UPPTK.

Paragraph 3
Health Services

Article 12
Health Services as referred to in Article 9 letter c include: medical services;
psychiatric medical services; and medicolegal services, including visum et repertum (VER), visum et psikiatrum (VEP), and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) identification.

Paragraph 4
Social Rehabilitation Services

Article 13
Social Rehabilitation Services as referred to in Article 9 letter d include: initial counseling services;
follow-up counseling services;
provision of safe houses; and spiritual guidance services.
Social Rehabilitation is implemented in an integrated manner.

Paragraph 5
Assistance Services and Law Enforcement

Article 14
Legal Assistance and Law Enforcement Services as referred to in Article 9 letter e consist of:
a. legal assistance services include litigation legal assistance and support and non-litigation legal assistance and support;
b. law enforcement services include law enforcement at the police level, law enforcement at the prosecutor's office level, and law enforcement at the court level;
c. law enforcement services at the police level as referred to in letter b include law enforcement in the inquiry and/or investigation process;
d. law enforcement services at the prosecutor's office level as referred to in letter b include law enforcement in the pre-prosecution and prosecution process; and
e. law enforcement services at the court level as referred to in letter b include law enforcement at the pre-trial stage, trial, and the rendering of a decision.

Paragraph 6
Repatriation Services and Social Reintegration

Article 15
Return Services as referred to in Article 9 letter f include: return of victims of gender-based violence and child victims;
return of victims of the criminal act of trafficking in persons.
Social Reintegration Services as referred to in Article 9 letter f include: reintegration with the family;
reintegration with a substitute family;
reintegration with the community environment; and educational reintegration.

Paragraph 7
Coordination and Cooperation

Article 16
Coordination and cooperation as referred to in Article 9 letter g includes: conducting coordination and cooperation in handling cases of violence with UPPTK;
conducting coordination and cooperation with integrated service centers between regencies/cities; and conducting coordination and cooperation with institutions providing services for victims of gender-based violence and children.

Paragraph 8
Efforts to Increase Community Participation

Article 17
Increasing Community Participation as referred to in Article 9 letter h is carried out by means of: fostering community awareness of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children;
encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting the occurrence of gender-based violence and violence against children;
fostering local wisdom in handling gender-based violence and violence against children;
organizing the strengthening of community groups in handling gender-based violence and violence against children; and disseminating information about laws and regulations related to gender-based violence and violence against children.

Paragraph 9
Monitoring and Reporting

Article 18
Monitoring and Reporting as referred to in Article 9 letter i constitutes activities that include monitoring, documenting and reporting cases of gender-based and child violence.

Part Three
UPPTK
Article 19
UPPTK as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter b, is formed by the Camat in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
UPPTK as referred to in paragraph (1) its membership consists of: sub-district government elements;
sub-district police elements;
community organization elements;
health service institutions;
community figures; and religious figures.
The membership of the UUPTK Team as referred to in paragraph (2) is established by Decree of the Camat.

Article 20
UPPTK as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter b has the duties of: receiving complaints of gender-based and child violence cases;
providing initial consultation to victims of gender-based and child violence;
conducting crisis intervention for victims of gender-based and child violence; and providing referrals for handling gender-based and child violence cases to PPT PKBGA.

Article 21
In carrying out the duties as referred to in Article 20, UPPTK has the following obligations:
1. to coordinate and consult with PPT PKBGA;
2. to document and report every case of gender-based violence and violence against children that it handles to PPT PKBGA.

Part Four
Rights of Victims of Violence

Article 22
Every victim of gender-based violence and children has the right: to obtain protection for personal security, family and property, and freedom from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
to participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
freedom from ensnaring questions;
to obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions; and to obtain complaint services, health services, social rehabilitation services, legal aid and enforcement services, as well as repatriation and social reintegration services.
The rights of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Five
Cooperation

Article 23
In implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with the Government, Provincial Government, other Regional Governments and/or other institutions.
Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Provincial Government or the Government includes consultation, coordination, advocacy, referral, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting.
Cooperation between the Regional Government and other Regional Governments includes coordination, advocacy, and referral.
The implementation of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 24
The implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and child victims is a joint obligation and responsibility of:
a. local government;
b. society;
c. family; and
d. parents.

First Part
Regional Government

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement protection efforts for victims of violence in the form of:
   a. preventing the occurrence of all forms of gender-based and child violence;
   b. providing protection by providing complaint services, health services, social rehabilitation services, legal aid and law enforcement services, repatriation and social reintegration services, seeking to increase community participation, as well as monitoring and reporting;
   c. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
   d. conducting cooperation with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect, and recover victims of violence.
(2) To carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
   a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of gender-based and child violence;
   b. establish integrated service centers;
   c. establish complaint service institutions at the sub-district level;
   d. facilitate the implementation of integrated service centers and the activities of complaint service institutions at the sub-district level;
   e. provide facilities and infrastructure;
   f. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
   g. conduct coordination and cooperation in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based and child violence;
   h. encourage and increase community participation; and
   i. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
(3) In the implementation of its obligations, responsibilities, and authorities, the Regent may delegate to Regional Apparatus.
(4) Regional Apparatus receiving delegation from the Regent as referred to in paragraph (3) shall, in its implementation, prepare a Regional Action Plan for victim protection.
(5) The Regional Government, in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives, or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

Part Two
Society, Family, and Parents

Article 26
The community, family, and parents have the obligation and responsibility to:
a. 	prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children;
b. 	report if violence occurs;
c. 	protect victims; and
d. 	provide emergency assistance.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 27
(1) The community may participate in assisting efforts to prevent and handle victims of gender-based violence and child victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
    a. providing information and/or reporting any violence that comes to their knowledge;
    b. providing protection for victims;
    c. providing emergency assistance;
    d. providing advocacy to victims and/or the community regarding the handling of gender-based violence and child victims;
    e. assisting in the process of submitting applications for the determination of protection; and
    f. assisting in the process of repatriation and social reintegration.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
The Regent has the authority to conduct guidance and supervision over the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and child victims.
The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the Regional Apparatus.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 29
All activities related to the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or from other legitimate and non-binding receipts.

CHAPTER IX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 30
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all implementing regulations related to the protection of victims of gender-based violence and child victims are declared to remain in effect as long as they have not been replaced and do not conflict with the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
The Implementation Provisions of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Purbalingga Regency.
Enacted in Purbalingga on the date of 3 March 2017

REGENT OF PURBALINGGA,
T A S D I
Promulgated in Purbalingga on 4 March 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY
PURBALINGGA REGENCY,
WAHYU KONTARDI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PURBALINGGA REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PURBALINGGA REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE : (2/2017)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PURBALINGGA REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND VIOLENCE AGAINST CHILDREN

I. GENERAL
Cases of gender-based violence and violence against children have recently been increasing, both in number and in the forms and modus operandi which are becoming more diverse. Rape, sexual harassment, domestic violence, sexual exploitation, violence against domestic workers, pornography, and neglect can occur in private, community, and public spheres.

Various causes of gender-based violence and violence against children include legal instruments that have not been able to provide protection to victims, the role of media that is less supportive in reporting on gender-based violence and violence against children, public services that are not yet optimal, poverty issues, erroneous interpretation of religious teachings, all of which cannot be separated from the strong patriarchal culture in society.

Therefore, victims of gender-based violence and violence against children need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality, and upholding human rights. This Regional Regulation regulates the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children, particularly in terms of prevention and services, protection mechanisms, community participation, guidance, funding, and supervision.

II.  	ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by the principle of "non-discrimination" is protection for all victims of gender-based violence and children without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture, language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
Letter b What is meant by the principle of "best interests of the victim" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.
Letter c What is meant by the principle of "gender justice" is fair treatment given to women and men.
What is meant by the principle of "gender equality" is a condition and position that describes a harmonious, compatible, and balanced relationship between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development as well as enjoying the results of development in family life, as well as in society, nationhood and statehood.
Letter d What is meant by the principle of "victim protection" is providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family members, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Letter e What is meant by the principle of "child survival" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to identity.
What is meant by "child growth and development" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to be creative and to engage in recreation.
Letter f What is meant by the principle of "respect for the child's opinion" is respect for children's rights to participate and express their opinions in decision-making which can be taken into consideration especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.
Letter g What is meant by the principle of "openness" is that in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children it is transparent among service providers.
Letter h What is meant by the principle of "integration" is that in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children it is carried out by building coordination among service providers, including medical services, legal advocates, psychologists, religious counselors, social workers, and police.
Letter i What is meant by the principle of "empowering" is that every effort provided must be able to strengthen victims, both physically, psychologically, socially, and economically.
Letter j What is meant by the principle of "victim confidentiality" is every action taken to ensure victims are in a safe condition from threats or other actions that threaten the life and psychology of victims.

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 4
Letter a Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
Letter b Psychological violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Letter c Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
Letter d Neglect is: an act that results in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
an act of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
an act of neglecting a person within the household scope; and/or an act that results in economic dependency by means of restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Letter e Other violence constitutes any act caused by:
a. threat of violence, which includes any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that create fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom;
b. coercion, which includes a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

Article 5
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Letter a Initial counseling services include identification and assessment.
Letter b Sufficiently Clear.
Letter c Sufficiently Clear.
Letter d Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 14
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently Clear.
Letter b What is meant by a substitute family is an alternative family that can provide care through a foster parent system, guardianship, or child adoption (adoption).
Letter c Sufficiently Clear.
Letter d What is meant by education is both formal and non-formal education.

Article 16
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 20
Letter a Sufficiently Clear.
Letter b Sufficiently Clear.
Letter c What is meant by "crisis intervention" is action that must be immediately taken because the victim is in a critical condition, for example the victim is in a state of injury or illness requiring immediate care and treatment, the victim's mental condition is threatened.
Letter d Sufficiently Clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently Clear.
Letter b Sufficiently Clear.
Letter c What is meant by "entrapping questions" is questions that harm (corner, demean, harass, blame, and judge) the victim.
Letter d Sufficiently Clear.
Letter e Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PURBALINGGA REGENCY NUMBER 34