MAYOR OF MAGELANG
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAGELANG CITY
NUMBER 11 YEAR 2012
REGARDING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF MAGELANG,
Considering : a. that within every human being are inherent human rights that must be respected, upheld and protected by the state, law, Regional Government and every person for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity;
b. that women and children are among vulnerable groups who tend to become victims of violence and crimes against humanity which constitute violations of human rights, thus requiring protection through regulations that can provide prevention and protection for victims of violence;
c. that based on Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government together with the community is obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of violence;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 17 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Small City Regions within the Province of East Java, Central Java and West Java;
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning the Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning the Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
9. Law Number 36 of 2009 Concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 44, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
10. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
11. Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning the Ratification of the Optional Protocol to The Convention on The Rights of The Child on The Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
12. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation of Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
15. Presidential Regulation Number 1 of 2007 concerning the Ratification, Promulgation, and Dissemination of Legislation;
16. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 of 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Violence Based on Gender and Children (Regional Gazette of Central Java Province of 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);
17. Regional Regulation of Magelang City Number 2 of 2008 concerning Government Affairs That Are the Authority of the Regional Government of Magelang City (Regional Gazette of Magelang City of 2008 Number 2);
18. Regional Regulation of Magelang City Number 5 of 2008 concerning the Structure, Position, and Principal Duties of Regional Technical Institutions, Integrated Licensing Service Agency, and Civil Service Police Unit (Regional Gazette of Magelang City of 2008 Number 5);
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF MAGELANG CITY
MAYOR OF MAGELANG
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Magelang.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration of the City of Magelang.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Magelang.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the regional apparatus in the City of Magelang.
5. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child in the womb.
7. Child Victim of Violence is a child who receives harsh treatment either physically, psychologically, economically, socially, sexually, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
11. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
12. Implementation of protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the Integrated Service Center.
13. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
14. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
15. Violence against Children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, economic exploitation, socially including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
16. Domestic violence is any act against a person especially women that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or unlawful deprivation of freedom within the scope of the household.
17. Prevention is direct efforts made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
18. Complaint is notification either in writing or orally by an interested party to an authorized institution, in which the person concerned suffers loss due to the actions of another person.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Integrated Service is a series of activities to provide protection for women and children victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation, prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
21. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an institution providing services to victims of violence, carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation, prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
22. Health Service is an effort that includes promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
23. Spiritual guidance is accompaniment in the form of services for spiritual strengthening so that sick people can rise to be closer to God so that a sense of calm and security arises, and they become mentally healthy.
24. Legal assistance is legal services provided by legal companions or advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children.
25. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
26. Victim Recovery is all efforts to empower victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
27. Accompaniment is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for self-empowerment of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to resolve the problems faced.
28. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
29. Safe House (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of women and children victims of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection of victims;
d. best interests of victims;
e. non-discrimination.

Article 3
Protection of women and children victims of violence aims to: a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children, occurring within the household and/or community; b. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children; c. provide legal assistance;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
e. pursue recovery and social reintegration;
f. increase community participation.
- 7 -

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 4
The scope of protection for women and children victims of violence includes the rights of victims, obligations and authority of the Regional Government, implementation of protection, reporting, control, guidance, and supervision, community participation and financing.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 5
(1) Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to: a. obtain protection for personal, family, and property security, and be free from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
b. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. be free from ensnaring questions;
d. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
e. receive services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and in accordance with needs;
f. obtain recovery, social reintegration, continuous handling up to rehabilitation and empowerment;
g. obtain assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process and out-of-court processes as they are carried out;
h. obtain psychological assistance, spiritual guidance, assistance in economic and social aspects, and interpreter services.
(2) The rights of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 6
In addition to the rights as referred to in Article 5, every victim must:
a. provide true information to the interested parties;
b. become a witness if it does not endanger themselves and if there is a security guarantee for the victim.
- 8 -

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND AUTHORITY OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 7
(1) Regional Government is obligated to:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence;
b. provide protection for victims of violence;
c. provide recovery services and social reintegration;
d. encourage and increase community participation;
e. cooperate with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect and recover victims of violence;
f. facilitate the establishment of P2TP2A based in Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Trauma Center Shelters, and other supporting institutions;
g. supervise the implementation of services for victims, with service standards that involve the community.
(2) To carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of violence against women and children;
b. establish P2TP2A;
c. facilitate the implementation of P2TP2A activities;
d. provide facilities and infrastructure;
e. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
f. conduct coordination and cooperation in the implementation of protection for victims of violence against women and children;
g. encourage community participation;
h. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Regional Government in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER VI
ADMINISTRATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional Arrangements

Article 8
In providing protection for women and children victims of violence, the Regional Government is assisted by P2TP2A.
- 9 -

Article 9
(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 8 shall be established by the Regional Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of elements of the Regional Government, non-governmental institutions, health service institutions, law enforcement officers, professional personnel, volunteer companions, social workers, religious figures, safe houses (shelters), and social rehabilitation centers.
(3) The membership of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by the Mayor's Decision.

Article 10
The implementation of P2TP2A operations is coordinated by the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 11
Further provisions regarding the procedures, requirements, and establishment of P2TP2A shall be regulated by a Mayor Regulation.

Article 12
P2TP2A as referred to in Article 8, has the duties to:
a. seek to carry out prevention;
b. seek to carry out recovery and social reintegration;
c. provide legal protection;
d. conduct coordination; and
e. seek to increase community participation, as well as monitoring and reporting.

Paragraph 1
Prevention Efforts

Article 13
(1) Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 12 letter a include:
a. establishing a prevention and handling network for violence through coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
b. establishing a violence prevention system, mapping of locations or areas prone to violence;
c. organizing communication, information, and education about violence against women and children;
d. socialization of laws and regulations related to violence against women and children.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner coordinated by the SKPD that has duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment.

Article 14
In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 13, prevention efforts must also be carried out by:
a. family and closest relatives;
b. community and business sector;
c. educational institutions.

Paragraph 2
Recovery and Social Reintegration Efforts

Article 15
Recovery and social reintegration efforts as referred to in Article 12 letter b, include:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. providing medicolegal services;
c. assisting the return of victims;
d. providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters);
e. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. providing spiritual guidance services;
g. conducting family and community preparation, economic empowerment, and return to school and/or other educational institutions.

Paragraph 3
Legal Protection

Article 16
Legal protection as referred to in Article 12 letter c includes:
a. providing protection in a safe house (shelter);
b. providing assistance in the legal process;
c. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence can be carried out through the appointment of guardianship in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Coordination

Article 17
Coordination as referred to in Article 12 letter d, includes:
a. conducting coordination of violence case handling with integrated provincial services;
b. conducting coordination with integrated services of other regions;
c. conducting coordination with service provider institutions for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting coordination and consultation with Regional Government.

Paragraph 5
Efforts to Increase Community Participation

Article 18
Increasing community participation as referred to in Article 12 letter e is carried out by means of:
a. fostering community awareness of cases of violence against women and children;
b. encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting the occurrence of violence against women and children;
c. fostering local wisdom in handling women and children victims of violence;
d. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling women and children victims of violence;
e. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to violence against women and children.
Paragraph 6 Monitoring and Reporting

Article 19
Monitoring and reporting as referred to in Article 12 letter f, includes monitoring, documentation, and reporting of cases of violence against women and children.

Part Two
Cooperation

Article 20
(1) In providing protection for victims of violence against women and children, the Regional Government may cooperate with the Government, Provincial Government, other regional governments and other institutions.
(2) Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Government includes consultation, coordination, and reporting.
(3) Cooperation with other regional governments and other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) includes coordination, advocacy, referral, repatriation, social reintegration, and development of integrated service systems.

Article 21
Cooperation as referred to in Article 20 shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
REPORTING
Article 22
(1) P2TP2A reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and children victims of violence to the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment.
(2) The Head of SKPD responsible for women's empowerment reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and children victims of violence to the Mayor.
(3) The Mayor reports protection of women and children victims of violence to the Governor.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures and mechanisms for reporting as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3) shall be regulated by a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 23
(1) The Mayor implements control, guidance, and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of violence against women and children.
(2) Control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 24
(1) The community may participate in assisting prevention efforts and handling of victims of violence against women and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be realized through:
a. providing information and or reporting any violence that comes to their knowledge;
b. providing protection for victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing advocacy to victims and or the community regarding the handling of cases of violence against women and children;
e. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders;
f. assisting in the process of repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 25
Financing of activities related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence may be sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
d. other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 26
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Magelang City.
Enacted in Magelang on 27 December 2012

MAYOR OF MAGELANG,
SIGIT WIDYONINDITO
Promulgated in Magelang on 27 December 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MAGELANG CITY,
SUGIHARTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAGELANG CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 11
- 14 -

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE CITY OF MAGELANG
NUMBER 11 OF 2012
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
As we have known together that the protection of children and women victims of violence nowadays needs to receive serious attention, particularly Magelang City in implementing the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection program, this is as stated in the Medium-Term Development Plan of Magelang City for the Year 2011-2015.
This is to provide understanding that every Citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence, especially in the Household and those who potentially become victims are generally women, likewise acts of violence and exploitation against children.
Therefore it is expected that particularly women can know and understand various aspects regarding domestic violence.
As mandated in Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, it has been stated that all forms of violence, especially violence against Women and Children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of Discrimination that must be eliminated, so that they must receive protection from the State and or society in order to avoid and be free from violence, threats of torture or treatment that degrades the degree and dignity of humanity.
Statistically, cases of violence against women and children in Magelang City are relatively small, this is proven in the Year 2011 Magelang City received the Parahita Ekapraya Award Madya Level from the President of the Republic of Indonesia, this shows that the assessment of Women's Empowerment activities in Magelang City including the handling of acts of violence against women and children is relatively successful. However, the possibility of cases that still exist and must be handled continues to always be given attention.
In relation to this matter, the Magelang City Government needs to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women And Children Victims of Violence that regulates clearly, firmly, and comprehensively to better understand and know various forms of acts of violence against women and children as well as where to seek protection.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
letter a What is meant by "respect for the rights of victims" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims.
letter b What is meant by "gender justice and equality" is a process to be fair to men and women in obtaining opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities as well as equality in enjoying the results of development.
letter c What is meant by "protection of victims" is providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.
letter e What is meant by "non-discrimination" means not making distinctions on any grounds or in any way, whether concerning religion and beliefs, ethnicity, race, gender, skin color, language, and politics.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
- 16 -

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "medicolegal" is the effort to collect evidence for the purpose of proof in the judicial process.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.
- 17 -

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAGELANG CITY NUMBER 9