Considering : :

REGENT OF BLITAR
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR REGENCY
NUMBER 11 OF 2013
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BLITAR,

a. that women and children are beings created by Almighty God who possess noble rights and dignity in accordance with their nature as human beings;
b. that there are still many women and children who do not fully receive their basic rights, especially women and children who are victims of violence;
c. that all forms of acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of Human Rights, therefore women and children who are victims of violence need to receive protection;
d. that the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, is one of the obligations that must be carried out by the Regional Government as one of the efforts to realize community welfare;
e. that to realize protection for women and children who are victims of violence in an integrated and sustainable manner, institutional support and legislation are needed that can guarantee its implementation in a coordinated and directed manner;
f. that based on considerations a, b, c, d, and e, it is necessary to immediately establish a Regional Regulation of Blitar Regency concerning the Protection of Women and Children.

Considering:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution;
2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 41), as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3851);
3. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
4. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
5. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
6. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Convention concerning Minimum Age for Children Permitted to Work) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for The Elimination of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941));
9. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
10. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
11. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
12. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4419);
13. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
14. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims) State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
15. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
16. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare;
17. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82);
18. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System;
19. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration;
20. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
21. Government Regulation Number 39 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 68, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5294);
22. Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention On the Rights of the Child (Convention on the Rights of the Child) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1990 Number 57);
23. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 6 of 2009 concerning Gender Disaggregated Data and Mainstreaming of Children's Rights;
24. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Fulfillment Number 11 of 2011 concerning Policy for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
25. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
26. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Preparation of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) in Development as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Preparation of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) in Development;
27. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 of 2014 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;
28. Regional Regulation of Blitar Regency Number 5 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation Number 19 of 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Agencies.

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BLITAR REGENCY and

REGENT OF BLITAR
DECIDES:
To Enact : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Blitar Regency;
2. Blitar Regency Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the DPRD of Blitar Regency;
3. Regent is the Regent of Blitar;
4. Regional Government is the Government of Blitar Regency;
5. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations;
6. Woman is a creature created by God with female sex, or with reproductive organs in the form of ovaries or egg nests, ovum or egg cells, uterus, and hymen;
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children still in the womb;
8. Protection of women and children is all efforts to protect women and children, starting from prevention, safeguarding and handling actions, which are aimed at providing a sense of security and comfort to women and children and their families, especially those who are victims of violence;
9. Victims of violence are women and children who experience violence and/or threats of violence whether physical, psychological, sexual or economic both in the domestic sphere and in the public sphere;
10. Violence is any act or omission of obligation that results in misery or suffering whether physical, mental, sexual and economic including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully;
11. Neglect is an act that results in a person's economic dependence on another person in one household;
12. Prevention is all efforts aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence and threats of violence;
13. Safeguarding is all efforts so that women and children who are vulnerable to violence do not become victims of violence;
14. Handling is all efforts aimed at handling cases of violence against women and children and their families including litigation and non-litigation services;
15. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
16. Sexual exploitation is any form of utilization of sexual body organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, but is not limited to all activities of prostitution and sexual abuse.
17. Integrated Service Center for Women Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) is one form of service facility for women and children consisting of government and non-government elements in an effort to fulfill information and needs in the fields of education, health, economy, politics, law, fulfillment and prevention of acts of violence and trafficking against women and children.
18. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide fulfillment to victims in accordance with the determined standard operating procedures.
19. Children in normal or regular situations are children who get the opportunity to grow and develop optimally.
20. Children as victims of violence are children who become victims of one or all types of violence, whether physical, psychological, sexual, or neglected by parents and their families including victims of human trafficking;
21. Disabled children are children with disabilities;
22. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, adoptive father and/or mother;
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree;
24. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises parental authority as a parent over a child;
25. Minimum Service Standards (SPM) is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance as well as repatriation-social reintegration especially for women and children victims of violence
26. Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) is a technical guideline for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence compiled based on Minimum Service Standards according to regional financial capacity.
27. Abandoned children are children whose needs are not properly fulfilled by those obligated according to their ability both physically, mentally and spiritually.
28. Related SKPD is SKPD which in its main tasks and functions handles the protection of women and children.
29. SKPD in charge of regional development planning is the Regional Development Planning Agency of Blitar Regency, hereinafter abbreviated as BAPEDA of Blitar Regency.
30. SKPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection is the Agency for Women's Empowerment and Family Planning of Blitar Regency.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATION AND BASIC PRINCIPLES
Article 2
The Implementation of Protection of Women and Children is based on Pancasila and founded on the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, and is principally based on:
a. respect for human rights, women's human rights and children's rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. protection for confidentiality, security and comfort of victims;
e. the best interests of the child;
f. the right to life, continuity of growth and development, and respect for the child's opinion.

CHAPTER III
OBJECTIVES
Article 3
The objective of implementing protection for women and children, especially victims of violence, is to guarantee the protection of women and children so that they do not become victims of violence, and to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children and their families, both before, during, and after violence occurs, as well as prevention so that violence does not occur, in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

BAB IV
SCOPE
Article 4
The scope of the implementation of protection for women and children, especially victims of violence includes:
a. implementation of protection for women and children, both before, during and after violence occurs, as well as prevention so that violence does not occur;
b. regulation of institutions and mechanisms for implementing protection for women and children, especially victims of violence.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN, ESPECIALLY VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 5
(1) The implementation of protection for women, children and families of victims of violence constitutes a comprehensive prevention system, covering protection against all forms of violence, trafficking of women and children, economic exploitation, sexual exploitation, maltreatment, neglect and or abandonment in all situations including women and children with disabilities, children of migrant worker families, children in conflict with the law, children in emergency situations and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence.
(2) The regional government is obligated and responsible for the implementation of protection against all forms of violence toward women and children and their families.

Second Part
Forms of Services

Article 6
(1) Prevention services are all forms of services provided to the general public, especially women and children, both legally, socially, culturally and economically, which have an impact on increasing knowledge, skills and awareness so that they do not become victims and perpetrators of violence.
(2) Safeguarding services are all forms of services provided to the community, especially women and children who are vulnerable to becoming victims of violence, due to their situation and condition as well as their family's. The services provided include legal, social, cultural and economic services that have an impact on increasing knowledge, skills and awareness so that they do not become victims and perpetrators of violence.
(3) Handling services include all forms of minimum services, both legal, medical, psychosocial, rehabilitation and social reintegration services provided to women and children who are victims of physical, psychological, sexual violence, trafficking in women and children, neglect, and exploitation.
(4) The procedures, mechanisms and service standards for prevention, safeguarding and handling, as referred to in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) shall be further regulated by the Regent's Regulation.

Third Part
Institutional Arrangements

Article 7
(1) The implementation of protection, prevention, safeguarding and handling of women and children, especially victims of violence, is carried out in an integrated manner, covering legal, medical, medicolegal and psychosocial aspects, by the Integrated Service Center for the Empowerment of Women and Children (P2TP2A) or other names that have the same functional role as P2TP2A.
(2) The institutional structure of P2TP2A and or other similar names is established by Regent's Decree.
(3) The implementation of P2TP2A services and or other names is carried out based on the Minimum Service Standards (SPM) and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in accordance with statutory provisions.

Fourth Part
Form and Mechanism of Prevention and Safeguarding Services

Article 8
(1) The formulation of policies, program planning and budgeting for prevention and safeguarding services shall be implemented through the following mechanisms: a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of data on women and children in general and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence; b. coordination and synchronization of program planning with related SKPD;
c. preparation of programs and activities supported by budgeting; and
d. determination of programs and activities in planning documents. (2) The implementation of the provision of prevention and safeguarding for women and children in general and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence shall be implemented through the following mechanisms:
a. implementation of programs and activities contained in the SKPD budgeting documents;
b. coordination and synchronization of program and activity implementation with related SKPD; and
c. monitoring, evaluation and reporting on policies, programs and activities for the implementation of the protection of women and children. (3) The mechanism for formulating policies, programs and activities and services shall be further regulated in minimum service standards and standard operating procedures in the Regent's Regulation.
(4) The formulation of policies, programs and activities for the implementation of safeguarding for women and children vulnerable to becoming victims of violence shall be coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Regional Development Planning.
(5) Prevention and safeguarding efforts for women and children in general and those vulnerable to becoming victims shall be implemented by: a. establishing working networks in violence prevention efforts; b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns among stakeholders; c. establishing a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; and
d. conducting dissemination/outreach regarding prevention of violence against women, as well as fulfillment of the rights of children and women.

Fifth Part
Form and Mechanism of Services for Handling Victims of Violence

Article 9
(1) Forms of handling services for victims of violence organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service, especially Visum et Repertum and Visum et Repertum Psichiatricum, for the purpose of evidence in the judicial process, starting from the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court levels;
c. legal aid services to assist victims of violence in undergoing the judicial process;
d. spiritual services for moral strengthening in accordance with the religion and beliefs adhered to;
e. first psychosocial assistance to victims carried out to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;
f. assistance to victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with P2TP2T or another name;
g. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and provision of economic access so that victims can be economically independent; and
h. services to return and/or remain in educational institutions for child victims of violence.
(2) The implementation of handling services for women and children victims of violence is carried out with: speed, safety and comfort, a sense of empathy, non-discrimination, easy accessibility, no charges and guaranteed confidentiality.
(3) The mechanism and procedures for the technical implementation of handling services for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and further regulated by a Regulation of the Regent.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT, COMMUNITY, BUSINESS SECTOR

Part One
General

Article 10
Regional Government, society, and the business sector have the obligation and responsibility for the implementation of protection of women and children, especially victims of violence and their families.

Second Part
Regional Government

Article 11
The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. establish a system for the implementation of protection for women and children, especially victims of violence, and their families;
b. provide facilities and infrastructure including safe houses/shelters, Human Resources comprising lawyers, doctors and psychologists-psychiatrists, volunteer companions, spiritual figures, economists, and social workers;
c. enhance the institutional capacity of protection providers, for victims of violence especially for women, children and their families;
d. establish a data and information center regarding protection, for victims of violence especially for women, children and their families;
e. conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection, for victims of violence especially for women, children and their families.

Article 12
In carrying out its obligations and responsibilities, the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. make policies and programs;
b. formulate implementation guidelines;
c. provide services;
d. coordinate policies, programs, budgets and services;
e. conduct monitoring, supervision and evaluation of the implementation of protection and prevention for victims of violence, especially for women, children and their families.

Article 13
In coordinating the implementation of protection for victims of violence, especially for women, children and their families, the Regional Government appoints the Regional Government Work Unit (SKPD) that oversees Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as coordinator.

Third Part
Society

Article 14
(1) The community may play a role in carrying out obligations and responsibilities with respect to the provision of protection for women and children who are victims of violence, especially women, children, and their families.
(2) Members of the community who know of, hear, or witness the occurrence of violence are obligated to provide assistance and protection to victims of violence, especially women, children, and their families.

Fourth Part
Business World

Article 15
The Business Sector may play a role in implementing obligations and responsibilities toward the implementation of protection for victims of violence, especially for women, children and their families.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING
Article 16
(1) Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children, prevention, safeguarding and handling of victims of violence, especially women and children, shall be charged to the Regency Regional Government Revenue and Expenditure Budget, through the SKPD responsible for matters of protection of women and children.
(2) Budget management for the implementation of protection of women and children who are victims of violence shall be conducted with the principles of fairness, efficiency, transparency and accountability.

CHAPTER VIII
EVALUATION, REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Article 17
(1) Evaluation, reporting and accountability by P2TP2A or another similar name as the institution administering protection for women and children who are victims of violence shall be carried out periodically and submitted to the Regent.
(2) The mechanism for evaluation, reporting and supervision of the administrator of protection for women and children, especially victims of violence, shall be stipulated in a Regent’s Decree.

CHAPTER IX
PROVISIONS ON INVESTIGATION
FOR CIVIL SERVANTS
Article 18
(1) Certain civil servant officials within the Regency Government are given authority to conduct investigations into violations of the provisions in this Regional Regulation.
(2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is: a. to receive reports or complaints from a person or family and other persons, regarding the existence of actions or violations of the Regional Regulation;
b. to take first action and examination at the scene;
c. to bring in the experts needed in connection with the examination of cases;
d. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as witnesses or suspects;
e. to take actions according to law that can be accounted for.

B A B X
PROVISIONS ON SANCTIONS
Article 19
Every person who deliberately allows violence against women and children to occur and/or does not report the occurrence of violence against women and children, shall be subject to sanctions as regulated in the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 20
(1) Any person who discloses the whereabouts of a victim of violence who is being placed in a confidential location shall be subject to confinement for a maximum of 3 (three) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(2) In the event that the act as referred to in paragraph (1) is committed by an official appointed to administer protection, the official shall be subject to confinement for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

Article 21
Organizers or managers of P2TPA and/or Safe Houses who are proven to collect fees from victims of violence shall be subject to confinement for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

Article 22
In the event that the acts as referred to in Article 21 are committed by an organizer or manager who is a Civil Servant, the sanctions shall be added with employment sanctions in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 23
At the time this Regional Regulation is stipulated and promulgated, all provisions related to the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, shall remain valid insofar as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 24
All forms of operational regulations for the implementation of this Regional Regulation must be in place no later than 6 months after this Regional Regulation is stipulated and promulgated.

Article 25
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that every person may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Blitar Regency.
Enacted in Blitar on 16 December 2013

REGENT OF BLITAR
Signed.

HERRY NOEGROHO
Promulgated in Blitar on the date of 27 January 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BLITAR REGENCY
Signed.

PALAL ALI SANTOSO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLITAR REGENCY YEAR 2013 NUMBER: 2/E