REGIONAL GAZETTE
NUMBER 2 OF 2013
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUDUS REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2013
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD VICTIMS

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF KUDUS,

Considering : a. that all forms of violence, especially gender-based violence and violence against children are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination;
b. that victims of gender-based violence and violence against children must receive protection, whether from the Regional Government, related agencies, and/or the community in order to avoid and be free from violence and/or threats of violence in the household and community;
c. that based on Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government, related agencies, and/or the community are obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within the Province of Central Java;
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
6. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4281);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437 as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
9. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
10. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
12. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
13. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Laws and Regulations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
14. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
15. Government Regulation Number 2 of 1988 concerning Child Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3367);
16. Government Regulation Number 6 of 1988 concerning Coordination of Vertical Agency Activities in the Regions (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1988 Number 10, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3373);
17. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of the Implementation of Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
18. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
19. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
20. Government Regulation Number 50 of 2007 concerning Procedures for the Implementation of Regional Cooperation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4761);
21. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
22. Presidential Regulation Number 1 of 2007 concerning Ratification, Promulgation and Dissemination of Legislation;
23. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 of 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children (Regional Gazette of the Province of 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);
24. Regional Regulation of Kudus Regency Number 3 of 2008 concerning Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Regional Government of Kudus Regency (Regional Gazette of Kudus Regency of 2008 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Kudus Regency Number 106);

With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KUDUS REGENCY
REGENT OF KUDUS
DECIDES:
To Stipulate: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD VICTIMS.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Central Government hereinafter referred to as Government is the President of the Republic of Indonesia who holds the governmental power of the State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
2. Region is Kudus Regency.
3. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
4. Regent is the Regent of Kudus.
5. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Kudus Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit that oversees women's empowerment and child protection.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
8. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Implementation of protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the relevant SKPD.
12. Violence is any form of unlawful act that can result in or cause danger to a person whether physical, sexual, psychological or economic in nature.
13. Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights, the consequences of which include but are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
14. Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children, the consequences of which include but are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological, and economic violence.
15. Physical Violence is any act that results in pain, illness, or serious injury.
16. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural and/or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
17. Psychological Violence or psychic violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.
18. Economic Violence is any act that may include restricting a person's right to work decently inside or outside the home and also acts of neglecting family members in the form of not providing a decent living, care or maintenance.
19. Victim of Gender-Based Violence is a person who due to their gender experiences physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
20. Child Victim of Violence is a child who receives harsh treatment whether physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
21. Victim Recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
22. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of self-empowerment of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to resolve the problems they face.
23. Integrated Services is a series of activities to provide protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation of prevention efforts, health services, medicolegal services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
24. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
25. Safe House (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
26. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations, and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The protection of victims of gender-based violence and children is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution, as well as basic principles that include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. best interests of victims;
c. gender justice and equality;
d. victim protection;
e. survival, and growth and development of children;
f. respect for the opinion of children;
g. transparency;
h. integration;
i. empowerment; and
j. confidentiality of victims.

Article 3
The objectives of this Regional Regulation are:
a. to prevent all forms of gender-based violence in the home, and violence against children occurring in households and/or communities;
b. to provide services and protection;
c. to provide legal assistance;
d. to pursue recovery and social reintegration; and
e. to provide a sense of security to victims.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
(1) Every victim of gender-based violence and every child victim has the right to:
a. obtain protection for personal, family, and property security, and be free from threats related to information that will be, is being, or has been provided;
b. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
d. obtain integrated services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and according to needs;
e. recovery and social reintegration; and
f. obtain legal, psychological, spiritual, economic, social assistance, and interpreter services.
(2) The rights of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND AUTHORITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 5
(1) In providing protection to victims of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government has the obligation to:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence;
b. provide protection for victims of violence;
c. provide recovery services and social reintegration for victims;
d. encourage and increase community participation;
e. cooperate with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect and recover victims of violence;
f. supervise the implementation of services for victims involving the community; and
g. provide safe houses (shelters).
(2) To carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of gender-based violence and children;
b. facilitate the implementation of integrated services;
c. provide facilities and infrastructure;
d. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
e. conduct coordination and cooperation in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children;
f. encourage community participation; and
g. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives, or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Integrated Services

Article 6
In providing protection to victims of gender-based violence and child victims of violence, the Regional Government is assisted by Integrated Services.

Article 7
(1) The Integrated Service as referred to in Article 6 shall be established by the Regent in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
(2) The Integrated Service as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of members from the following elements:
a. regional government;
b. non-governmental institutions;
c. health service institutions;
d. law enforcement apparatus;
e. professional personnel;
f. companion volunteers;
g. social workers; and/or
h. religious figures.
(3) The Integrated Service as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the following duties:
a. undertaking prevention;
b. recovery and social reintegration;
c. providing legal protection;
d. conducting coordination and cooperation;
e. undertaking efforts to increase community participation; and
f. monitoring and reporting.

Article 8
Further provisions regarding the establishment of Integrated Services shall be regulated further by a Regent's Regulation.

Second Part
Prevention Efforts

Article 9
Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter a include:
a. conducting communication, information, and education about gender-based and child violence; and
b. socialization of laws and regulations related to gender-based and child violence.

Third Part
Recovery Efforts and Social Reintegration

Article 10
Recovery and Social Reintegration Efforts as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter b include:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. medicolegal services;
c. assisting the repatriation of victims;
d. providing protection at Safe Houses (shelters), social rehabilitation centers, or other places desired by victims;
e. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. providing spiritual guidance services; and
g. conducting family and community preparation, economic empowerment, and return to school and/or other educational institutions.

Fourth Part
Legal Protection

Article 11
Legal protection as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter c includes:
a. providing assistance during the legal process at every stage of examination; and
b. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence which can be carried out through the appointment of guardianship in accordance with applicable regulations.

Part Five
Coordination and Cooperation

Article 12
Coordination and cooperation as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter d includes:
a. conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated services at the regency/city level;
b. conducting coordination and cooperation with institutions providing services for victims of gender-based violence and children; and
c. conducting coordination and consultation with Regional Governments.

Part Six
Penimngkatan of Community Participation

Article 13
(1) Increasing Community Participation as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter e is to provide the widest possible opportunity for the community to participate in assisting the prevention and handling of gender-based violence and violence against children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by:
a. providing protection for victims;
b. providing emergency assistance;
c. providing advocacy to victims and/or the community regarding the handling of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children;
d. assisting in the process of submitting applications for the determination of protection;
e. providing assistance in the form of money, goods, or services; and/or
f. conveying information to authorized officials regarding cases of gender-based violence and violence against children.

Seventh Part
Monitoring and Reporting

Article 14
Monitoring and reporting as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (3) letter f shall be conducted on all aspects of integrated service activities in the form of supervision, documentation and evaluation of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children.

Article 15
The implementation of Integrated Services shall be coordinated by the relevant SKPD.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE
Article 16
Assistance is carried out by individuals or official institutions that have professional competence in their field and cooperate with Integrated Services.

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION
Article 17
(1) In providing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government cooperates with the Government, Provincial Government, and Regency/City Government, and other institutions.
(2) Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Government and Provincial Government as referred to in paragraph (1) includes consultation, coordination and reporting.
(3) Cooperation between the Regional Government and Regency/City Government as referred to in paragraph (1) includes coordination, advocacy, referral, return, social reintegration, facilitation of integrated service system development, monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

CHAPTER VIII
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 18
(1) Control, guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children shall be carried out by the Regent.
(2) The implementation of control, guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be assisted by the relevant SKPD (Regional Apparatus Work Unit).

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING
Article 19
All activities related to the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and other legitimate and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 20
Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation insofar as concerning its implementation shall be regulated by the Regent's Regulation.

Article 21
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Kudus Regency.
Enacted in Kudus on the date of 23 December 2013

REGENT OF KUDUS,
signed.

M U S T H O F A
Promulgated in Kudus on 24 December 2013
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KUDUS REGENCY,

ttd.

NOOR YASIN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KUDUS REGENCY YEAR 2013 NUMBER 2
EXPLANATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUDUS REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL
Women and children have an important role in the development of a nation. Women as mothers of the nation who will give birth to children and children as the next generation of the nation are the capital of national development that need to obtain legal protection from acts of gender-based violence and violence against children.
Gender-based violence and violence against children nowadays are increasingly rising in number. Several forms of acts of violence against women and children that occur in society can be in the form of harassment, rape, trafficking of women and children, pornography, sexual exploitation, abandonment/neglect, domestic violence. Therefore, legal instruments are needed that can guarantee the implementation of protection of the rights of women and children both at the national and regional levels.
In order to realize the protection of the rights of women and children from the threat of acts of violence as referred to above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "non-discrimination" is protection for all victims of gender-based violence and child victims without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, group, sex, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status, and physical or mental condition.
Letter b What is meant by "the best interests of the victim" is that for all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, the community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.
Letter c What is meant by "gender justice" is fair treatment given to both women and men.
What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition and position that describes harmonious, aligned and balanced relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development as well as enjoying the results of development in family life as well as in society, nation and state.
Letter d What is meant by "victim protection" is providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family members, advocates, social institutions, the police, the prosecutor's office, the courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on a court determination.
Letter e What is meant by "child survival" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to identity.
What is meant by "child growth and development" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to be creative and to engage in recreation.
Letter f What is meant by "respect for the child's opinion" is respect for children's rights to participate and express their opinions in decision-making which can be taken into consideration, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.
Letter g What is meant by "openness" is that in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and child victims it is transparent among the organizers of integrated services.
Letter h What is meant by "integration" is that in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and child victims it is carried out by building coordination among service providers, among others medical services, legal assistance, psychologists, religious counselors, social workers, and the police.
Letter i What is meant by "empowering" is that every effort provided must be able to strengthen victims, both physically, psychologically, socially and economically.
Letter j What is meant by "victim confidentiality" is every action taken to ensure victims are in a safe condition from threats or other actions that threaten the life and psychology of victims.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Paragraph (1)
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "cooperation" is a systematic and integrated method among organizers of protection and handling of victims of violence in providing services for victims of gender-based violence and child victims.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) The required professional personnel, in addition to those mentioned, shall be in accordance with the case being handled.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "Medicolegal Services" is a form of medical service for the purpose of evidence in the field of law.
Types of Medicolegal services, namely:
a. visum et repertum examination; and
b. health examination for legal purposes.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "psychosocial services" is services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have a sense of confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KUDUS REGENCY NUMBER 168