NUMBER 5 REGIONAL GAZETTE
Considering :

BEKASI REGENCY YEAR 2020
REGENT OF BEKASI
WEST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI REGENCY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2020
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BEKASI,
a. that women are assets who play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations so they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;
b. that in order to realize the fulfillment of women's constitutional rights to be free from torture, treatment that degrades human dignity, the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all violence and to improve the quality of life of women, they need to receive protection and empowerment from the regional government of Bekasi Regency;
c. that the implementation of protection of women in Bekasi Regency has not been able to be carried out optimally and is accompanied by violations of women's rights so that a comprehensive regulation is needed to provide direction, foundation, and legal certainty;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;
In View of:
1.
2.
3.

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas Within the Province of West Java (State Gazette of 1950) as amended by Law Number 4 of 1968 concerning the Establishment of Purwakarta Regency and Bekasi Regency by Amending Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within the Province of West Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968 Number 31, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);
Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia year 1948 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3886);
3. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
4. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
5. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
6. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of Persons With Disabilities (Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (Convention concerning the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 567
8. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BEKASI REGENCY
REGENT OF BEKASI
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGULATION

REGION
REGARDING
PROTECTION
OF WOMEN
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regency Region is the Regency Region of Bekasi.
2. Regent is the Regent of Bekasi.
3. Regency Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Bekasi Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in government affairs that are the authority of the region.
6. Woman is a person of female sex starting from infant, adolescent, adult up to elderly, who has been recognized by law.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
8.
9. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individual and collective in the political, economic, legal, educational, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
10. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband, wife and their child, or father and his child, or mother and her child, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
11. Household is husband, wife, child, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
12. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
13. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially as well as discrimination against victims that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
14. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, socio-economically and discrimination, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
15. Domestic Violence is any act against a person especially women that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or threats of domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
16. Physical Violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
17. Psychological Violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.
18. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain other purposes.
19. Women's Rights are a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly committed by state apparatus or by the state or by regional government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by God Almighty.
20. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and or knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
21. Integrated Service is a series of activities to provide protection for witnesses and victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unit of health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, return, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
22. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
23. Complaint is a series of actions taken by the organizer of the Integrated Service Center to follow up on reports of acts of violence against victims of violence.
24. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims of violence from health disorders they suffer.
25. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring the psychological condition and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
26. Legal Assistance is legal services provided by companions, law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.
27. Return is an effort to return victims of violence from the receiving area/area where violence occurred to the area of origin or family.
28. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims of violence with family, community, institutions or other social environments that can provide protection.
29. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an institution established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children experiencing criminal and civil problems.
30. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the accompaniment process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
31. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services up to return and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
Fundamental Rights of Women

Article 2
(1) Women have the right:
a. to life;
b. to form a family and continue the lineage;
c. to self-development;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to a sense of security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.
(2) Every woman has the right:
a. to live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually;
b. to be free from all threats of violence and/or exploitation;
c. to live in a family within the bonds of a legal marriage;
d. to sustain life and improve her standard of living;
e. to have work that she likes and is also entitled to fair employment conditions;
f. to obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and pathways of education in accordance with the requirements determined;
g. to a healthy and clean environment;
h. to receive fair wages in accordance with her work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity;
i. to elect and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to the applicable laws and regulations;
j. to obtain special protection in the implementation of work or profession against matters that may threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive function; and
k. special rights inherent to women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.
l. to obtain legal protection and assistance for problems faced in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
m. other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Every woman in conditions of disability, old age, pregnancy has the right to obtain facilities and special treatment.
(4) Every elderly woman, with physical and/or mental disability, has the right to obtain care, education, training and special assistance from the Regional Government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.
(5) The Regional Government shall endeavor to establish an old age protection guarantee system for elderly women.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 3
Every woman with a disability has the right to:
a. reproductive health;
b. accept or refuse the use of contraceptives;
c. obtain greater Protection from multilayered Discrimination;
d. obtain greater Protection from acts of violence, including sexual violence and exploitation;
e. obtain education at all units, pathways, types and levels of education;
f. obtain work and a decent livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education and ability;
g. obtain accessibility for the purpose of her independence;
h. obtain rehabilitation, social assistance and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
i. obtain equal rights to foster and develop her talents, abilities and social life.

Third Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 4
Every female victim of violence has the right to:
a. obtain protection;
b. determine and make her own decisions;
c. obtain information;
d. obtain complaint-handling services;
e. obtain assistance;
f. obtain continuous services up to the rehabilitation stage; and
g. obtain confidential services, whether from individuals, groups, or institutions, whether governmental or non-governmental.

Article 5
Women victims of acts of violence have the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage, and handling in a confidential manner, whether provided by individuals, groups, or institutions, whether governmental or non-governmental.

Fourth Part
Special Rights for the Protection of Women

Article 6
(1) Women have the right to obtain special protection from matters that threaten their safety and/or health.
(2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive function is guaranteed and protected by law.
(3) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of health services related to:
   a. menstruation;
   b. pregnancy;
   c. childbirth; and
   d. breastfeeding.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (3) may be provided by parties that employ female workers in accordance with health service standards.

Article 7
(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
(2) Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through the fulfillment of women's rights to receive equal treatment from the parties employing them.
(3) Parties employing female workers are obligated to provide protection in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
(4) The protection that must be provided by parties employing female workers as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 8
Forms of violence include:
a. Physical Violence;
b. Psychological Violence;
c. Sexual Violence; and
d. Domestic Violence;

Article 9
Physical Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, bruising, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 10
Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.

Article 11
(1) Sexual Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. sexual abuse;
c. coercion of sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner;
d. coercion of sexual relations with others and/or exploitation of women for commercial purposes and other specific purposes.
(2) Coercion of sexual relations as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter c is excluded for persons who have mental disorders or sexual disorders within marital relations.

Article 12
Domestic Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter d is in the form of:
a. acts that neglect women within the household scope by a person who is obligated to provide livelihood, care or maintenance to such woman;
b. acts that result in economic dependency by means of restricting and/or prohibiting from engaging in decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of a person; and
c. acts committed by family members that result in pain, bruises, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or cause death.

CHAPTER IV
PREVENTION, PROTECTION SERVICES, AND EMPOWERMENT
First Part
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 13
(1) The Regional Government undertakes integrated efforts to prevent violence against women in the Region.
(2) Integrated efforts to prevent violence against women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for the protection and empowerment of women.
(3) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented by:
a. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns that may involve community organizations, universities, professionals as well as customary heads and/or community leaders;
b. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of the rights of women victims of violence;
c. establishing an integrated violence prevention system;
d. providing ease of access to obtain civil rights, education, health, employment, training and funding, welfare improvement and social services;
e. providing education regarding women's rights for the community;
f. fostering and developing community participation and concern for the protection of women from acts of violence;
g. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system; and
h. establishing a cooperation network in efforts to prevent acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women.

Article 14
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women as referred to in Article 13, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that oversee affairs of:
a. health;
b. education;
c. manpower;
d. socio-political;
e. protection and empowerment of women; and
f. peace and order;
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan with the Regional Apparatus that oversees Protection and Empowerment of Women.

Part Two
Protection Services

Article 15
(1) The provision of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.

Article 16
Forms of services for the protection of women and women victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal aid; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Article 17
Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 16 letter a include:
a. identification or initial recording of victims;
b. recommendation for follow-up action; and
c. approval for follow-up action.

Article 18
(1) Assistance services as referred to in Article 16 letter b include:
a. assistance to victims during the examination process and health recovery;
b. assistance to victims during the medical examination process for legal purposes;
c. assistance to victims during the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all interested parties, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing rehabilitation.
(2) Assistance Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are services, continuous handling up to the stage referred to, consisting of activities and actions carried out by assistants originating from individuals or representatives of institutions that have expertise in providing assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy, and advocacy for the strengthening and self-recovery of victims of violence.

Article 19
Health services as referred to in Article 16 letter c shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus with authority over health affairs in the form of:
a. medical assistance to victims;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
c. implementation of visum et repertum for investigation purposes;
d. provision of services in accordance with SOP to female victims of violence; and
e. referral of health services in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 20
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 16 letter d are implemented by UPTD PPA in the form of:
a. provision of spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) constitute services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect witnesses and victims from various threats and intimidation.

Article 21
Legal services as referred to in Article 16 letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution and examination levels in court hearings and assisting victims to comprehensively describe the violence they have experienced; and
c. coordinating with law enforcement officials, volunteer companions and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 22
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 16 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment;
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. district/city governments within one provincial territory; and
b. related agencies and institutions both governmental and non-governmental.

Third Part
Women's Empowerment

Article 23
(1) Empowerment of women victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings in order to be able to play a role and participate in activities:
a. health;
b. education;
c. economy;
d. law;
e. employment;
f. politics and government.

Article 24
Women's empowerment in the health sector
(1) The implementation of health empowerment as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a is carried out by the Regional Apparatus that oversees health affairs.
(2) The form of empowerment in the health sector as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of health services to undergo reproductive life and sexual life that is healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
 a. Health services during the pre-pregnancy, pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum periods;
 b. Pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health;
 c. Reproductive health services; and
 d. Services and provision of adequate lactation rooms in every Regional Government institution, public facilities and industry.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Article 25
(1) Empowerment of women in the field of education as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b is implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for Education in the form of organizing formal and non-formal education.
(2) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve the capabilities of women.
(3) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (2) includes women's empowerment education, skills education and job training.
(4) The organization of formal and non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 26
The Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c is carried out by Regional Apparatus with authority over micro, small and medium enterprises and other related agencies in the form of:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation and strengthening of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of the development of marketing networks.
(1) Implementation

Article 27
Empowerment of Women in the field of law as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d is implemented by Regional Apparatus and other related institutions in the form of:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Empowerment of women in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 28
The Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of employment as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter e is carried out by Regional Apparatus with authority over labor and other related agencies in the form of:
a. women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment; and
b. employers who employ female workers are obligated to provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.

Article 29
(1) The Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of politics and government as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter f shall be carried out by the National and Political Unity Agency and other related agencies in the form of:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Women's empowerment in the field of politics and government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the laws and regulations.
(3) The Regional Government shall provide guarantees to women to have the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) The Regional Government shall provide opportunities for women to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in regional government.
(5) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties shall be responsible for providing political education for women in an effort

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 30
Protection of Women Victims of Violence
The Regional Government is obligated to:
a. guarantee the implementation of the fulfillment of women's rights and the provision of assurance of safety from acts of violence, and efforts of exploitation against women in the region;
b. establish policies, programs, activities for the protection of women and guarantees for victim handling to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the region;
c. provide guidance and supervision in efforts to protect women carried out by Regional Apparatus handling the Protection and Empowerment of Women;
d. endeavor to establish women's protection institutions;
e. implement the established policies, programs and activities for the protection of women; and
f. conduct socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence and discrimination;

Article 31
The Regional Government is responsible for:
a. implementing activities to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. providing facilities and infrastructure for the protection of women;
c. applying minimum service standards in women's protection services and the applicable standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration;
d. providing implementing officers and functional officers at the UPTD

PPA;
e. involving the community in the implementation of women's protection.
f. providing an adequate budget for women's protection programs according to regional capacity; and
g. conducting guidance and protection of women in the Region.
under the supervision of the implementation

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Article 32
(1) The Regional Government, in its efforts to provide and administer the handling of protection services for women victims of violence, shall establish the UPTD PPA.
(2) The UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is under the regional apparatus responsible to the head of the regional apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) The UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) has the following duties:
 a. coordinating and synchronizing the handling of women's protection services in cooperation with related parties;
 b. maintaining and developing networks and referral systems; and
 c. coordinating the preparation and presentation of reports regarding women's protection.
(4) The UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is grouped into the following roles:
 a. health;
 b. psychology;
 c. social-education;
 d. law; and
 e. economy.
(5) Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties and functions, as well as the management of the UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
(1) In order

Article 33
(1) In order to coordinate and synchronize policies, programs and activities for the protection of women to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the Region, the Regent shall establish a task force, forum, working group or other institution.
(2) The membership of the task force, forum, working group or other institution as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of relevant Regional Apparatus, community leaders, religious leaders, and universities.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment of the task force, forum, working group or other institution as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by the Regent.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Part One
Monitoring

Article 34
(1) To guarantee synergy, continuity and effectiveness in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women in the Region.
(3) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted periodically, starting from the planning stage through the implementation of the policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women for the current year.
(4) The results of the monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be reported to the Regent periodically.

Second Part
Evaluation

Article 35
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.

Third Part
Reporting

Article 36
(1) To improve coordination of service delivery for women and children in the Region, UPTD PPA shall report the implementation to the Head of the Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, with a copy to the Regent.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the implementation of handling issues related to the protection of women in the Region, its duties to.

Article 37
Further provisions regarding the supervision, evaluation, and reporting of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women as referred to in Article 34 through Article 36 shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 38
(1) The community can participate in the implementation of women's protection in the region.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities and mass media.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. providing information or reporting to the competent authority if they become aware of acts of violence against women;
b. taking preventive action against violence towards women;
c. conducting skills training for women; and
d. establishing social community institutions that handle the guidance and empowerment of women.
Further provisions regarding community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING
Article 39
Financing for the implementation of women's protection in the Region is sourced from the regional revenue and expenditure budget and other legitimate and non-binding sources of funds.

CHAPTER X
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 40
(1) Any person, institution, or entity that deliberately fails to provide protection to women, thereby causing acts of violence against women to occur, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or fails to report to the relevant agency may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Business Entities or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are obligated to provide Protection to Women and against acts of Violence in their work environment.
(3) Business Entities or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are obligated to report acts of violence in their work environment to the relevant agency.
(4) Violations as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3) may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
   a. verbal warning;
   b. written warning;
   c. temporary suspension of activities;
   d. termination of cooperation;
   e. revocation of the certificate of registration;
   f. revocation of the operational permit;
   g. sealing;
   h. withdrawal of facilities; and/or
   i. an administrative fine of at least Rp.10,000,000,- (Ten Million Rupiah) and at most Rp.50,000,000,- (Fifty Million Rupiah).
(5) Provisions regarding the procedures for implementing administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated in the Regent's Regulation.

Article 42
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Bekasi Regency.
Promulgated in Cikarang Pusat on the date

REGIONAL SECRETARY
BEKASI REGENCY,
Enacted in Cikarang Pusat on the date of

REGENT OF BEKASI,
EKA SUPRIA ATMAJA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI REGENCY YEAR 2020 NUMBER 5
REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI REGENCY WEST JAVA PROVINCE (5/145/2020)