REGENT OF BANYUWANGI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANYUWANGI REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2011
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE AND HUMAN TRAFFICKING

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BANYUWANGI,

Considering : a. that violence against women and children as well as trafficking in persons constitutes an act of degrading human dignity and degree, therefore they need to be provided with adequate services and protection;
b. that the level of trafficking in persons, violence against women and children is still high, therefore it is the obligation of the regional government to regulate and serve the interests of the community, in this case women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons;
c. that in order for the handling of trafficking in persons, violence against women and children to be implemented effectively and efficiently, it is necessary to regulate the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c, it is necessary to establish a regional regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence and Trafficking in Persons.

In View of : 1. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 4), as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 23, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 8 of 1981 concerning Criminal Procedure Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76; Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 8 of 1985 concerning Social Organizations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3298);
6. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 5 of 1998 Concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
8. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (ILO Convention concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
9. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
10. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for The Elimination of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention Number 182 concerning Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
11. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
12. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
13. Law Number 10 of 2004 concerning the Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
14. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
15. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as last amended by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 108, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4548);
16. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
17. Law Number 11 of 2009 Concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
18. Government Regulation Number 27 of 1983 concerning Implementation of the Criminal Procedure Code, as amended by Government Regulation Number 58 of 2010 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 27 of 1983 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5145);
19. Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
20. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
21. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons. (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
22. Government Regulation Number 44 of 2008 concerning Provision of Compensation, Restitution and Assistance to Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 84, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4860);
23. Presidential Regulation Number 1 of 2007 concerning Ratification, Promulgation and Dissemination of Legislation.
24. Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 69 of 2008 Concerning Task Force for Prevention and Handling of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons.
25. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 9 of 2005 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence and Trafficking in Persons (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2005 Number 4 Series E);

With the Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANYUWANGI REGENCY
and

REGENT OF BANYUWANGI
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE AND

TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Banyuwangi Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regional Head is the Regent of Banyuwangi.
4. SKPD in charge of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is the Regional Apparatus Organization that has the main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in Banyuwangi Regency.
5. Woman is a person of female gender.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, dispatch, transfer, relocation, or receipt of a person by means of threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage, or giving payments or benefits so as to obtain the consent of a person having control over another person, whether conducted within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
8. Child's rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, community, government, and the state.
9. Violence is any act unlawfully, with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body, or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, mentally, socially, psychosocially, and sexually.
11. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causes death.
12. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.
13. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
14. Victim is a woman including female workers who work abroad and children who experience misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of such misery.
15. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits either material or immaterial.
16. Sexual exploitation is any form of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution and indecency.
17. Recruitment is an action that includes inviting, gathering, bringing, or separating a person from their family or community.
18. Sending/Dispatch is the act of dispatching or landing a person from one place to another place.
19. Debt bondage is an act of placing a person in a status or condition of pledging or being forced to pledge themselves or their family or people who are their responsibility or their personal services as a form of debt repayment.
20. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
21. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and the fulfillment of their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from acts of violence and discrimination.
22. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing, and knowing that violence against the victim is occurring or has occurred.
23. Companion is a person who has the expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
24. Social worker is a person who has the expertise to listen empathetically and explore problems to provide counseling in efforts to strengthen the victim psychologically.
25. Commission for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter referred to as KPPA is an institution that handles the protection of women and children whose membership consists of relevant agencies, NGOs and Academics.
26. Medicolegal is an effort to collect evidence for the purposes of proof in the judicial process.
27. Women Crisis Center is a service center for women and children victims of violence.
28. Safe House is a temporary residence for victims, in order to obtain a sense of security and not be reached by the perpetrator or the perpetrator's messenger, while their case has not been resolved.
29. Restitution is the payment of compensation charged to the perpetrator based on a court decision that has permanent legal force for material and/or immaterial losses suffered by the victim or their heirs.
30. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions in order to be able to carry out their role again properly both in the family and in society.
31. Reintegration is the process of reuniting victims with family, or substitute family and community supported by the provision of educational assistance or skills enhancement and assistance.
32. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter referred to as SPO is a procedure that becomes a reference for service actions established by Regent's Decree.
33. Discrimination against women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women;
34. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, established by the government or community-based, which includes: referral centers, business consultation centers, reproductive health consultation centers, legal consultation centers, integrated crisis centers (PKT), integrated service centers (PPT), trauma recovery centers (trauma centers), women's crisis handling centers (women crisis centers), training centers, safe houses (shelters), transit houses, or other forms.
35. Community institution is an institution formed by members of the Indonesian citizen community voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, consisting of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.
36. Companion institution is an institution that provides assistance to women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons in Banyuwangi Regency.
37. Empathy is a mental condition that makes a person feel themselves to be in the same state of feelings or thoughts as the person or group who is a victim of violence and trafficking in persons.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Part One
Principles

Article 2
The principles in the protection of women and children victims of violence and human trafficking are:
a. Legal Certainty;
b. Justice and Gender Equality;
c. Nondiscrimination;
d. Best interests of victims;
e. Respect for the rights of women and children as fulfillment of Human Rights.

Second Part
Objectives

Article 3
The Objectives of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence and Trafficking are:
a. To protect women and children victims of violence and trafficking;
b. To take action against perpetrators of violence and trafficking against women and children;
c. To provide a sense of security to women and children victims of violence and trafficking;
d. To restore the physical, psychological, social, and economic conditions of women and children victims of violence and trafficking;
e. To guarantee the availability of comprehensive services in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF VICTIMS AND ASSISTANTS
First Part
Rights of Victims

Article 4
Every victim has the right to:
a. obtain protection from individuals, groups or regional government as well as private institutions;
b. obtain information about the location of complaint centers, KPPA, companions, social workers and religious counselors, psychologists and psychiatrists, from individuals, groups, or government, regional government and national or international private institutions;
c. obtain integrated services in accordance with applicable legislation;
d. file claims and/or legal suits through judicial bodies, and may report to the International Court of Justice;
e. obtain restitution or compensation payments;
f. obtain information about legislation that protects victims;
g. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
h. obtain information and be involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and development of case services;
i. obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother or child and household member, as well as community member;
j. obtain psychological, medical, spiritual and legal assistance at every level of examination and throughout the judicial process;
k. obtain continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and reintegration stage.

Article 5
Restitution or payment of compensation as referred to in article 4 letter e includes:
a. loss of wealth or income;
b. suffering;
c. costs for medical and/or psychological treatment;
d. other losses suffered by victims as a result of trafficking in persons and violence.

Second Part
Obligations of the Accompanying Institution

Article 6
The Accompanying Institution is obligated to:
a. encourage victims to provide information to the authorities and be willing to become witnesses;
b. facilitate victims to be involved in efforts to prevent the increase of victims together with the community.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 7
The regional government is obligated and responsible to:
a. implement all efforts to prevent the occurrence of criminal acts of trafficking in persons, and violence against women and children;
b. provide and organize integrated services for victims;
c. guarantee the implementation of protection for victims by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victims;
d. supervise the implementation of services for victims, with service standards that involve the community;
e. Open the widest possible access to information for the public, especially to women and children who are victims of violence and trafficking in persons.

Part Two
Obligations and Role of the Community

Article 8
The community participates to carry out:
a. prevention efforts against the occurrence of criminal acts of trafficking in persons and violence;
b. supervision and reporting of the occurrence of criminal acts of trafficking in persons and violence to the competent authorities;
c. proposals regarding the formulation and policies on protection;
d. protection efforts and moral and/or material support to victims.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Protection System

Article 9
(1) The system for implementing protection for victims of human trafficking and violence against women and children is carried out through 2 (two) methods, namely:
a. Preventive method or prevention; and
b. Repressive method or handling.
(2) The preventive method or prevention is carried out through various forms of protection, both by the community and the government, which are intended to prevent the emergence of the criminal act of human trafficking and violence or victims of violence against women and children.
(3) The repressive method or handling is carried out through various forms of protection conducted by the government through regulatory activities, implementation and enforcement of laws and regulations governing the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence and Human Trafficking.
(4) The Guidelines and Technical Procedures for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence and Human Trafficking shall be further regulated through a Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Institutional Arrangements

Article 10
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of P2TP2A or similar institutions.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by decree of the Regent.
(3) P2TP2A is domiciled in Banyuwangi regency.

Third Part
Principles of Service

Article 11
The provision of services to victims is carried out with the following principles:
a. Free of charge;
b. Swift;
c. Safe;
d. Empathetic;
e. Non-judgmental;
f. Non-discriminatory;
g. Easily accessible;
h. Confidential; and
i. Integrated.

Fourth Part
Form And Mechanism of Service

Article 12
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service for the purpose of evidence in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various forms of threats and intimidation against victims and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services are services to assist victims in carrying out the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent;
f. spiritual services include providing explanations about rights, obligations and strengthening of faith and piety;
g. continuous services at the rehabilitation and reintegration stage.

Article 13
The service mechanism shall be implemented according to the SOP which will be regulated later in the Regent's Regulation.

Part Five
Assistance

Article 14
(1) Assistance includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims carried out by the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts, Advocates and social workers, Women's Crisis Center, women's organizations and social organizations concerned with women and children;
(2) Assistance by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, and advocates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with laws and regulations.

Article 15
(1) The duties of the Social Worker as companion are:
a. to provide sufficient information to the victim about their rights;
b. to build an equal relationship with the victim so that they are willing to open up in expressing their problems;
c. to ask what they want to do and what assistance is needed;
d. to provide information and connect with institutions or individuals who can help overcome the problems;
e. to help provide information about legal consultation services;
f. to accompany the victim during the medicological process;
g. to accompany the victim during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
h. to monitor the interests and rights of the victim in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
i. to maintain the privacy and confidentiality of the victim from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
j. to coordinate with other companions;
k. to provide continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and reintegration stage.
(2) Services to victims are carried out in an integrated and continuous manner by service providers.

CHAPTER VI
PLANNING
Article 16
The Regent integrates policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women into regional development planning.

Article 17
(1) The integration of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children who are victims of violence and trafficking in persons shall be set forth in planning and budget documents which include the Regional Long-Term Development Plan (RPJPD), Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD), Strategic Plan of Regional Work Units (Renstra SKPD), Regional Government Work Plan (RKPD), and Work Plan and Budget of Regional Work Units (RKA-SKPD) and the RKA of related SKPD.
(2) The preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be harmonized among related Regional Work Units (SKPD).
(3) The SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection together with P2TP2A shall facilitate the integration of policies, programs, and activities for empowerment and protection of women and children who are victims of violence as well as trafficking in persons into the preparation of planning and budget documents as set forth in paragraph (1).
(4) In carrying out the implementation as referred to in paragraph (3), the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection together with P2TP2A shall coordinate with the Regional Development Planning Agency.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION
Article 18
(1) The Regent implements policies, programs, and activities to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women and child victims of violence and human trafficking.
(2) The implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Vice Regent.
(3) The Office of Women's Empowerment and Family Planning or SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection together with P2TP2A shall implement the policies, programs and activities that have been established, and in their implementation shall cooperate with relevant SKPDs, law enforcement agencies, community institutions, universities, and civil society.
(4) The implementation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be in the form of: policy analysis, coordination, advocacy, socialization, communication, information and education (KIE), training, service facilitation, service provision, development of women and child protection models and other forms.

Article 19
(1) The implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and human trafficking shall be carried out by establishing, developing, strengthening, or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups, or other institutions.
(2) The membership of task forces, forums, working groups, or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of relevant SKPD, law enforcement, community institutions, universities, and civil society.
(3) The establishment of task forces, forums, working groups, or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by Regent's Decree.

Article 20
(1) In implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and human trafficking, the district government may cooperate with international institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 21
The Regent in implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons, undertakes efforts to:
a. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities among SKPD;
b. cooperate with other regencies and cities within one province, and with regencies and cities in other provinces, in the implementation of policies, programs and activities in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. facilitate and provide services;
d. implement affirmative action for the protection of women and children and trafficking in persons; and
e. develop a data system for the protection of women and children, including a data system on violence against women and children as well as trafficking in persons.

Article 22
(1) Facilitation and provision of services as referred to in Article 21 letter c, in the form of victim identification, legal assistance, medical rehabilitation, psychosocial rehabilitation, social reintegration, repatriation assistance, or other forms.
(2) Facilitation and provision of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided for women and children victims of violence including victims of trafficking in persons, women and children in conflict-prone and disaster areas, women and child laborers, elderly women, women and children with disabilities, women and children victims of sexual exploitation, women heads of households, and women and children of other vulnerable groups.

Article 23
Facilitation and provision of services as referred to in article 22 paragraph (2) shall be carried out to avoid all forms of discrimination and acts of violence which are implemented through P2TP2A, or other similar institutions.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 24
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons, the Regency Government shall conduct monitoring.
(2) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities that have been established.
(3) Monitoring shall be conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of SKPD implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons.
(4) Monitoring shall be conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons for the current year.

Article 25
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS
Article 26
(1) The Regency Government shall establish Minimum Service Standards for protection activities for women and children victims of violence and human trafficking.
(2) The Minimum Service Standards as referred to in paragraph (1), include services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against women and children;
b. health services for women and children victims of violence;
c. social rehabilitation for women and children victims of violence;
d. law enforcement and legal assistance for women and children victims of violence; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 27
All funds required for protection activities for women and children victims of violence/human trafficking, including their recovery process, shall be charged to the Regional Budget (APBD) of Banyuwangi Regency, as well as other legitimate and non-binding revenues.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) The Regional Head conducts guidance and supervision to the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons.
(2) The Regional Head through the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, conducts guidance and supervision to P2TP2A in implementing activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence and trafficking in persons.

CHAPTER XII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 29
Every person who commits a criminal act of violence in the form of physical, psychological, or sexual violence, neglect, human trafficking, exploitation or acts that fall under the category of human trafficking, as well as other violence, shall be subject to criminal penalties as regulated in the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 30
(1) In the event that the P2TP2A institution has not yet been formed, then all implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence and Trafficking in Persons, shall be carried out by KPPA.
(2) The P2TP2A institution must be formed no later than 1 (one) year from the enactment of this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation insofar as concerning its implementation shall be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 32
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Banyuwangi Regency.
Enacted in Banyuwangi On the Date of January 24, 2011

REGENT OF BANYUWANGI,
H. ABDULLAH AZWAR ANAS
Promulgated in Banyuwangi on the 19th of August 2011

REGIONAL SECRETARY
BANYUWANGI REGENCY
Drs. Ec. H. SUKANDI, M.M.
Senior Main Advisor

NIP. 19560225 198212 1 002
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANYUWANGI REGENCY YEAR 2011 NUMBER E/4
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANYUWANGI REGENCY
NUMBER 1 YEAR 2011
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE AND HUMAN TRAFFICKING

I. GENERAL EXPLANATION
The practice of exploitation and violence against women and children, including trafficking in persons, has recently continued to increase in number. Perpetrators of exploitation and violence come from all walks of life and are not related to level of education, occupation, or income. Perpetrators of violence also have no connection with social status, religion and beliefs, or any particular ethnic group, ethnicity, or race. One of the causes is the patriarchal cultural factor that views women as lower than men. Violence against women and children can and will continue to occur as long as the imbalance in the relationship between men and women is still believed in and manifested in social life.
That violence and trafficking in persons that has been occurring is like the iceberg theory, meaning that cases that are recorded and reported are only the number on the surface, while far below the surface there are many more that are not recorded and not reached by assistance nor receive serious attention from the authorities.
According to a report by the American Center for International Labor Solidarity (ACILS) and Jaringan Penanggulangan Anak Indonesia (JARAK), specifically for East Java Province, areas that are vulnerable and have potential for women and child trafficking are Banyuwangi, Malang, Blitar, Tulungagung, and Trenggalek. Therefore there needs to be firm law enforcement, because in addition to the state, Regional Governments also have the obligation and responsibility to prevent and impose sanctions against acts of trafficking in women and children, as well as provide protection, assistance, recovery and compensation to victims of violations.
Thus it is expected that the main objective of the drafting of this Regional Regulation Draft can be achieved properly, namely to provide a legal foundation for efforts to protect Women and Children Victims of Violence and Trafficking in Persons as well as guarantee the implementation of the regional government's obligations in carrying out the mandate of laws and regulations in preventing and eradicating violence and trafficking.

II. ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE EXPLANATION
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
paragraph (1) letter a Sufficiently Clear letter b Gender equality and justice is a process to be fair to men and women; Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural activities, national defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
letter c Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
letter d The best interests of victims are all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
letter e Sufficiently Clear

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
letter a
1. An individual is a person (adult) who is capable of providing protection.
2. A group is a collection of 2 (two) or more persons who are capable of providing protection, including mass organizations, religious activity groups, etc.
3. A private institution is a non-governmental organization that is capable of providing protection, including companies (business entities) and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).
letter b through k Sufficiently clear

Article 5 through 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Service providers are government and private institutions that provide services for victims of violence and human trafficking, such as PPT, P2TP2A, KPPA, or WCC (women crisis center).

Article 16 through 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Paragraph (1) The establishment of the institution referred to is the founding of P2TP2A of Banyuwangi Regency
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 20 up to
Article 32
Sufficiently Clear ==============================================