REGENT OF BARITO KUALA
PROVINCE OF SOUTH KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BARITO KUALA,

Considering : a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against humanity;
b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children and to improve the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that becomes the duty, authority and responsibility of regional government;
c. that discrimination and violence against women and children in Barito Kuala Regency continues to increase and spread which causes community members to be unsafe in carrying out their lives, so that integrated protection efforts are needed;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In View of : 1. Law Number 27 Year 1959 concerning Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 Year 1953 concerning Formation of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1953 Number 9) as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1952 Number 72, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1820);
2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 5 Year 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
6. Law Number 19 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 105 Concerning The Abolition of Forced Labour (ILO Convention concerning Abolition of Forced Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 55, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3824);
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning the Prohibition of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention 182 concerning Prohibition and Immediate Action for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941) and U.N Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000;
9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
10. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4279);
11. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
12. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
13. Law Number 39 Year 2004 concerning Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers Abroad (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 133, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4445);
14. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
15. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
16. Law Number 40 Year 2008 concerning Elimination of Racial and Ethnic Discrimination (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 170, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4919);
17. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 11, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
18. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Service (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
19. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 99, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
20. Law Number 44 Year 2009 concerning Hospitals (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 153, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5072);
21. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
22. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette Number 5587) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government to become Law (State Gazette Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette Number 5679);
23. Government Regulation Number 10 Year 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1983 Number 13, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3250) as has been amended by Government Regulation Number 45 Year 1990 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 10 Year 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1990 Number 61, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3424);
24. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
25. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
26. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
27. Government Regulation Number 83 Year 2008 concerning Requirements and Procedures for Providing Free Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 214, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4955);
28. Presidential Regulation Number 69 Year 2008 concerning Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Trafficking in Persons;
29. Regulation of the Minister of Social Affairs Number 102/HUK/2007 concerning Establishment and Operation of Shelters and Trauma Centers;
30. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 02 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
31. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 03 Year 2008 Concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
32. Presidential Instruction Number 5 Year 2014 concerning National Movement Against Sexual Crimes Against Children;
33. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
34. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);
35. Regional Regulation of Barito Kuala Regency Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Authority of Barito Kuala Regency (Regional Gazette of Barito Kuala Regency Year 2008 Number 1 Series D);
36. Regional Regulation of Barito Kuala Regency Number 17 Year 2010 concerning Formation of Organizational Structure and Working Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions and Civil Service Police Unit of Barito Kuala Regency (Regional Gazette of Barito Kuala Regency Number 17 Year 2010, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Barito Kuala Regency Number 17);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY
and

HEAD OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Barito Kuala Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent together with regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration of Barito Kuala Regency.
3. Family Planning, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Agency, abbreviated as BKBP3A is the Regional Work Unit of Barito Kuala Regency.
4. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively through information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
5. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Human Trafficking Crimes, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts of human trafficking crimes in Barito Kuala Regency.
6. Woman is a person who has female genitalia who can menstruate and become pregnant or has obtained legal status as a woman.
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including those in the womb.
8. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion, whether direct or indirect, based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, class, social status, socio-economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individual and collective in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
9. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim;
10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life;
11. Violence against children is any action that results in misery or suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom.
12. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and or household neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the household scope;
13. Human trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, and abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the Country or between Countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited;
14. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
15. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
16. Economic violence is any act that deliberately neglects family members in the form of not providing a decent livelihood, care or maintenance.
17. Psychological violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
18. Victim is a woman and child who experiences and/or suffers either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
19. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts, Social Institutions, or other parties who know or hear or violence against women has occurred.
20. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
21. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
22. Optimal service is a dynamic effort consisting of various parts that are regularly related, followed by performance offered by one party to another party by providing benefits, in order to achieve the best goal.
23. Information is a message (speech or expression) or collection of messages consisting of order sequences of symbols, or meanings that can be interpreted from messages or collections of messages and can be recorded or transmitted.
24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and or mother;
25. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children and among people who are their dependents.
26. Society is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The protection of women and children from acts of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children; and
e. non-discrimination.

Article 3
The objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence are to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children who are victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. facilitate and conduct mediation of domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Women and children victims of acts of violence receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to recovery of health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and
j. the right to assistance.

Article 5
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 4, also obtain special rights as follows;
a. the right to respect and full enjoyment for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community;
c. Family;
d. Parents;
e. Related institutions both directly and indirectly.
Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the regional government as referred to in Article 6 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as the basis for SKPD in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
 a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
 b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
 c. participating in providing assistance and/or handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 9
The obligations of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c and letter d are that they, by law, have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect women and children as members of the family.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 10
(1) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the regional government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government shall undertake efforts as follows: a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 11
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 10, shall be implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the field of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual matters; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

CHAPTER VI
SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 12
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services and psychological services;
c. legal assistance;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration; and
f. accompaniment services.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection;
d. mental and spiritual;
e. peace and order.
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, and the community.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for handling services for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 13
Regional governments are obligated to provide complaint services for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 14
Regional governments and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses.

Article 15
Further provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in Article 13 and Article 14 shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 16
(1) In the context of providing protection services to women and children from acts of violence, the regional government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center for the protection of women and children from acts of violence including victims of acts of violence.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Working Procedures of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 17
In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 16, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regent shall establish: a. a task force on the criminal act of trafficking in persons;
b. a regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 18
(1) The task force as referred to in Article 17 letter a, shall consist of representatives from local government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes a coordinative body tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of human trafficking.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by a Regent's Regulation.

Article 19
(1) The Committee as referred to in Article 17 letter b, shall consist of representatives from local government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 20
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the government;
b. other provinces;
c. regencies/cities; and
d. non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. provision of evidence and witnesses;
d. repatriation and social reintegration;
e. follow-up in accordance with applicable law.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 21
(1) Regional governments establish partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through: a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), are set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 22
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is in order to realize the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD and the community.

Article 23
(1) Regional governments are obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted with the principles of professionalism, transparency, and accountability.

Article 24
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the regional government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or to the DPRD.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 25
Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 26
(1) Regional governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity, and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
REPORTING
Article 27
(1) P2TP2A is obligated to report in writing the implementation of the provision of protection for women and children victims of violence to the Regent.
(2) The report as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) The submission of the report as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out at least once every 6 (six) months.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 28
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Barito Kuala Regency.
Enacted in Marabahan on 27 July 2015

REGENT OF BARITO KUALA,
HASANUDDIN MURAD
Promulgated in Marabahan on the date of 27 July 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY
SUPRIYONO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 12 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE ( 78 /2015)

ELUCIDATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY
NUMBER 4 OF 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The State has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb and damage psychological (psychic), physical, sexual and economic security. This is philosophically stated in the preamble of the 1945 Constitution, that the purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire Nation and the Homeland of Indonesia.

Therefore, the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), and is thus obligated to fulfill these provisions.

Human Rights state that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the State, especially the Government. Through Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection, the Government recognizes the existence of children's rights. The inherent rights of children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, the Right to Growth and Development, the Right to Protection and the Right to Participation.

Protection is necessary to prevent violence and physical, mental and sexual exploitation. To fulfill the right to growth and development, children need space to play, exercise, and education that is appropriate to their physical and psychological development. In fulfilling children's rights, every government administrator, community and parents are obligated to understand and care about children's rights. The existence of legal instruments and legal apparatus that defend the interests of children is necessary for this protection effort. Legislation that is principled on defending the best interests of the child (the best interest of the child) is necessary to realize protection that is legal in nature.

The Government of Barito Kuala Regency has established an Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) as a center for empowerment of women victims of acts of violence which specifically has the main duties and functions for empowerment of women and children victims of acts of violence.

From the above framework, the Government of Barito Kuala Regency is responsible for taking legal actions to prevent, suppress, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children, through the creation of the Regional Regulation of Barito Kuala Regency concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter a The principle of humanity serves as the foundation for the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence, constituting respect for human rights and the dignity and worth of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila) Letter b The principle of justice and gender equality that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, and governmental activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
Letter c The principle of protection is a principle that functions to provide protection to women and children in order to provide peace in family and community life.
Letter d The principle of the best interests of women and children, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities, and Regional Governments are to fulfill the rights of women and children as regulated in laws and regulations.
Letter e The principle of non-discrimination, that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence there shall be no differentiation on the basis of age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.

Article 3
Letter a What is meant by trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by means of the threat of force, use of force, abduction, confinement, forgery of documents or identity, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of a person having control over that person or another person, whether conducted within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
Letter b What is meant by exploitation is an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical sexual reproductive organs or unlawfully, transferring/utilizing labor or transplanting organs and or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
Letter c Sufficiently clear
Letter d What is meant by witness is a person who sees, hears and experiences events of violence and human rights violations.
Letter e Mediation is conducted for cases of domestic violence that fall into the category of complaint offenses as regulated in Law No. 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence.

Article 4
Letter a
What is meant by the right to have one’s dignity respected is upholding human rights.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
What is meant by the right to information is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages—whether data, facts, or their explanations—that can be seen, heard, and read, presented in various packages and formats in accordance with developments in information and communication technology, both electronically and non-electronically, related to acts of violence.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
What is meant by the right to compensation includes economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health insurance, and education or skills training.

Letter g
What is meant by the victim’s right to rehabilitation includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship.

Letter h
What is meant by the right to complaint handling is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.

Letter i
Sufficiently clear.

Letter j
What is meant by the right to assistance includes, among others, psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious leaders, advocates, and family members.

What is meant by a companion/assistant (pendamping) is an individual who works as a volunteer to provide protection and support to women and children who are victims of acts of violence during the judicial process; these companions/assistants can come from family members, friends, or independent organizations that provide attention to witnesses and victims, or advocates.

Article 5
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b The basic rights referred to include the right to education and access to parents during the handling process.
Letter c What is meant by the right to equal protection is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinions, ethnicity or social life, property, disability, birth or other status.
Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e What is meant by the right to obtain freedom is the freedom to express their views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by the Regional Action Plan is the stages of programs and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence, including the worst forms of child labor, which must be carried out by SKPD and UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by complaint services is a series of actions carried out by the organizer of integrated service institutions to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community.
Letter b What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
Letter c What is meant by legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
Letter d What is meant by repatriation is returning women and children victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
Letter e What is meant by social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
What is meant by social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
Letter f What is meant by assistance services is that victims have the right to be accompanied by social workers at the investigation, prosecution or examination level.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by minimum service standards is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b What is meant by the worst forms of work for children, among others:
a. children who are prostituted;
b. children who work in the construction sector;
c. children who work as scavengers;
d. children who conduct activities on the street;
e. children who work as domestic workers;
f. children who work in home-based industries;
g. children who work as beggars;
h. children who work as vehicle washers;
i. children who conduct activities as street vendors, newspaper vendors, shoe shiners, and street buskers;
j. children who work in the industrial sector and types of activities that use hazardous chemicals; and
k. children who work in the entertainment sector.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Paragraph (1) what is meant by guidance on the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is efforts undertaken by regional government and society to realize the achievement of the objectives of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence.
What is meant by supervision of the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is a process of activities aimed at ensuring that efforts undertaken by regional government and society run efficiently and effectively in accordance with plans and provisions of laws and regulations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BARITO KUALA REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 12