REGENT OF EAST BARITO
PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST BARITO REGENCY NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019

REGARDING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BARITO TIMUR,

Considering : a. that women and children with their dignity have the right to be protected from various acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination that marginalize and degrade their status as human beings;

b. that negative behavior and actions that may result in women and children being in a position of oppression or powerlessness in the social community sphere, or in the legal process sphere should be given special treatment that maintains the stability of their soul and spirit to remain able to carry out their lives in social interaction;

c. that the Regional Government is obligated to provide protection for women and children;

Observing 1. 2.
3.

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation regarding the Protection of Women and Children;

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1945;
Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
Law Number 5 Year 2002 concerning the Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and Barito Timur Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 18, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);
4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4479);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 44 Year 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
9. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
10. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
11. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
12. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
Government Regulation Number 65 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for the Preparation and Implementation of Minimum Service Standards (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 150, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4585);
Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
Government Regulation Number 12 Year 2019 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 42, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6322);
Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as has been amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 Year 2011 concerning the Second Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);
19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);
20. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY and

REGENT OF EAST BARITO
DECIDES:
To stipulate: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of East Barito Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government Administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Barito.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives Institution positioned as an element of Government Administration.
5. Regional Apparatus of East Barito Regency is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives of East Barito Regency in the Administration of government affairs that are the authority of East Barito Regency.
6. Service (Dinas) is a Regional Apparatus that handles government affairs in the field of women and children.
7. Technical Service Unit is a Regional Technical Service Unit that handles the affairs of protection of women and children.
8. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
9. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a Woman.
10. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
11. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
12. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and distress whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
13. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
14. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
15. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
16. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or distress either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
17. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
18. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professionals in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
19. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
20. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution that has the expertise to provide assistance.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
22. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
23. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
24. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
25. Regional Action Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RAD is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
26. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
27. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
28. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
29. Parent is biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
30. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government that is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and established by Regional Regulation.
31. Gender Equality is the view that all people should receive equal treatment and not be discriminated against based on their gender identity.
32. Medicolegal Service is a form of health service carried out by medical personnel using medical science and technology based on the authority possessed for legal purposes and to implement applicable regulations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
(1) The implementation of the protection of women and children is carried out based on the following principles:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children;
d. the best interests of women and children; and
e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience acts of violence or neglect.
(2) The objectives of implementing the protection of women and children include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children, including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing a sense of security for women and children;
d. providing services to women and children who are victims of acts of violence, as well as reporters and witnesses;
e. facilitating and conducting mediation of domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; and
f. seeking to obtain damages/compensation for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 3 Protection of women and children in the region includes prevention, services, and empowerment for victims of physical violence, psychological violence, sexual violence, exploitation, human trafficking, and domestic neglect, including child deviant behavior.
The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence is a joint obligation and responsibility among the Regional Government, the community, the family, and parents.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4
Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical violence, psychological violence, exploitation or human trafficking has the right to receive protection and services.
The protection, assistance, and services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. complaints or requests for protection from the concerned party and/or other parties;
c. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose whereabouts are kept secret to avoid intimidation and threats;
d. medical services/health treatment in the form of care and recovery from injuries or the physical condition of victims by medical personnel and paramedics;
e. medicolegal services for evidence in the legal field;
f. protection by law enforcement officers;
g. provision of information regarding rights and obligations under the law to victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;
h. continuous handling up to the stage of rehabilitation;
i. recovery of physical, psychological, and sexual health according to the suffering experienced by victims of violence;
j. psychological assistance to restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore the self-confidence of victims;
k. assistance support for legal processes and obtaining the right to compensation or restitution;
l. spiritual guidance services;
m. determining their own decisions;
n. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
o. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a member of society (social reintegration); and

L  -D-F {,
- !
j. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent. (3) In the event that the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), also obtains special rights including:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma;
e. the right to obtain freedom; and
f. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 5
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. institutions;
d. family; and
e. parents.

Article 6
The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include:
a. implementing the obligations for protection of women and children from acts of violence as stipulated by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing Safe Houses for women and children victims of violence;
f. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
h. establishing regional technical implementation units for protection of women and children based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
 a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children
 b. providing protection to victims;
 c. providing emergency assistance;
 d. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties, and/or related Agencies through UPTD PPA; and
 e. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article B
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children r'i

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL MATTERS
Article 9 (1) The Regional Government is obligated to establish a Technical Service Unit for the protection of women and children.
(2) The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established after this Regional Regulation comes into force and shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General
Article 10 The Regional Government through the Agency or technical service unit and Regional Apparatus (PD), carries out prevention and service efforts for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of Children and Women, up to the empowerment of the victims so that they can return to living their lives in accordance with the dignity and worth they possess.

Second Part
Prevention of Acts of Violence' Exploitation and Penelantararx PeremPuan and Children

Article 1 1
(1) The form of prevention as referred to in Article 10 is carried out through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children and Women to the wider community in the region;
b. activities for disseminating information on the protection of women and children to be known by all people in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or notice boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the most severe condition;
c. training for members who are able to disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;
d. opening of public complaint channels by the Regional Government or Agency through Technical Service Units in each area through community networks;
e. strengthening coordination channels with the Government at the Sub-district, Urban Village/Village level;
f. immediate handling of public complaints throughout all areas in the region and securing subjects of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking, neglect; and/or people; or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of raising awareness of the wider community down to the smallest community groups (families), especially parents to protect women and children.
(2) The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD conducts data collection on areas of violence based on incident rates and conducts research and studies on the level of vulnerability of areas to find solutions for reduction up to cessation of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.

Third Part
Services for Women and Children Who Experience Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 12
(1) The form of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons, or neglect shall be implemented in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (21) and paragraph (3).
(2) To support the operations of the UPTD, the Regent shall order the relevant Agencies regarding services as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the minimum service standards established by the government.

Article 13
The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD is obligated to prepare standard operating procedures for Assistance to victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect in every stage of fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 14
The provision of services and assistance to victims is carried out with the principles of: non-discrimination;
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. coordination between government agencies;
c. guarantee of confidentiality;
d. easily accessible; and
e. free of charge.

Article 15
Forms of services for the rights of women and children from acts of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal aid; and
f. return and social reintegration services.

Fourth Part
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 16
(1) The Regional Government through the Office/UPTD is obligated to conduct empowerment in the economic field for victims of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect.
(2) Forms of empowerment for victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. providing the necessary requirements for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitude, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. conducting assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop the businesses of victims of acts of violence;
e. endeavoring to provide capital for victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding access to information and promoting the products of victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 17
(1) Cooperation is carried out to strengthen the role of the Office/UPTD in achieving the objectives of the protection of women and children in the regional area.
(2) Cooperation is carried out with:
a. the government;
b. the provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions; and
e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims;
c. return (pemulangan d 7 id..j' i.x);
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 18
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector to support the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. provision of information on job opportunities for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who have been removed from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of violence.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 19
(1) In providing protection for women and children, the community may:
a. establish family partners at the kelurahan/desa level by the community;
b. establish women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. provide first aid to victims;
and;
e. report to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER X
REGIONAL ACTION PLAN
Article 20
(1) In order to implement obligations and responsibilities, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as the basis for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The RAD as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(3) Further provisions regarding the RAD as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by the Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 21
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The Regent may appoint the Head of the Agency/Department (Kepala Dinas) to conduct guidance and supervision.
Article 22
The community may conduct supervision over the implementation of the protection of women and children in the regional area through a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or the DPRD.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION
Article 23 (1) In addition to general investigation officials, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation, can also be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with the legislation.
(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. receive reports or complaints from a person regarding the existence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take initial action at that time at the scene and conduct examination;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identity;
d. seize objects and/or documents;
e. take fingerprints and photograph a person;
f. summon persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in expert witnesses required in connection with the examination of the case;
h. cease investigation after receiving instruction from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident does not constitute a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this matter to the public prosecutor, suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.
(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (2), shall notify the commencement of investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Official Investigator of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 24 (1) Every person who deliberately fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the Laws and Regulations.
(2) If officials appointed to provide protection do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.
(3) Officials who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence, who violate service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal mechanisms of the organization.

CHAPTER XIV
OTHER PROVISIONS
Article 25
The handling of legal cases in the investigation process (1) by law enforcement officials must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.
Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are:
a. in investigation cases for women or female child victims of violence must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in point a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardian together with the advocacy and psychology team from P3A who have the same gender;
c. in investigation cases for boy victims of violence may be conducted by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and implemented as referred to in point b; and
d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 26
In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be presented at the trial, except in circumstances that are very compelling while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in trial processes at different times.

Article 27
In the case that the perpetrator of a criminal act is a child, the following matters apply:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by considering that the child still has hope for their future;
b. The Investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases;
c. The investigation is conducted in a closed room and only attended by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardian;
d. in the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but rather entrusted to their family with supervision and guarding;
e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court room; and
f. the sentencing process for the child is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that can be accompanied by their parents.

Article 28
News media are not permitted to expose news coverage for cases concerning child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and their hope for the future unless the victim loses their life as a result of such violence.

CHAPTER XII
FINANCING
Article 29
The budget allocation for the protection of women and children who are victims of violence, carried out by the Regional Government, is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, and/or other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 3O
The establishment of UPT as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (3) must be implemented no later than 1 (one) year from the enactment of this Regional Regulation.

Article S1
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of its promulgation.
In order that every person may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Barito Regency, East Barito.
Enacted in Tamiang Layang on the date of el4ppt 2019

REGENT
Promulgated in Batamiang Layang on date F).A3uli$ zots

REGIONAL SECRETARY
EAST BARITO REGENCY,
ESKOP
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST BARITO REGENCY YEAR 2079 NUMBER 60
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF REGENCY..BA* CENTRAL KALIMANTAN: (O4,SOI2O19)

I. GENERAL
EXPLANATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST BARITO REGENCY NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019

ABOUT
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
The role of women is very important because they are the mothers of the nation who become the pillars of the family to build the future of human resources in various fields including family economic empowerment, likewise with children who are the generation of the nation who will play a role in filling development in the future.
Children and Women must receive protection from violent treatment, exploitation, human trafficking and neglect from responsible parties. Protection is intended to create a peaceful and prosperous atmosphere for all levels of society in fostering life and togetherness within the regional area. Violence cannot be avoided just like that, but as early as possible must be prevented from spreading to a level that is detrimental to all parties. Protection efforts are prioritized on prevention efforts and minimizing incidents.
Acts of violence against Children and Women constitute violations of human rights so their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Children and Women victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee their protection. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims, especially in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of Children and Women victims of violence in Kotabaru Regency. As one of the efforts to protect Children and Women, it is carried out through guidance, training and assistance to victims and families of violence victims. Economic empowerment is also carried out for the prevention of women as victims, which can be done by growing and developing micro and small businesses in accordance with local potential. To grow micro and small businesses, it is necessary to increase the capacity and capability of women through assistance and guidance so that the group and develop their businesses.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1 Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Paragraph (1)
Letter a Respect for the rights of Children and Women constitutes respect for the fulfillment of basic rights for women and children.
Letter b What is meant by "gender justice and equality" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain the same opportunities to obtain opportunities (access), as well as welfare; Gender equality is the equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men, including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is all best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
Letter e What is meant by restoration of socio-economic rights is increasing understanding, awareness, responsibility, commitment, participation, capability and independence for the purpose of economic improvement and quality of women or target groups so as to avoid problems.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Paragraph (1) what is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death. What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person. What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes. What is meant by "exploitation" includes:

a. acts that exploit a child economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; acts with or without the victim's consent that include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.

b. include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.

c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

What is meant by "trafficking in persons" is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is: an act that results in the unfulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. an act of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as appropriate;
c. an act of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household, whereas according to the law applicable to him or her or because of an agreement or contract he or she is obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. an act that results in economic dependence by means of limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person. What is meant is deviant behavior of children such as the use of glue/aibon which can cause children to feel addicted or intoxicated because they are invited by their friends, and deviation towards free sex behavior or the use of illicit goods.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Special stigma for cases of child rape, victims have the right not to be exposed through media coverage, including mention of family background, location/place of residence, and matters related to the child's future interests.
Point e Sufficiently clear.
Point f Damages or compensation currently have not been formally institutionalized juridically, but have been institutionalized in customary (adat) rules; legal remedies are possible in the case of claims for damages as developed in developed countries today.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
ii: i;

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 1,9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.
Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3O
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.
TAIIIBAHAIY LEMBAnAN DAERATT xABuparglr BARrro rrmuR iloMoR .dl F'.,T"ilBr&F