COPY OF
REGENT OF SUKAMARA
PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SUKAMARA REGENCY NUMBER 9 OF 2022
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF SUKAMARA,

Considering : a. that every woman and child has equal rights to live a dignified life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality and justice;
b. that to guarantee women's empowerment and child protection in accordance with their nature and human dignity as well as to receive protection from violence, discrimination and other violations, women's empowerment and child protection must be carried out in an integrated, continuous manner through accelerating the fulfillment and protection of the rights of women and children in their personal lives, family, community, nation and state;
c. that in accordance with the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b, Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection is one of the mandatory government affairs that is the authority of regional government;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of : 1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 5 of 2002 concerning the Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and East Barito Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 18, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
6. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
7. Government Regulation Number 43 of 2017 concerning the Implementation of Restitution for Children Who Are Victims of Criminal Acts (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2017 Number 219, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6131);
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Policy Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2011 concerning National Socio-Cultural Strategy to Realize Gender Equality (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 20);
11. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 of 2011 concerning Policy for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 12 of 2011 concerning Indicators of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
14. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 615);
15. Regional Regulation of Sukamara Regency Number 6 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Sukamara Regency (Regional Gazette of Sukamara Regency of 2016 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Sukamara Regency Number 40), as has been amended by Regional Regulation of Sukamara Regency Number 6 of 2019 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Sukamara Regency Number 6 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Sukamara Regency (Regional Gazette of Sukamara Regency of 2019 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Sukamara Regency Number 67);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SUKAMARA REGENCY
REGENT OF SUKAMARA
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Sukamara Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administrator who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Sukamara.
4. Regional Apparatus hereinafter abbreviated as PD is the Regional Apparatus within the Sukamara Regency Government.
5. Women's Empowerment is an effort to enable women to obtain access and control over economic, political and cultural resources so that women can manage themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
6. Women's Protection is all efforts to guarantee and protect women's rights so that they can live healthily and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from neglect, violence and discrimination both in the form of preventive, repressive and postremedial protection (assistance and treatment).
7. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from neglect, violence and discrimination.
8. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old, including children who are still in the womb and not yet married.
9. Prevention is direct efforts carried out by the Regional Government, community and parents and/or family to prevent violations of the rights of women and children.
10. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, and psychological to the victim.
11. Children's forum is a forum for children's participation formed with the aim of facilitating children's involvement in the decision-making process and enjoying changes relating to their lives either directly or indirectly, which is carried out with the consent and will of all children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of thinking maturity.
12. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a Regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of government commitment and resources, community and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
13. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social.
14. Social welfare is a condition of fulfillment of material, spiritual and social needs of citizens so that they can live decently and are able to develop themselves so that they can carry out their social functions.
15. Gender Mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development program policies.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Women victims of violence are women who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, sexually or psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
18. Child victims of violence are children who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically or neglect that threatens life, body and degrades human dignity.
19. Human trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the Country or outside the Country.
20. Complaint Handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children, submitted by victims, families or the community.
21. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
22. Law enforcement is the action of apparatus authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
23. PUG focal point is an OPD operator who has the ability to carry out gender mainstreaming in their respective work units.
24. Legal assistance is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
25. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point or from the receiving Region to the region of origin.
26. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
27. Safe house is a temporary shelter that aims to provide a sense of security to victims of violence.
28. Shelter home is a forum for guidance and welfare services for street children so that they can grow and develop normally.
29. Spiritual guidance is an effort to provide spiritual/religious guidance.
30. Gender Responsive is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers in achieving gender equality.
31. Gender Sensitivity or gender awareness is the ability to identify gaps in power relations between women and men in the family and in the community, the impact of gender-based division of labor on women and men and the experience that problems, needs, interests and aspirations of women and men are different.
32. Public service provider is every state organizing institution, corporation, independent institution formed based on law for public service activities and other legal entities formed solely for public service activities.
33. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women and children from various fields of development as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including human trafficking formed by the government or community-based, which includes: referral centers, business consultation centers, reproductive health consultation centers, integrated crisis centers (PKT), trauma recovery centers (trauma centers), women's crisis handling centers (women crisis centers), training centers, science and technology information centers (PIPTEK), safe houses (shelters), shelter homes, children's friend telephone (TESSA) 129 or other forms.
34. Community organization is an organization established and formed by the community voluntarily based on common aspirations, will, needs, interests and goals to participate in development for the achievement of the goals of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila.
35. Parents are biological father and/or mother or stepfather and/or stepmother or adoptive father and/or mother.
36. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
37. Customs are local wisdom values that apply and are still applied from generation to generation in the community environment.
38. Regency Task Force is a coordination institution at the regency level that coordinates policy efforts, programs and activities to realize a child-friendly regency.
39. Action plan for the development of a Child-Friendly Regency is a document containing policies, programs and activities to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.

Article 2
The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women, children, and the quality of families;
b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection in Sukamara Regency, including the development of gender and child data systems; and
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 3
Every woman and child has basic rights as a human being that must be protected, promoted, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 4
The rights of women as referred to in Article 2, include: a. to live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually; b. to enjoy a good and healthy living environment; c. to live in a family within the bonds of a legal marriage based on statutory provisions;
d. to obtain work in accordance with ability, requirements and fair and just wages;
e. specifically for women with disabilities, the right to obtain facilities and special treatment in public services;
f. to play an active role in the field of politics and government in accordance with their potential;
g. to obtain information and legal services;
h. to obtain services to increase their income; and i. to obtain other rights in accordance with the dignity of their abilities based on the provisions of statutory regulations;

Article 5
The rights of children as referred to in Article 2, include: a. obtaining education and teaching in accordance with age level, physical and mental condition, intelligence as well as interests and talents; b. living, growing and developing and participating reasonably in accordance with human dignity and receiving protection from acts of violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect, cruelty, violence and abuse, injustice and mistreatment;
c. having needs fulfilled by the family;
d. receiving religious guidance;
e. obtaining their identity;
f. obtaining other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
g. specifically for children with disabilities, having the right to receive facilities and special treatment in their services.

Article 6
In addition to the rights of women and children as referred to in Article 4 and Article 5, women and children victims of acts of violence have the right to:
a. have their dignity and worth as human beings respected; b. the right to file complaints and receive fast and affordable services; c. obtain information and legal certainty;
d. confidentiality regarding the case they are undergoing;
e. compensation for the case they are undergoing;
f. obtain facilitation in the judicial process; g. obtain assistance;
h. obtain physical and psychological health recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
i. determine their own decisions;
j. obtain rehabilitation and social reintegration;
k. obtain respect and services for survival, growth and development;
l. obtain basic services;
m. be free from negative stigma; and
n. obtain freedom to determine choices and decide for themselves following their parents' divorce.

Article 7
The implementation of women's empowerment and child protection is based on the principles of:
a. the best interests of women and children;
b. gender justice and gender equality;
c. local wisdom;
d. law enforcement and legal certainty;
e. non-discrimination;
f. the right to life, survival and development; and
g. respect for the views of the child.

CHAPTER III
IMPROVEMENT OF WOMEN'S QUALITY OF LIFE
Part One
General

Article 8
(1) In order to improve the quality of life of women, the regional government is responsible for:
a. respecting and guaranteeing the rights of women without discrimination in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. implementing gender mainstreaming;
c. establishing a gender mainstreaming working group;
d. increasing the empowerment of women in terms of role, quality and capacity in the fields of:
1) politics;
2) law;
3) social; and
4) economy.
e. strengthening and developing institutions providing women's empowerment services in the Region.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Second Part
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming

Article 9
(1) The Regent is responsible for the implementation of gender mainstreaming.
(2) The responsibility of the Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to the Vice Regent.

Article 10
In implementing Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) letter b, the Regent shall designate the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's and children's empowerment as the coordinator for the implementation of gender mainstreaming.

Third Part
Formation of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group

Article 11
(1) In the effort to accelerate the institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming, a Gender Mainstreaming working group shall be formed in all PD. (2) Members of the Gender Mainstreaming working group are all Heads of PD chaired by the Head of PD who administers governmental affairs in the field of regional development planning as chair of the gender mainstreaming working group and the head of PD who administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as head of the Secretariat of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group.
(3) The formation of the Gender Mainstreaming working group as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 12
The Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in Article 11 has the following duties:
a. promoting and facilitating gender mainstreaming to each PD;
b. conducting socialization and advocacy of gender mainstreaming to Sub-district Heads and Village Heads;
c. preparing annual programs;
d. encouraging the realization of gender-responsive planning and budgeting;
e. preparing the work plan of the gender mainstreaming working group every year;
f. being responsible to the Regent through the Vice Regent;
g. formulating policy recommendations to the Regent;
h. preparing the regional gender profile;
i. conducting monitoring of gender mainstreaming in each agency;
j. establishing a technical team to conduct analysis of the regional budget;
k. preparing a regional action plan for gender mainstreaming; and
l. encouraging the implementation of selection and appointment of gender mainstreaming focal points in each PD.

Article 13
(1) The Technical Team as referred to in Article 12 letter j shall consist of officials who understand gender-responsive budget analysis.
(2) The Regional Action Plan for Regional Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in Article 12 letter k shall contain: a. gender mainstreaming in laws and regulations;
b. gender mainstreaming in the development cycle; c. strengthening of gender mainstreaming institutions; and d. strengthening community participation.

Article 14
(1) The gender mainstreaming focal point in each PD as referred to in Article 12 letter 1 consists of officials and/or staff whose field covers planning and/or program duties.
(2) The gender mainstreaming focal point as referred to in paragraph (1), has the following duties:
 a. promoting gender mainstreaming in the work unit;
 b. facilitating the preparation of work plans and budgeting of PD that are gender responsive;
 c. implementing training, socialization, advocacy of gender mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the PD environment;
 d. reporting the implementation of gender mainstreaming to the leadership of PD;
 e. encouraging the implementation of gender analysis on policies, programs and activities in the work unit; and
 f. facilitating the preparation of gender data in each PD.
(3) The gender mainstreaming focal point as referred to in paragraph (1), is selected and determined by the PD.

Fourth Part
Enhancement of the Role, Quality and Capability of Women

Paragraph 1
Political Field

Article 15
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability in the political field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) letter d number 1 include:
a. conducting outreach/socialization to increase women's political participation in general elections;
b. implementing programs that encourage the level of women's involvement in political processes and political positions;
c. facilitating women's self-development in organizing, forming associations, and gathering; and
d. involving women in decision-making concerning women's interests.

Paragraph 2
Legal Field

Article 16
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the field of law as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) letter d number 2 include:
a. conducting socialization to increase women's legal knowledge and awareness;
b. conducting mapping and reviewing gender-biased policies; and
c. involving women's organizations in the process of drafting and discussing regional legal products related to women's participation.

Paragraph 3
Social Sector

Article 17
Efforts to increase the role, quality and capability of women in the social field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) letter d number 3, include:
a. increasing knowledge and skills to encourage the fulfillment of education in accordance with their potential;
b. increasing and fulfilling health quality for women;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
d. increasing women's awareness of the impact of early marriage;
e. facilitating and endeavoring to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women;
f. increasing women's awareness and knowledge of independent, healthy and prosperous family planning;
g. implementing programs to reduce maternal mortality rates; and
h. encouraging the establishment of women's organizations.

Paragraph 4
Economic Sector

Article 18
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the economic field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) letter d number 4, include:
a. implementing training program activities to improve women's skills and expertise in order to realize the improvement of women's welfare;
b. facilitation of strengthening business capital for women with weak economic capacity;
c. marketing of products resulting from businesses of women with weak economic capacity;
d. training for the development of women's capabilities through economic empowerment of pre-prosperous families; and
e. comprehensive entrepreneurship training for women.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 19
(1) The Regional Government, in efforts to protect women, is responsible for:
a. guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with statutory regulations;
b. establishing and implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women's rights, including the provision of facilities and funding for the provision of services for women and children who are victims of violence;
c. cooperating with the community and/or community organizations in the implementation of women's protection in accordance with statutory regulations;
d. carrying out the handling and empowerment of women who are victims of acts of violence;
e. providing special protection to women who are victims of acts of violence and trafficking in persons; and
f. taking preventive actions in order to prevent violations of women's rights.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to protect women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs in the field of women's and children's empowerment and, in its implementation, may coordinate with relevant agencies.

Part Two
Prevention of Acts of Violence Against Women

Article 20
In order to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women, the regional government is obligated to:
a. conduct socialization regarding the prevention of violence against women by optimizing the role of customary, cultural, religious institutions and community organizations;
b. provide guidelines on handling acts of violence against women;
c. involve community participation in recovery and reintegration;
d. develop an integrated database and information system regarding acts of violence against women;
e. strengthen the function of community organizations working in the field of women's and children's empowerment; and
f. provide public facilities that are comfortable and safe for women.

Third Part
Effectiveness of Services for Women Victims of Violence

Paragraph 1
General

Article 21
(1) Protection of female victims of acts of violence is implemented through integrated services.
(2) The provision of integrated services to female victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) uses the principles of:
a. gender responsive;
b. non-discrimination;
c. equal and respectful relationships;
d. maintaining confidentiality;
e. providing a sense of security and comfort;
f. respecting individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respecting the choices and decisions of victims;
i. sensitive to the background and condition of victims and the use of appropriate language that is understood by victims;
j. fast and simple;
k. empathy; and
l. fulfillment of women's rights.

Article 22
The form of integrated services for women victims of violence includes:
a. complaint handling;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. law enforcement and legal assistance; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration.

Paragraph 2
Handling of Complaints

Article 23
Integrated complaint handling services as referred to in Article 22 letter a shall be implemented by:
a. hospitals;
b. community health centers;
c. women's service units;
d. trauma center shelters;
e. women crisis centers;
f. advisory board for marriage guidance and preservation;
g. police;
h. prosecutor's office;
i. courts;
j. ministry of religious affairs, and/or
k. legal aid institutions.

Article 24
(1) Complaints of acts of violence against women may be made by reporters consisting of victims, family, the community and/or community organizations in the field of protection of women and children.
(2) Reports as referred to in paragraph (1) may be submitted by making complaints:
 a. directly;
 b. by telephone; and/or
 c. by letter.
(3) In addition to handling complaints submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions as referred to in Article 23 are also authorized to handle victims of acts of violence against women based on other information.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for complaint handling services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Health Rehabilitation

Article 25
(1) Health Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 22 letter b, constitutes efforts that include aspects of:
a. promotive;
b. preventive;
c. curative; and
d. rehabilitative.
(2) Health rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted comprehensively, accessible 24 (twenty-four) hours at RSUD and conducted in accordance with health service standards.
(3) Women victims of acts of violence have the right to health services free of charge for both medical costs, medicolegal and visum.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementation of Health Rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in the Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 4
Social Rehabilitation

Article 26
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 22 letter c, is intended to restore and develop the capabilities of women victims of violence who experience social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions in society properly.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes services:
a. counseling;
b. provision of safe houses; and
c. spiritual guidance.
(3) The implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by:
a. PD that administers governmental affairs in the social sector;
b. PD that administers governmental affairs in the sector of women and child empowerment, and may cooperate with an integrated service center (women crisis center) or existing community organizations in the social sector; or
c. religious institutions and/or organizations.

Article 27
(1) Counseling services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2) letter a, aim to:
a. assist women victims of violence in recognizing their problems and finding the most effective way to overcome them themselves;
b. empower women victims of violence to determine their future;
c. provide moral support to victims of violence in facing the process they are undergoing; and
d. make women victims of violence feel accepted in the community environment.
(2) Counseling services are carried out by gender-responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of:
a. counselors;
b. psychologists; and
c. psychiatrists.
(3) Counseling services are carried out in places that guarantee a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information from women victims of violence.
(4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; and
d. site visits.

Article 28
(1) The Regional Government may provide safe houses for women victims of acts of violence.
(2) The provision of safe house services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2) letter b aims to protect women victims of acts of violence from intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.
(3) The location of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.
(4) The criteria for women victims of acts of violence who require safe houses include:
   a. their life is threatened;
   b. receiving rejection from family or community;
   c. requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far; and/or
   d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house.
(5) The implementation of safe house services is carried out by social rehabilitation officers who have gender sensitivity or gender awareness, consisting of:
   a. social workers/volunteers;
   b. security officers; and/or
   c. community leaders.
(6) Further provisions regarding the implementation of safe house services are regulated in Regent Regulation.

Article 29
(1) Spiritual guidance as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2) letter c aims for psychological recovery.
(2) Spiritual guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on the principles of:
a. not imposing any religion or belief; and
b. leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim.
(3) Spiritual guidance is conducted by spiritual guidance officers.
(4) Spiritual guidance officers as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of consultants from the Marriage Advisory, Development and Preservation Board, Officers of the Religious Affairs Office, religious leaders, who possess gender sensitivity or gender awareness.

Paragraph 5
Enforcement and Legal Assistance

Article 30
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in Article 22 letter d constitute actions by law enforcement officials to implement laws and regulations in order to handle cases of violence against women, especially to impose sanctions on perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
(2) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by prioritizing the best interests of victims.

Article 31
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services are intended to provide assistance and protection to women victims of acts of violence and sexual violence with a gender-responsive approach so that victims obtain justice and legal certainty.
(2) Types of legal aid services include:
 a. legal aid in the reporting process and preparation of official investigation reports;
 b. legal aid in the prosecution process at the prosecutor's office;
 c. legal aid in the examination process at court;
 d. legal aid in the court hearing decision process until there is a final and binding legal decision; and
 e. legal aid in the mediation process.
(3) The Regional Government provides legal aid to women victims of acts of violence based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) In providing legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3), the Regional Government may cooperate with legal aid institutions, women crisis centers, advocates and/or other legal assistants who are gender sensitive.

Paragraph 6
Return and Social Reintegration

Article 32
(1) Repatriation is intended to return women victims of acts of violence to their Region of origin.
(2) Repatriation of women victims of acts of violence is accompanied by social reintegration efforts.

Article 33
(1) Social reintegration as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (2) is carried out in the context of reuniting women victims of acts of violence with substitute family parties, or communities that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
(2) Social reintegration is aimed so that:
a. women victims of acts of violence can resume their social life; and
b. women victims of acts of violence can have a decent life.
(3) Social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out after victims receive social rehabilitation services.

Article 34
The Regional Government implements repatriation and social reintegration of women victims of acts of violence in accordance with laws and regulations.

Fourth Part
Employment protection

Article 35
(1) Employers who employ women are obligated to maintain decency, safety and security while in the workplace.
(2) Employers are obligated to place female workers in places that are safe for women's reproductive health.
(3) Employers are obligated to fulfill the rights of female workers to receive wages in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Employers are obligated to provide special breastfeeding facilities at their company.

Article 36
(1) Female workers/laborers under the age of 18 (eighteen) years are prohibited from being employed between 23.00 WIB until 07.00 WIB.
(2) Employers are prohibited from employing pregnant female workers/laborers who according to a doctor's statement would endanger the health and safety of their pregnancy.
(3) Employers who employ workers/laborers between 23.00 WIB until 07.00 WIB, are obligated to:
a. provide nutritious food and beverages; and
b. maintain decency and security while at the workplace.
(4) Employers are obligated to provide shuttle transportation for female workers/laborers who depart and return between 23.00 WIB until 05.00 WIB.

CHAPTER V
IMPROVEMENT OF FAMILY QUALITY
Article 37
(1) In order to improve family quality, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. conducting efforts to improve family quality to realize gender equality and children's rights;
b. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and children's rights; and
c. strengthening and developing institutions that provide family quality improvement services.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus (PD) in accordance with its duties and functions.

Article 38
Regional Government undertakes efforts to improve family quality as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (1) letter a, comprising: a. guidance;
b. counseling;
c. supervision;
d. facilitation of family development implementation; and e. improving the health quality of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers.

Article 39
Development as referred to in Article 38 letter a, includes:
a. improvement of child quality by providing access to information, education, outreach/counseling, and services regarding care, nurturing, and the development of parenting patterns;
b. improvement of adolescent quality by providing access to information, education, counseling, and services regarding family life through planned generation activities, adolescent information and counseling centers, and adolescent family development;
c. improvement of the quality of life of the elderly through elderly development programs, elderly family development, elderly coaching and guidance; and
d. improvement of the family economy.

Article 40
Guidance as referred to in article 38 letter b, includes: a. providing protection and assistance to develop oneself through improvement of family capabilities and skills; b. conducting counseling on improving the quality of life of women; c. conducting counseling on improving gender equality in family and community life;
d. improving access and opportunities to receive information and economic resources through efforts to increase prosperous family income and increase women's economic productivity; and
e. undertaking empowerment efforts for women heads of households.

Article 41
Supervision as referred to in Article 38 letter c, includes:
a. conducting evaluation and monitoring of child protection programs and parenting pattern development;
b. conducting evaluation and monitoring of youth quality improvement;
c. conducting evaluation and monitoring of elderly quality of life improvement;
d. conducting evaluation and monitoring of family economic improvement; and
e. conducting evaluation and monitoring of family capability and skills improvement.

Article 42
The provision of services for families as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (1) letter includes:
a. communication, information and education;
b. contraceptive devices and medicines;
c. recording and reporting of family planning services;
d. adequate health service facilities and infrastructure; and
e. breastfeeding corner rooms in every public facility.

Article 43
Communication, information and education as referred to in Article 42 letter a constitutes communication activities to increase knowledge and improve the attitudes and behavior of families and communities in population and family planning programs.

Article 44
(1) Apart from the Regional Government, private parties are obligated to provide breastfeeding corner rooms;
(2) Breastfeeding corner rooms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be proper and adequate rooms;
(3) Private parties that do not provide breastfeeding corner rooms as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. restriction of business activities;
c. suspension of business activities;
d. administrative fine; and/or
e. revocation of permit.

CHAPTER VI
CHILD PROTECTION
Article 45
(1) PD and related agencies are obligated to conduct gender and child data management which includes the stages of:
a. collection;
b. processing;
c. analysis; and
d. presentation.
(2) Data collection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is conducted through surveys, registration, routine agency statistics, research using secondary data, and/or other methods in accordance with the development of science and technology.
(3) Data processing as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is conducted on all types of disaggregated data related to gender and children.
(4) Data analysis as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, is conducted using data processing methodology in accordance with needs.
(5) Presentation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is conducted using print media and/or electronic media.

Article 46
(1) PD that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection is obligated to organize gender and child data.
(2) The organization of gender and child data as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by coordinating with the Central Statistics Agency and the Agency that administers Government affairs in the field of Regional Development Planning.

Article 47
(1) Gender and child data as referred to in Article 45 paragraph (1) shall become material for data recapitulation by the Regional Apparatus that administers Governmental Affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) The recapitulation results as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be reported to the Regent each year and disseminated to Regional Apparatus and related agencies.

CHAPTER VII
FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General

Article 48
(1) Regional Government in efforts to fulfill children's rights is responsible for:
a. establishing and implementing policies and programs/activities for the fulfillment of children's rights;
b. respecting and guaranteeing the human rights of every child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition;
c. strengthening and developing family quality improvement service provider institutions in realizing children's rights;
d. guaranteeing the protection, care and welfare of children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians or other persons who are legally responsible for the child;
e. guaranteeing the right of children to express opinions in accordance with the age and level of intelligence of the child;
f. conducting supervision and guidance in the context of implementing the fulfillment of children's rights; and
g. conducting cooperation with private parties and/or NGOs in the implementation of child protection.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in child protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that administers Government Affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Second Part
Registration of Birth and Education

Article 49
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to administer the registration of child births with the issuance of birth certificates.
(2) Birth certificates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be administered free of charge.

Article 50
The Regional Government guarantees the implementation of a 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program for children aged 7 (seven) to 19 (nineteen) years.

Article 51
(1) Every organizer of an educational unit is obligated to provide opportunities for children to obtain services without discrimination.
(2) Every organizer of an educational unit is prohibited from expelling children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the child's education.
(3) In the event that a child victim of violence experiences dropping out of school, the organizer of the educational unit is obligated to coordinate with related agencies.

Article 52
(1) Children with disabilities and children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including inclusive education.
(2) Regional governments provide educators for inclusive education at every education unit.

Article 53
Children in conflict with the law, children experiencing pregnancy outside of marriage and/or an unwanted pregnancy, and children who are victims of HIV/AIDS infection are protected in their right to obtain education.

Third Part
Health and Social

Article 54
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the time they are in the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services and care; and
b. exemption from cost burden for malnourished children, children with disabilities, children with special needs, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child laborers, child victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances, children who are victims of violence and child victims of human trafficking.
(3) Regional Governments, communities, families and parents are obligated to make efforts so that children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Article 55
(1) Promotive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at improving health status more optimally.
(2) Promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by providing socialization or education to the community regarding healthy lifestyle patterns which include: a. the importance of exclusive breastfeeding for infants;
b. the importance of immunization for toddlers;
c. clean living patterns;
d. the importance of nutritious food; and
e. the dangers of narcotics and smoking.
(3) In addition to promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may carry out other activities in the context of health service implementation.

Article 56
(1) Preventive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a, are aimed at preventing the occurrence of disease or health problems.
(2) The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
 a. obligating mothers to provide exclusive breastfeeding to infants up to 6 (six) months of age;
 b. providing free immunization and vitamins to infants and toddlers;
 c. providing nutritious food to toddlers from underprivileged families;
 d. optimizing the role of posyandu for health services for mothers and toddlers;
 e. conducting periodic health examinations; and
 f. providing sanitation facilities and clean water at every school.

Article 57
(1) Curative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a, are aimed at preventing diseases from becoming more severe through treatment.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1), is free of charge for children from underprivileged families.

Article 58
(1) Rehabilitative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a, are intended to maintain and restore conditions after illness.
(2) Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), are carried out through periodic health examinations.

Article 59
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to provide social welfare for:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. child victims of violence who are exploited economically and sexually, neglected children, child victims of abduction and child victims of human trafficking;
c. children who do not have parents and are cared for by parties or families who are unable to provide;
d. child victims of natural disasters or social disasters; and
e. children with disabilities.
(2) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of provision of services:
a. health;
b. education;
c. legal aid;
d. assistance;
e. social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation; and/or
g. reintegration.

Fourth Part
Employment

Article 60
The regional government conducts periodic supervision of every person/entity that employs children in an effort to protect child workers.

Article 61
Every person/entity that employs children must fulfill the requirements:
a. minimum age of 15 (fifteen) years;
b. obtain written consent from the parent/guardian of the child worker;
c. have a written employment agreement between the employer and the parent/guardian of the child worker and obtain validation from the authorized agency;
d. not employ children at night;
e. maximum working time of 3 (three) hours per day;
f. not employ the child in places or environments that can disrupt the child's growth and development process, whether physically, mentally, morally and intellectually, or the child's health;
g. provide opportunities to receive education in accordance with their talents and interests;
h. employ for light types of work; and
i. provide one day off per week.

Article 62
In the event that children are employed together with adult workers, the workplace for children must be separated from the workplace for adults.

Article 63
(1) Every person/entity is prohibited from employing and involving children in the worst forms of work.
(2) The worst forms of work referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. all work in the form of slavery or similar practices; b. all work that exploits, provides or offers children for prostitution, pornography production, pornographic performances, or gambling;
c. all work that exploits, provides or involves children for the production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances; and/or
d. all work that endangers the health, safety or morals of children.

Fifth Part
Facilitation of the Juvenile Justice System

Article 64
(1) Facilitation of the child justice system includes criminal and civil justice.
(2) Facilitation of the criminal justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
 a. provision of companions or child volunteers during examination by investigators;
 b. provision of legal aid and psychological services;
 c. involving members/investigators of the local police in efforts to prevent criminal acts committed by children, and children as witnesses;
 d. realizing restorative justice processes for children in conflict with the law; and
 e. rehabilitation and social reintegration services.
(3) Fulfillment of children's rights in the civil justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the provision and delivery of consultation and assistance services during the court process.
(4) In facilitating the child justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), the PD with authority is the PD that administers governmental affairs in the field of protection of women and children as well as social affairs.

Sixth Part
Children's Forum

Article 65
(1) In implementing the fulfillment of children's rights to express opinions and participate, the regional government facilitates the establishment of children's forums.
(2) The children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a representation of children in the region, both representation of children's geographical domicile, components of children's socio-cultural groups and children's educational background.
(3) In every formulation of policies related to children, the regional government is obligated to consider and accommodate the opinions of children conveyed through children's participation forums.
(4) Further provisions regarding the establishment of children's forums as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (3) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Seventh Part
Child-Friendly Regency

Article 66
(1) In the framework of fulfilling children's rights in an integrated, systematic and sustainable manner, the Regional Government establishes a Regional Action Plan for the Development of a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) The Regional Action Plan for the Development of a Child-Friendly Regency as referred to in paragraph (1), contains: a. the concept of a Child-Friendly Regency concerning objectives, strategies and the roles of related parties;
b. children's rights;
c. the approach to developing a Child-Friendly Regency.

Article 67
(1) The Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly Regency Development is directed towards the fulfillment of children's rights which are divided into 5 (five) target groups, comprising:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, use of leisure time, cultural activities; and
e. special protection.
(2) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly Regency Development as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 68
(1) In order to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly Regency Development in the Region, a Child-Friendly Regency Task Force shall be established.
(2) The establishment and membership composition of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force shall be determined by Regent's Decree.
(3) The Child-Friendly Regency Task Force shall be positioned within the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) The Child-Friendly Regency Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall have the following principal duties:
a. coordinating the implementation of policies and development of the Child-Friendly Regency;
b. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication, information and education on Child-Friendly Regency policies;
c. collecting baseline data for the development of the Child-Friendly Regency;
d. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
e. disseminating baseline data;
f. determining the focus and priority of programs in realizing a Child-Friendly Regency that is adapted to regional potential;
g. formulating a 5 (five) year regional action plan for the Child-Friendly Regency and work mechanisms; and
h. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once every 1 (one) year.

Article 69
In carrying out its duties, the Child-Friendly Regency task force may coordinate and cooperate with P2TP2A institutions or other institutions that provide child protection services.

CHAPTER VIII
GENDER AND CHILD DATA SYSTEM
Article 70
Regional governments in order to provide protection for children:
a. conduct prevention of violence against children by optimizing the role of customary institutions;
b. conduct socialization seminars and counseling regarding child protection and rights;
c. develop child-friendly school models;
d. provide public facilities that are friendly and safe for children;
e. compile databases and information about acts of violence against children;
f. conduct mapping of locations and areas vulnerable to the occurrence of violence against children;
g. conduct coordination and cooperation in preventing violations of children's rights;
h. strengthen the function of institutions or organizations working in the field of child protection; and
i. encourage public awareness of the importance of child protection by establishing assistance for the protection of women and children.

Article 71
Service efforts carried out by Regional Governments for women victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 20 through Article 33 shall apply mutatis mutandis to service efforts for child victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER IX
PARTICIPATION OF THE COMMUNITY, PRIVATE COMPANIES, PARENTS AND/OR FAMILY

Article 72
(1) Community participation in efforts to protect women and children includes:
a. participating in prevention and providing support for the development of programs to prevent violations of the rights of women and children;
b. providing protection to victims and emergency assistance;
c. providing information and/or reporting violations of the rights of women and children to the competent authorities;
d. monitoring the law enforcement process in cases of violations of the rights of women and children; and
e. establishing Community-Based Integrated Child Protection Groups (PATBM).
(2) Families and parents have a role to protect and prevent violations of the rights of women and children.
(3) The participation of private companies in efforts to protect women and children includes:
a. socialization and advocacy related to child protection in their company environment;
b. supporting programs for the prevention of violence against children through CSR funds;
c. supporting programs for the protection of child victims of violence through CSR funds;
d. facilitating safe places/houses for child victims of violence in the company environment; and
e. providing complaint services for child victims of violence.
(4) Community, family and parental participation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be based on laws and regulations and the values of local wisdom of the local community.

Article 73
(1) In the context of preventing violations of women's rights, the community:
 a. monitors various conditions occurring in their environment that may lead to violations of women's rights;
 b. increases awareness of women's rights;
 c. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations, and the family environment; and
 d. prevents unregistered marriages.
(2) In the context of preventing violations of children's rights, the community:
 a. monitors various conditions occurring in their environment that may lead to violations of children's rights;
 b. increases awareness of violations of children's rights;
 c. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations, and the family environment; and
 d. prevents the occurrence of marriage at an early age.

Second Part
Parents and/or Family

Article 74
The family, in efforts to protect the rights of women, plays a role in:
a. providing equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, socio-economic, political, and culture;
b. preventing the occurrence of violations of women's rights in the household; and
c. protecting women from conflict and violence in the household that degrade the dignity of women.

Article 75
(1) Parents, in efforts to protect children's rights, have the role to:
a. care for, maintain, educate and protect children;
b. develop children in accordance with their abilities, talents and interests;
c. provide formal and non-formal education;
d. guide children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics and morals as well as customs; and
e. prevent the occurrence of marriage at an early age.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 76
(1) Guidance on women's empowerment and child protection is carried out by the Regional Government.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out in the form of:
a. providing training for government officials and law enforcement regarding prevention;
b. providing training for religious leaders, community leaders, customary leaders, educators, journalists and media managers in order to prevent violence against women and children;
c. providing training to health workers who provide health services to women and children victims of violence at community health centers, integrated service units and general hospitals;
d. providing training to social rehabilitation officers and spiritual guidance officers in order to protect women and children victims of violence; and
e. conducting professional improvement for officers, managers of violence case data against women and children at community health centers, integrated service units and general hospitals.
(3) The Regent has the authority to conduct guidance in the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 77
(1) The Head of the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection is obligated to submit a report on the implementation of women and child protection programs to the Regent.
(2) The report as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted periodically 1 (one) time every 6 (six) months.

Article 78
(1) The Regent conducts supervision and evaluation of the implementation of protection of women and children periodically 1 (one) time every 3 (three) months.
(2) In conducting supervision and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent may appoint Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.
(3) The results of supervision and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) constitute evaluation material for policy programs on protection of women and children in the Region.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING
Article 79
Financing for the implementation of programs and activities for women's empowerment and child protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 80
Regent Regulations implementing this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 81
This Regional Regulation shall come into force from the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Sukamara Regency.
Enacted in Sukamara on the date of October 6, 2022

REGENT OF SUKAMARA,
WINDU SUBAGIO
Promulgated in Sukamara on October 6, 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY
SUKAMARA REGENCY,
RENDY LESMANA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUKAMARA REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 9 Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,
DEWA PUTU OKA, S.H. NIP. 19750815 200212 1 004
ELUCIDATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SUKAMARA REGENCY
NUMBER 9 OF 2022
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
1. GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution as a Constitutional foundation has explicitly regulated the importance of protection of Human Rights, including the rights of women and children. In addition to the guarantee from the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, the guarantee that every person must have equal dignity and degree has also been recognized internationally. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights or UDHR of 1948 which underlies Human Rights in general has guaranteed that all people are born with freedom, having equal dignity and rights without exception.

The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the Regional Government to regulate and manage regional government affairs aimed at realizing community welfare through improved services, protection and empowerment of the community. As a component of society that plays an important role in realizing a quality generation and as successors to the nation's struggle, women and children must receive guarantees for the fulfillment of children's rights.

To ensure the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection in accordance with human dignity and in order to carry out mandatory affairs, regional governments need to provide legal certainty in the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection through the formulation of a policy. The formulation of such policy is a form of support and concrete effort from various other parties in ensuring the fulfillment of the rights of women and children.

The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is carried out based on the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of women and children;
c. the right to life, survival and development;
d. respect for children and legal certainty; and
e. local wisdom and justice and gender equality.

The formulation of the Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to:
a. provide guidance in planning and implementing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection policies;
b. increase efforts for Women's Empowerment and fulfillment of children's rights in order to realize improved quality of life for women and children in the Region;
c. increase protection efforts for women and children from actions and policies that violate the rights of women and children;
d. increase the value of local wisdom and the role of customs in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, and
e. increase the role of Regional Government and other community institutions in efforts for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

This Regional Regulation on Women and Child Protection regulates:
a. Improvement of women's quality of life which contains government responsibilities, implementation of PUG, Efforts to increase the role, quality and capacity of women in the political, legal, social and economic fields;
b. Protection of women which contains regional government responsibilities in women's protection, prevention of violence against women, protection for women victims of violence, as well as complaint handling,
c. Child Protection which contains the responsibilities of regional government, parents/families and the community in protecting children as well as efforts made by regional governments in implementing child protection. In addition, the need to establish a children's forum and Child-Friendly Regency as a form of appreciation in realizing protection and fulfillment of children's rights.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6

a. Sufficiently clear.

b. What is meant by Gender Equality is a condition and fair treatment of women and men; in order for justice for women and men to be realized, steps are needed to stop matters that, politically and socio-culturally, can hinder women and men from being able to play a role and enjoy the results of that role.

What is included in gender equity is equality of conditions and positions for men and women to obtain opportunities from their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, educational, defense, national security activities, and equality in enjoying development results with balanced impacts.

c. What is meant by local wisdom is good cultural values that exist within a community, because every culture teaches certain ways, rules, or methods to obtain knowledge or truth about something.

d. Sufficiently clear.

e. What is meant by non-discrimination is that every woman and child without exception has the right to receive services related to the violence experienced; no one may be rejected or given priority over others except on the basis of certain emergency considerations.

f. Sufficiently clear.

g. Sufficiently clear.

h. Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11

a. Sufficiently clear.

b. Sufficiently clear.

c. Sufficiently clear.

d. Sufficiently clear.

e. Sufficiently clear.

f. Sufficiently clear.

g. Sufficiently clear.

h. Sufficiently clear.

i. Sufficiently clear.

j. Sufficiently clear.

k. Sufficiently clear.

l. What is meant by Focal Point is PUG cadres in each SKPD, in order to be able to implement gender mainstreaming strategies so that the integration of gender concepts into development sector program activities is carried out properly.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by a sex-biased policy is a policy/program/activity or condition that favors or disadvantages one sex.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d What is meant by pre-welfare is the inability to meet basic needs at a minimum, such as the need for religious education, clothing, shelter, and health care.
Letter e What is meant by comprehensive is entrepreneurship training that is comprehensive and thorough, starting from business motivation, business management, marketing, and goods packaging (packaging).

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c What is meant by Reintegration is the reunification of a system that has undergone blending/assimilation until it becomes one complete unified whole.
Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f What is meant by public facilities are hospitals, offices, terminals, airports, bus stops, or places that are feasible/possible and suitable.

Article 20
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Point a What is meant by gender responsive is that all service officers must be gender sensitive when exploring problems experienced by victims and be able to empower victims.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c What is meant by equal and respectful relations is that whoever the victim, the provision of services for victims must be carried out with respect for the victim without distinguishing beliefs, values, and social status.
Point d What is meant by maintaining confidentiality is that services must be provided in a place that guarantees the victim's privacy. Every piece of information revealed in the service provision process must be kept confidential and known only to people who are relevant in providing services. Officers must convey this principle to victims.
Point e What is meant by providing a sense of security and comfort is that officers providing services must ensure that victims are in a safe and comfortable state in telling their problems.
Point f What is meant by respecting individual differences (individual differences) is that each individual must be viewed as unique; each person has a different background, life experience, and way of dealing with stress (coping mechanism), so that one victim must not be compared with another victim in any matter.
Point g What is meant by non-judgmental is that officers providing services must ensure that whatever the victim's condition, they will not be assessed or judged.
Point h What is meant by respecting the victim's choices and decisions is that service provision must be carried out with the victim's consent.
Point i What is meant by being sensitive to the victim's background and condition and using language that is appropriate and understood by the victim is that sometimes victims come from regions or economic, educational, and environmental backgrounds that are not the same as the officers; it must be ensured that victims are served in language understood by the victim. Lately, there are increasingly more disabled/difable/disable women who become victims of violence, whether deaf, mute, blind, or those experiencing mental retardation. For this category of victims, interpreters must also be provided, for example from special education school teachers.
Point j What is meant by fast and simple is that service provision must be given immediately without delay involving various parties; however, with proactive service officers, victims must be guaranteed to go through everything with a simple process. If the victim comes on referral from another service provider, the receiving officer must first read the referral cover letter, and efforts must be made so that the victim is not asked repeatedly about the same things related to identity or the case narrative.
Point k What is meant by "empat", namely the ability to place oneself in the position of others (in this case the victim). Thus the victim feels accepted, understood, and can openly tell their problems.
Point l What is meant by fulfillment of women's and children's rights is that victims are entitled to respect and full use of their rights to survival, development, protection, freedom from all forms of discrimination, and participation, as regulated in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e What is meant by women crisis centre is a center for handling women victims of violence.
Letter f Sufficiently clear Letter g Sufficiently clear Letter h Sufficiently clear Letter i Sufficiently clear Letter j Sufficiently clear Letter k Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) What is meant by other information is the source of information from all things that can be used by a person so that they know about new things and have characteristics that can be seen, read and studied, transformed to other people through information media visually (books, journals, papers) audio (radio and others) and Audiovisual (television, mobile phones, internet, experts/specialists).

Article 24
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
What is meant by the promotive aspect is improving so that health status becomes increasingly improved, for example providing early breastfeeding initiation (IMD) and Exclusive Breast Milk (ASI Eksklusif) which can help increase the body's immunity against disease because breast milk contains colostrum and nutrients needed by infants.
Letter b
What is meant by the preventive aspect is preventing from contracting disease or maintaining healthy people, for example washing hands before eating and after defecating to prevent disease.
Letter c
What is meant by the curative aspect is the process of healing a person physically and psychologically.
Letter d
What is meant by the rehabilitative aspect is the process of maintaining so that a person who has recovered (not yet 100‰ recovered) returns to being fit as before.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by medicolegal is providing excellent service/the best possible service to victims of violence.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c What is meant by religious agencies and/or organizations are the Management of the Indonesian Assembly (Majelis Indonesia), Officers of the Office of Religious Affairs, ministers and pastors, as well as Islamic preachers.

Article 26
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Point a What is meant by a counselor is a trained officer who conducts counseling, namely the provision of assistance by a person who is expert/trained in such a way that the understanding and psychological capacity of the victim increases in solving the problems faced.
Point b What is meant by a psychologist is personnel who have the ability to carry out psychological recovery for women and child victims of violence.
Point c What is meant by a psychiatrist is a specialist doctor whose duty is to handle problems of mental disorders.
Point d What is meant by a location visit (home visit) is a visit to the victim's social environment in the context of resocialization and gathering further information related to the victim's problems.

Article 27

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (5)
Letter a What is meant by social worker/volunteer is a person who has professional competence in social work obtained through formal education or practical experience in the field of social work/social welfare that is officially recognized by the Government and carries out professional social work duties that are gender sensitive.
Letter b What is meant by security officers, among others consists of police, security units, Satpol PP, Officers appointed in accordance with applicable provisions.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Article (28)
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Point a Sufficiently clear Point b What is meant by leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self determination) is that the counselor conveys information as completely as possible and allows the victim to make the final decision.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Letter a What is meant by coaching is carrying out coaching for the community, especially for underprivileged families.
Letter b What is meant by guidance is providing guidance through trainings for underprivileged families who have skills such as embroidery training, clothing, bed covers and others.
Letter c What is meant by supervision is field monitoring of the extent of progress of the training activities that have been provided.
Letter d Sufficiently clear
Letter e Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Letter a What is meant by skills improvement training includes: sewing training, salon training, culinary training, needlework training, embroidery training.
Letter b Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Sufficiently clear

Article 41
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear

Article 43
Paragraph (1) What is meant by private parties includes, among others, limited liability companies that provide public services.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 44
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by a survey is a comprehensive understanding of a particular object, the purpose of which is to obtain valid data.
What is meant by registration is a sequence of administrative procedures that must be undertaken by every victim of violence.
What is meant by routine agency statistics is a data-processing site in the form of an application.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear

Article 46
Sufficiently clear

Article 47
Sufficiently clear

Article 48
Sufficiently clear

Article 49
Sufficiently clear

Article 50
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) What is meant by institution is an institution related to the implementation of child protection, for example, Regional Apparatus Organizations that administer government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, P2TP2A and others.

Article 51
Paragraph (1) What is meant by children with special needs are children who experience limitations/exceptionalities whether physical, mental, intellectual, social, or emotional that significantly influence the growth and development process compared to other children of the same age.
What is meant by formal education is systematic, structured, tiered activities starting from elementary school to higher education and their equivalents, including academically and generally oriented study activities, specialization programs, and professional training conducted on a continuous basis.
What is meant by non-formal education is an educational pathway outside formal education that can be implemented in a structured and tiered manner.
What is meant by informal education is the family education pathway (tutoring, home schooling, private) and environment, education is organized by providing exemplary behavior, building willingness, and developing the creativity of students in the learning process.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by inclusive education is an educational service system that includes children with special needs learning together with their peers in regular schools closest to their place of residence.

Article 52
What is meant by children in conflict with the law are children who are in conflict with the law, children who become perpetrators of criminal acts, and children who are subject to non-criminal sanctions.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear

Article 54
Sufficiently clear

Article 55
Sufficiently clear

Article 56
Sufficiently clear

Article 57
Sufficiently clear

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Sufficiently clear

Article 60
Sufficiently clear

Article 61
Sufficiently clear

Article 62
Sufficiently clear

Article 63

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
a. Sufficiently clear.

b. Sufficiently clear.

c. Sufficiently clear.

d. What is meant by restorative justice is the settlement of criminal cases by involving the perpetrator, the victim, the perpetrator’s/victim’s family, and other related parties to jointly seek a fair settlement by emphasizing restoration to the original condition and retribution.

e. Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 64
Sufficiently clear

Article 64
Sufficiently clear

Article 65
Sufficiently clear

Article 66
Sufficiently clear

Article 67
Sufficiently clear

Article 68
Sufficiently clear

Article 69
Sufficiently clear

Article 70
Sufficiently clear

Article 71
Sufficiently clear

Article 72
Sufficiently clear

Article 73
Sufficiently clear

Article 74
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by "can be transferred to the family" is that the child's caregiver is transferred to the extended family, an alternative family, or adoptive parents.

Article 75
Sufficiently clear

Article 76
Sufficiently clear

Article 77
Sufficiently clear

Article 78
Sufficiently clear

Article 79
Sufficiently clear

Article 80
Sufficiently clear

Article 81
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUKAMARA REGENCY NUMBER 89