MAYOR OF PALANGKA RAYA
PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALANGKA RAYA CITY
NUMBER , YEAR 2021
REGARDING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD THE ONE AND ONLY

MAYOR OF PALANGKA RAYA,

Considering:

a. that every citizen has the right to survival, growth, and proper development and to obtain consistent and systematic security as a form of Protection for Women and Children as mandated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that Regional Government, families, groups, social organizations and/or other community organizations have responsibility for the implementation of fulfillment, protection, respect, advancement and enforcement of rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;

c. that to provide direction, legal basis and legal certainty in the Protection of Women and Children, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 5 of 1965 concerning the Establishment of Kotapradja Palangka Raya (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 48, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2753);

3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of all Form of Discrimination Againts Woman) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);

6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Law Number 52 of 2009 concerning Population Development and Family Development (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 161, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5080);

I II
- 3 -
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Government Regulation Number 59 Year 2019 concerning the Organization of Coordination for Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 160, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6382);
12. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for Women and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);
13. Regional Regulation of Palangka Raya City Number 17 Year 2013 concerning Child Protection in the Framework of Realizing a Child-Friendly City (Regional Gazette of Palangka Raya City Year 2013 Number 17, Supplement to the Regional Gazette Number 8);
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PALANGKA RAYA CITY and

MAYOR OF PALANGKA RAYA
Establishes REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

I II
- 4 -

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Palangka Raya.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Palangka Raya.
4. Regional Apparatus hereinafter abbreviated as PD is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
6. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as receive protection from violence and discrimination.
7. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
8. Woman is a person who is female by sex.
9. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old who is not married, including a child who is still in the womb.
10. Community is individuals, community groups, including parents and family.
11. Prevention is all efforts to eliminate all risks and adverse impacts from violence against women and children.
12. Child-Friendly City hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a Community that is conducive to developing all social psychological potential of a person optimally.
13. Child Obligations are everything that must be carried out by children according to the function and role of children.
14. Forum for Handling Victims of Violence Against Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as FPK2PA is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is tiered at the city and sub-district levels.
15. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination, and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons established by the regional government or community-based.
16. Child Friendly Kelurahan (Urban Village) hereinafter abbreviated as KRA is the development of a kelurahan area that unites the commitment and resources of the kelurahan government involving the community and business world located in the kelurahan in order to promote, protect, fulfill and respect children's rights, which are planned consciously and sustainably.

Article 2
Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of: a. respect, fulfillment, protection, advancement, and enforcement of rights; and b. legal certainty.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is implemented based on the principles of: a. responsive to rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. maintaining confidentiality;
d. empowerment; and
e. participation.

Article 4
The objectives of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence include: a. ensuring the fulfillment of rights;
b. providing justice and equality of rights;
c. providing protection and a sense of security; and
d. conducting empowerment.

Article 5
The scope of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence includes: a. protection of Women;
b. protection of Children;
c. coordination and cooperation;
d. responsibility of Regional Government;
e. community participation;
f. guidance and supervision;
g. evaluation;
h. reporting; and
i. funding.

CHAPTER II
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 6
Protection of Women includes:
a. services;
b. empowerment;
c. prevention; and
d. monitoring.

Second Part
Services

Article 7
(1) The form of Protection services for Women as referred to in Article 6 letter a includes:
 a. legal aid;
 b. health services;
 c. social rehabilitation services;
 d. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
 e. social reintegration services; and
 f. pre-marriage guidance services.
(2) Pre-marriage guidance services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f shall be carried out by every woman who will enter into marriage.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted to provide understanding and knowledge regarding family resilience, health, psychology, religion, social and culture.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be carried out by the PD that administers affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(5) In implementing guidance as referred to in paragraph (4), the PD may involve:
 a. relevant agencies;
 b. religious leaders; and
 c. customary leaders.
(6) Further provisions regarding minimum service standards for the protection of Women shall be regulated by a Mayor's Regulation.

Third Part
Empowerment

Article 8
(1) The form of empowerment of Women's Protection as referred to in Article 6 letter b includes: a. job training; and
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups.
(2) The implementation of empowerment of Women's Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by PD in accordance with its main duties and functions.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures for empowerment of Women's Protection shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Part Four
Prevention Article 9 (1) Prevention of violations against the rights of Women as referred to in Article 6 letter c is implemented by: a. establishing work networks;

I II
- 8 -
b. conduct coordination, integration, and synchronization of prevention based on partnership patterns with the community, the private sector, and non-governmental organizations; and
c. conduct socialization of laws and regulations related to the Protection of Women.
d. prevention of child marriage while still at a child's age.
(2) Further provisions regarding the prevention of violations of Women's rights are regulated in the Mayor's Regulation.

Part Five
Monitoring

Article 10
(1) Monitoring is implemented in the form of observation, identification, and recording of the implementation of Women's Protection.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted by the coordination team for Women's and Children's Protection through coordination forum activities.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) produces data and information regarding the implementation of the fulfillment of Women's rights.
(4) The results of monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) constitute material for the Mayor to conduct evaluation.

CHAPTER IV
CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 11
Child Protection includes: a. service provision;
b. fulfillment of the rights of the Child;
c. prevention; and d. monitoring.

Second Part
Services

Article 12
(1) The form of Child Protection services as referred to in Article 11 letter a includes:
a. legal aid;
b. social rehabilitation services; and
c. social reintegration services.
(2) Further provisions regarding minimum service standards for Child Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by a Mayor's Regulation.

Third Part
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 13
(1) Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 11 letter b includes:
   a. guarantee of civil rights and freedoms;
   b. guarantee of a family environment and alternative care;
   c. guarantee of basic health and welfare;
   d. education, leisure time, culture and recreation; and
   e. special protection.
(2) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e is carried out for:
   a. children in emergency situations;
   b. children in conflict with the law;
   c. children from minority and isolated groups;
   d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
   e. children who are victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropics, and other addictive substances;
   f. children who are victims of pornography;
   g. children with HIV/AIDS;
   h. children who are victims of kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking;
   i. children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
   j. children who are victims of sexual crimes;
   k. children who are victims of terrorist networks;
   l. children with disabilities;

I II
- 10 -
m. children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect; n. children with deviant social behavior; and o. children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(3) The Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in order to realize a Child-Friendly City (Kota Layak Anak).
(4) The Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the prevailing laws and regulations.

Part Four
Prevention

Article 14
(1) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children is carried out by the Regional Government and the community.
(2) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by:
 a. forming work networks;
 b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of prevention based on partnership patterns with the community, the private sector, and non-governmental organizations; and
 c. conducting dissemination of laws and regulations related to Child Protection.
(3) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children carried out by the community as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by:
 a. increasing the productivity of Children;
 b. developing the self-potential of Children;
 c. preventing child marriage;
 d. reducing maternal and infant mortality rates; and
 e. preventing the occurrence of domestic violence.
(4) The formation of work networks as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes the Regional Government’s work partners in the implementation of prevention of violations of rights, in the form of family partners.
(5) Further provisions regarding the prevention of violations against the rights of Children as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated in the Mayor's Regulation.

Part Five
Monitoring
Article 15
The provisions regarding monitoring as referred to in Article 10 apply mutatis mutandis to the conduct of monitoring of the fulfillment of the rights of Children and special protection of Children.

RAB IV
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Article 16
(1) The implementation of coordination and cooperation for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to:
a. enhance efforts to fulfill the rights of Women and Children;
b. improve synergistic and harmonious working relationships; and
c. obtain data and information in the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) In order to achieve the objectives as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. other Regional Governments;
b. related agencies;
c. non-governmental institutions;
d. universities; and
e. non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. socialization or legal counseling lectures;
c. rehabilitation of victims of violence; and
d. return (repatriation) and social reintegration.

CHAPTER V
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY
Part One
General

Article 17
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for the protection of the rights of Women and Children.
(2) The responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. education;
b. health;
c. politics;
d. law;
e. economy;
f. culture; and
g. social.
(3) The responsibility of the Regional Government for the protection of the rights of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. formulation of regional policies that are gender responsive;
b. institutionalization of gender mainstreaming within the Regional Government;
c. empowerment of Women in the fields of politics, law, economy, culture and social in community organizations at the city level;
d. strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's empowerment services at the city level;
e. implementing efforts to prevent violence against Women.
(4) The responsibility of the Regional Government for the protection of the rights of Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. formulation of policies, programs, and regional development activities that are child rights-oriented which are set forth in regional development planning documents;
b. formulation of norms, standard procedures and criteria for assessment of the fulfillment and protection of the rights of Children which refer to norms, standards, procedures and criteria established by the government;
c. implementation of child-friendly cities carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
d. facilitation of the implementation of the Regional Children's Forum;
e. increasing community participation in the implementation and protection of the rights of Children;
f. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs for the fulfillment and Protection of Children;
g. guidance of Child Protection institutions;
h. providing special protection for Children; and
i. implementing efforts to prevent violence against Children.

Article 18
(1) The Regional Government, in implementing the responsibility for institutionalizing Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter b concerning the Protection of Women and Children, shall be obliged to organize an information system for Women and Children data.
(2) The Women data information system as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes an inseparable part of the Children data information system.
(3) The Women and Children information system as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.
(4) Gender mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 19
(1) In the framework of effectiveness of the implementation of Protection of Women and Children, the Regional Government must conduct cross-sectoral coordination with related institutions.
(2) In the implementation of coordination of Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1), the Mayor establishes a team for Protection of Women and Children.
(3) In the activities of the coordination forum as referred to in paragraph (2), the coordination team for Protection of Women and Children has the duty to:
a. prepare materials needed related to the implementation of Protection of Women and Children; and
b. convey results, obstacles, and solutions undertaken to overcome obstacles in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
(4) The coordination forum as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted periodically, at least 2 (two) times in 1 (one) year.

Second Part
Prevention of Violence Against Women and Children

Article 20
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter e and paragraph (4) letter i conducted in the form of:
a. collecting data and organizing an information system for the Protection of Women and Children victims of violence;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against Women and Children; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the empowerment of Women and the Protection of Children victims of violence.
(2) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and organizing technical service institutions for victims by involving community elements; and
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims of violence.

Third Part
Institutional Framework

Article 21
(1) Technical Service Institutions as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter a shall be implemented by P2TP2A and FPK2PA.
(2) In the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children, it shall be carried out by the Regional Technical Implementation Unit.
(3) In the event of the implementation of technical services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may establish a task force.
(4) The task force as referred to in paragraph (3) may also carry out institutional strengthening through cooperation and coordination with:
 a. KLA task force;
 b. KRA task force;
 c. schools and/or educational institutions;
 d. Children's forum;
 e. children's activity center (sanggar anak);
 f. community organizations;
 g. Women's organizations; and
 h. other institutions concerned with the fulfillment of rights and the Protection of Children.
(5) The task force as referred to in paragraph (4) is a coordinative institution at the city, sub-district, and urban village level that coordinates policies, programs, and activities to realize Child-friendly sub-districts and urban villages.
(6) Further provisions regarding technical services as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by a Mayor Regulation.

Paragraph 1
P2TP2A
Article 22 (1) The provision of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in the form of functional relationship patterns among components directed to achieve common goals.

Article 23
(1) P2TP2A provides services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house.
(2) In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a safe house, then victims of violence are referred to other integrated service centers that have a safe house.

I II
• 16 ·

Article 24
(1) P2TP2A consists of several counseling fields. (2) The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. law;
b. health;
c. spiritual; and
d. psychology.
(3) The implementation of counseling is carried out by counselors and may be implemented by involving related parties.

Article 25
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial services;
d. legal services;
e. social reintegration services; and
f. economic independence services.

Article 26
Further provisions regarding P2TP2A as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Paragraph 2
FPK2PA
Article 27
(1) In order to protect and guarantee the rights of Women and Children from acts of violence, FPK2PA is established.
(2) FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of: a. Regional FPK2PA;
b. Sub-district FPK2PA; and
c. Urban Village FPK2PA.
(3) The establishment of Regional FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a is determined by the Mayor.

I II
- 17 - (4) The establishment of sub-district FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b shall be determined by the sub-district head.
(5) The establishment of urban village FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be determined by the urban village head.
(6) Further provisions regarding FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of Parents and/or Family

Article 28
Parents are obligated and responsible to:
a. care for, nurture, educate, manage, and protect family members;
b. develop family members in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent marriage at the age of a child.

Article 29
The enhancement of family participation in the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out through:
a. prevention of marriage at a child's age;
b. bringing Women closer to health services; and
c. strengthening family resilience.

Second Part
Community Involvement

Article 30
(1) The community is involved in the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) Community involvement as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of participation through prevention, services, empowerment, monitoring, supervision and fulfillment of the rights of Women and/or Children.

I II
- 18 - (3) The role of the community in the implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by:
a. providing communication and information through socialization and education regarding the rights of Women and Children;
b. providing suggestions and input in the formulation of policies related to the Protection of Women and Children;
c. reporting to the authorized party if violations occur against the rights of Women and Children;
d. playing an active role in the rehabilitation process and social reintegration for Women and Children;
e. forming family partners at the neighborhood association/community association or sub-district level by the community;
f. forming Women and Child Protection units within community organizations and educational institutions;
g. establishment and management of orphanages;
h. establishment of Child rehabilitation centers;
i. provision of a safe house and/or social services;
j. work skills training; and
k. providing first aid when violations occur against the rights of Women and Children.
(4) Further provisions regarding community participation shall be regulated by a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 31
(1) The Mayor is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of Child Victims of Violence.
(2) The implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of Women Empowerment and Protection of Child Victims of Violence.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training;
d. monitoring and evaluation; and
e. reporting.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is to realize the objectives of Women’s Protection and Child Protection in accordance with norms, standards, procedures, and criteria, implemented by the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of Women Empowerment and Child Protection.
(5) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted with professional and transparent principles.
(6) In implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of Women Empowerment and Child Protection is obligated to report periodically to the Mayor.
(7) In the case of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of Women Empowerment and Child Protection may cooperate and coordinate with other Regional Apparatus, the community, other agencies and/or organizational institutions.

CHAPTER VIII
EVALUATION
Article 32
(1) Evaluation of the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is conducted based on documents on the implementation of services, empowerment, prevention, fulfillment, and the results of monitoring of the administration of the Protection of Women and Children.

I II
- 20 - (2) The implementation of evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the PD that administers affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(3) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes process evaluation, impact and results.
(4) The results of the evaluation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall constitute material for the Mayor to prepare reports.
(5) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year.
(6) Further provisions regarding evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING
Article 33
(1) Reporting as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (5) shall serve as material for the Mayor's consideration in making policies for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) Reports on the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year or at any time if necessary.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 34
Funding for the implementation of Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
Regulation stipulated - 22 -

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 37
the implementation of this Regional Regulation shall be carried out no later than 1 (one) year from the date this Regional Regulation is promulgated.

Article 38
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date it is promulgated.
In order that everyone may know of it, it is ordered that this Regional Regulation be promulgated by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Palangka Raya City.
Promulgated in Palangka Raya on [date], in the Regional Gazette of Palangka Raya City.
Enacted in Palangka Raya on [date].
MAYOR OF PALANGKA RAYA,

FAIRID NAPARIN
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF ALANGKA RAYA CITY,
~ -

H'ERA NUGRAHAYU
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PALANGKA RAYA CITY YEAR 2021 NUMBER
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF THE REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALANGKA RAYA CITY, CENTRAL KALIMANTAN PROVINCE NUMBER: 02, 26/2021