COPY I
REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS
CENTRAL KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY NUMBER 1 OF 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS,

Considering
a. that every citizen has the right to survival, growth, and proper development and to obtain a sense of security that is consistent and systematic as a form of Protection for Women and Children as mandated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that the Regional Government, families, groups, social organizations and/or other community organizations have responsibility for the implementation of fulfillment, protection, respect, promotion and enforcement of rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. that to provide direction, legal basis and legal certainty in the Protection of Women and Children, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to stipulate a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children;

In View of
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 5 of 2002 concerning the Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and East Barito Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 18 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 52 of 2009 concerning Population Development and Family Development (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 161, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5080);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 59 of 2019 concerning Implementation of Child Protection Coordination (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 160, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6382);
9. Regional Regulation of Gunung Mas Regency Number 8 of 2018 concerning Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency of 2018 Number 257, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency Number 257);
10. Regional Regulation of Gunung Mas Regency Number 9 of 2018 concerning Prevention of Marriage at Child Age (Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency of 2018 Number 258, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency Number 258.a);

With Mutual Agreement

Stipulates:

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
GUNUNG MAS REGENCY
REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS
REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Gunung Mas Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Gunung Mas.
4. Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
6. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as receive protection from Violence and discrimination.
7. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
8. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
9. Community is individuals, community groups, including parents and family.
10. Prevention is all efforts to eliminate all risks and adverse impacts of violence against Women and Children.
11. Violence is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of freedom unlawfully.
12. Forum for Handling Victims of Violence Against Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as FPK2PA, is a coordination forum for handling victims of Violence against Women and Children whose implementation is tiered at the regency and sub-district levels.
13. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service center in efforts to empower Women in various fields of development, as well as protection of Women and Children from various types of discrimination and acts of Violence, including trafficking in persons, established by the government or community-based.
14. Child Friendly Village/Sub-District, hereinafter abbreviated as K/DRA, is the development of a village/sub-district area that unites the commitment and resources of the village/sub-district government involving the Community and business world located in the village/sub-district in order to promote, protect, fulfill and respect the rights of children, which is planned consciously and sustainably.

Article 2
The Protection of Women and Children is organized based on the principles of: a. respect, fulfillment, protection, advancement, and enforcement of rights; and
b. legal certainty.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. responsive to rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. maintaining confidentiality;
d. empowerment; and
e. participation.

Article 4
The Objectives of the Protection of Women and Children include:
a. ensuring the fulfillment of rights;
b. providing justice and equality of rights;
c. providing protection and a sense of security; and
d. conducting empowerment.

Article 5
The scope of Protection of Women and Children includes:
a. Protection of Women;
b. Protection of Children;
c. coordination and cooperation;
d. responsibility of Regional Government;
e. participation of the Community;
f. guidance and supervision;
g. evaluation;
h. reporting; and
i. funding.
- 6 -

CHAPTER II
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 6
Protection of Women includes:
a. services;
b. empowerment;
c. prevention; and
d. monitoring.

Second Part
Services

Article 7
(1) The forms of Women's Protection services as referred to in Article 6 letter a include:
a. legal aid;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
e. social reintegration services; and
f. pre-marital guidance services.
(2) Pre-marital guidance services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f shall be carried out by every Woman who will enter into marriage.
(3) The guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted to provide understanding and knowledge regarding family resilience, health, psychology, religion, social and culture.
(4) The guidance as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be implemented by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Child Protection.
(5) In implementing the guidance as referred to in paragraph (4), the Regional Apparatus may involve:
a. relevant agencies;
b. religious leaders; and
c. customary leaders.
(6) Further provisions regarding the procedures for Women's Protection services shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.
- 8 -

CHAPTER III
CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 11
Child Protection includes:
a. service provision;
b. fulfillment of the rights of the Child;
c. prevention; and
d. monitoring.

Second Part
Services

Article 12
(1) The form of Child Protection services as referred to in Article 11 letter a includes:
a. legal assistance;
b. social rehabilitation services; and
c. social reintegration services.
(2) Further provisions regarding Child Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 13
(1) Fulfillment of the rights of the Child as referred to in Article 11 letter b includes:
a. guarantee of civil rights and freedoms;
b. guarantee of family environment and alternative care;
c. guarantee of basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time, culture and recreation; and
e. special protection.
(2) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e, is carried out for:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. children victims of kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking;
i. children victims of physical and/or psychological Violence;
j. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorism networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to the condition of their parents.
(3) Regulation regarding the fulfillment of the rights of the Child is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Four
Prevention

Article 14
(1) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children is implemented by the Regional Government and the Community.
(2) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children implemented by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by:
a. forming work networks;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of Prevention based on partnership patterns with the Community, private sector, community self-reliance institutions; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to Child Protection.
(3) Prevention of violations against the rights of Children implemented by the Community as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by:
a. increasing the productivity of Children;
b. developing the self-potential of Children;
c. preventing pregnancy at a young age;
d. reducing maternal and infant mortality rates; and
e. preventing the occurrence of domestic violence.
(4) The formation of work networks as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a, includes work partners of the Regional Government in the implementation of Prevention of rights violations in the form of family partners.
(5) Further provisions regarding Prevention of violations against the rights of Children as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Part Five
Monitoring

Article 15
The provisions regarding monitoring as referred to in Article 10 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the implementation of monitoring of the fulfillment of children's rights and special protection of children.

CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Article 16
(1) The implementation of coordination and cooperation for the Protection of Women and Children aims to:
a. enhance efforts to fulfill the rights of Women and Children;
b. improve synergistic and harmonious working relationships; and
c. obtain data and information in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
(2) In order to achieve the objectives as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. other Regional Governments;
b. related agencies;
c. non-governmental institutions;
d. universities; and
e. community non-governmental organizations.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. socialization or legal counseling lectures;
c. rehabilitation of victims of Violence; and
d. repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER V
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY

Part One
General

Article 17
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for the protection of the rights of Women and Children.
(2) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. education;
b. health;
c. politics;
d. law;
e. economy;
f. culture; and
g. social.
(3) The responsibility of the Regional Government for the protection of the rights of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. formulation of gender-responsive Regional policies;
b. institutionalization of gender mainstreaming within the Regional Government;
c. empowerment of Women in the fields of politics, law, economy, culture and social in community organizations at the regency level;
d. strengthening and development of service provider institutions for Women's empowerment at the regency level;
e. implementing Prevention efforts against the occurrence of Violence against Women.
(4) The responsibility of the Regional Government for the protection of the rights of Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. formulation of policies, programs, and Regional development activities with a child rights perspective which are set forth in Regional development planning documents;
b. formulation of norms, standard procedures and assessment criteria for the fulfillment and protection of the rights of Children which refer to norms, standards, procedures and criteria established by the government;
c. implementation of a child-friendly regency is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
d. facilitation of the holding of the Regional Children's Forum;
e. increasing the participation of the Community in the implementation and protection of the rights of Children;
f. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs for the fulfillment and Protection of Children;
g. guidance of Child Protection institutions;
h. providing special protection for Children; and
i. implementing Prevention efforts against the occurrence of Violence against Children.

Article 18
(1) Regional Government in implementing the responsibility for institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter b regarding Protection of Women and Children must organize an information system for Women and Children data.
(2) The Women data Information System as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes an inseparable part of the Children data information system.
(3) The Women and Children information system as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
(4) Gender mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Article 19
(1) In order to ensure effectiveness of the implementation of Protection of Women and Children, Regional Government must conduct cross-sectoral coordination with related institutions.
(2) In organizing the coordination of Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regent shall establish a coordination team for Protection of Women and Children.
(3) In the coordination forum activities as referred to in paragraph (2) the coordination team for Protection of Women and Children shall have the duties to: a. prepare necessary materials related to the implementation of Protection of Women and Children; and b. convey results, obstacles, and solutions undertaken to overcome obstacles in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
(4) The coordination forum as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted periodically, at least 2 (two) times in 1 (one) year.

Part Two
Prevention of Violence Against Women and Children

Article 20
(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement Prevention efforts against the occurrence of Violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter e and paragraph (4) letter i conducted in the form of:
a. collecting data and organizing an information system for the Protection of Women and Children victims of Violence;
b. conducting education on anti-Violence values against Women and Children; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the empowerment of Women and Protection of Children victims of Violence.
(2) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and organizing technical service institutions for victims by involving Community elements; and
b. encouraging Community awareness of the importance of protection for victims of Violence.

Third Part
Institutional Arrangements

Article 21
(1) Technical Service Institutions as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter a shall be implemented by P2TP2A and FPK2PA.
(2) In the implementation of Protection of Women and Children, the Regional Government is obligated to establish a regional technical implementing unit for Protection of Women and Children.
(3) The establishment of the regional technical implementing unit as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation after obtaining written approval from the Governor.
(4) In the case of implementation of technical services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may establish a task force.
(5) The task force as referred to in paragraph (4) may also be institutionally strengthened through cooperation and coordination with:
a. KLA task force;
b. KRA task force;
c. K/DRA task force;
d. schools and/or educational institutions;
e. Children's forum;
f. children's center;
g. community organizations;
h. Women's organizations; and
i. other institutions concerned with the fulfillment of rights and Protection of Children.
(6) The task force as referred to in paragraph (4) is a coordinative institution at the regency and sub-district level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize sub-districts, urban villages/villages friendly to Children.
(7) Further provisions regarding technical services as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
- 14 -

Paragraph 1
P2TP2A
Article 22 (1) The provision of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in the form of functional relationship patterns among components directed to achieve common goals.

Article 23
(1) P2TP2A provides services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house.
(2) In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a safe house, then victims of Violence are referred to other integrated service centers that have a safe house.

Article 24
(1) P2TP2A consists of several counseling fields.
(2) The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
   a. law;
   b. health;
   c. spiritual; and
   d. psychology.
(3) The implementation of counseling is carried out by counselors and may be implemented by involving related parties.

Article 25
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
   a. medical services;
   b. medicolegal services;
   c. psychosocial services;
   d. legal services;
   e. social reintegration services; and
   f. economic independence services.
- 15 -

Article 26
Provisions regarding the implementation of services by P2TP2A as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 2
FPK2PA
Article 27
(1) In order to protect and guarantee the rights of Women and Children from acts of Violence, FPK2PA is established.
(2) FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:
 a. Regional FPK2PA;
 b. sub-district FPK2PA; and
 c. urban village/village FPK2PA.
(3) The establishment of Regional FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a is determined by the Regent.
(4) The establishment of sub-district FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b is determined by the sub-district head.
(5) The establishment of urban village/village FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c is determined by the urban village head/village head.
(6) Further provisions regarding FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of Parents and/or Family

Article 28
Parents are obligated and responsible to:
a. nurture, care for, educate, manage and protect the family;
b. develop family members' abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent marriage at child age.
Article 29
Protecting family members in accordance with the improvement of family participation in the Protection of Women and Children is carried out through:
a. preventing marriage at child age;
b. bringing Women closer to health services; and
c. strengthening family resilience.
- 16 -

Part Two
Community Involvement Article 30 (1) The Community is involved in the Protection of Women and Children. (2) Community involvement as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of participation through Prevention, services, empowerment, monitoring, supervision and fulfillment of the rights of Women and/or Children.
(3) The role of the Community in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by: a. providing communication and information through socialization and education regarding the rights of Women and Children;
b. providing suggestions and input in the formulation of policies related to the Protection of Women and Children;
c. reporting to the competent authorities if violations of the rights of Women and Children occur;
d. playing an active role in the rehabilitation and social reintegration process for Women and Children;
e. forming family partners at the neighborhood association/citizens association or sub-district/village level by the Community;
f. forming Women and Children Protection units within community organizations and educational institutions;
g. establishment and management of orphanages;
h. establishment of Child rehabilitation centers;
i. provision of shelters and/or social homes;
j. job skills training; and
k. providing first aid when violations of the rights of Women and Children occur.
(4) Further provisions regarding the role and participation of the Community are regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 31
(1) The Regent is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) The implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. mentoring;
c. education and training;
d. monitoring and evaluation; and
e. reporting.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is to realize the objectives of the Protection of Women and Children in accordance with standard norms, procedures and criteria implemented by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(5) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with professional and transparent principles.
(6) In implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection must report periodically to the Regent.
(7) In the case of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2), Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection may cooperate and coordinate with other Regional Apparatus, the Community, agencies and/or related institutional organizations.

CHAPTER VIII
EVALUATION
Article 32
(1) Evaluation of the Protection of Women and Children is conducted based on service implementation documents, empowerment, Prevention, fulfillment and monitoring results of the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) The implementation of evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of empowerment of Women and Protection of Children.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes evaluation of process, impact and results.
(4) The results of evaluation as referred to in paragraph (3) constitute material for the Regional Apparatus to prepare reports which are subsequently submitted to the Regent.
(5) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (4) is implemented at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year.
(6) Further provisions regarding evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by a Regent Regulation.
CHAPTER IX

REPORTING
Article 33
(1) Reporting of the evaluation results as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (5) shall serve as material for consideration by the Regent in making policies for the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Reports on the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year and at any time when necessary.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 34 Funding for the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 135. The establishment of regional technical implementation units that administer the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in Article 21 paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region.
- 19 -

Article 36
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency.
Enacted in Kuala Kurun on 28 January 2021

REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS,
JAYA SAMAYA MONONG
Promulgated in Kuala Kurun on 28 January 2021

REGIONAL SECRETARY
GUNUNG MAS REGENCY,
YANSITERSON
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER 285
REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY, PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN: 01,05/2021
Copy conforms to the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
E..-ayaTO, SH

NIP. 19700617 200501 1 007
- 20 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
Children are the future of the nation and the next generation of the nation's aspirations, so that every Child has the right to survival, to grow and develop, to participate and has the right to protection from acts of Violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.
Likewise Women who play a role as mothers who give birth to children who are healthy, strong, resilient, of noble character, potential and quality. Through the role of Women in the family, Society and the state, resilient generations will be born who will continue the nation's aspirations.
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, specifically Article 27 paragraph (1) which states that "All citizens have equal status in law and government and are obliged to uphold the law and government without exception". Although the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia has guaranteed equal status for every citizen, until now Women and Children still experience various obstacles to obtaining their rights in almost all fields.
On the other hand, Women have special needs compared to men, so that in accordance with their nature, in certain conditions the Regional Government must be able to guarantee that their rights are fulfilled in accordance with those needs. Whereas children, they are a trust and gift from God Almighty, in whom is inherent dignity and worth as complete human beings. Considering the position and expectations of children as the potential and future of the nation, children deserve attention from all parties so that children can grow and develop naturally and avoid wrong treatment and actions, Violence, discrimination that will damage the development of children both physically, mentally and socially. For this reason, children need to get the widest possible opportunity to be able to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally, socially and with noble character.
Based on this, a regulation is needed that serves as a guideline for all parties, especially the Regional Government in ensuring the implementation of Protection of Women and Children in Gunung Mas Regency in accordance with the authority possessed as stated in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, as well as other laws and regulations that regulate the Protection of Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "promotion" is the process, method, or action of making better in the protection of Women and Children.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "non-discrimination" is that the implementation of Protection of Women and Children is provided to every Woman and/or a Child and is not differentiated based on ethnicity, religion, race, group, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status, and physical or mental condition.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Paragraph (1) - 22 - Letter a Legal aid is a legal service provided by legal aid providers free of charge to legal aid recipients.
Letter b Health services are any efforts organized independently or jointly in an organization to maintain health, prevent and cure diseases, and restore the health of individuals, families, or the Community.
Letter c Social rehabilitation services are a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to carry out their social functions properly in the life of the Community.
Letter d Sufficiently Clear.
Letter e Social reintegration services are a process of preparing children in conflict with the law, child victims, and/or child witnesses to be able to return to the Family and Community environment.
Letter f Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (3) What is meant by family resilience is the ability of the family to manage resources and problems faced, so that the family is prosperous, namely the fulfillment of the needs of all family members.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "work network" is the work partner of the Regional Government in the implementation of Prevention of violations of Women's rights in the form of family partners, including among others family groups and dasawisma.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "socialization" is the dissemination of information on laws and regulations carried out through mass media, electronic media, and/or direct outreach to the Community.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Self-explanatory

Article 12
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Social Rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be capable of carrying out their social functions properly in community life.
Letter c Social Reintegration is a process of preparing children in conflict with the law, child victims, and/or child witnesses to be able to return to their Family and Community environment.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 13
Paragraph (1)
Letter a Sufficiently Clear.
Letter b Sufficiently Clear.
Letter c Sufficiently Clear.
Letter d Sufficiently Clear.
Letter e What is meant by "special protection" is: children who need special protection are children in emergency situations such as children who become refugees, victims of riots, victims of natural disasters and children in situations of armed conflict; children in conflict with the law; children from minority and isolated groups; children who are exploited economically and/or sexually; children who are trafficked; children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse; children who become victims of pornography; children with HIV/AIDS; children victims of kidnapping, and trafficking; children victims of Violence both physical and/or mental and sexual; children victims of terrorist networks; children with disabilities; children victims of maltreatment and neglect; children with deviant social behavior; children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 14
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (2) - 25 - Letter a Sufficiently Clear.
Letter b "Coordination and integration, synchronization of Prevention" is carried out based on a partnership pattern with the Community, private sector, and community self-help institutions.
Letter c Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (4) What is meant by "family partners" includes among others family groups and dasawisma.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of education is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children to obtain access to education, both formal and informal education.
Point b What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of health is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children to obtain access and facilities in the field of health.
Point c What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women in the field of Politics is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating the enhancement of Women's knowledge in the field of politics through socialization to increase awareness of Women's rights and Women's participation in the field of politics, encouraging increased involvement of Women in community organizations and decision-making activities within the Regional Government, encouraging the establishment of Women's organizations/forums.
Point d What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of law is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating the enhancement of legal knowledge and awareness for Women and Children, encouraging the establishment of organizations that provide free legal services for Women and Children.
Point e What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of economy is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children in obtaining access and facilities in the field of economy, facilitating Women in efforts to improve family economy, providing capital assistance or training for Women.
Point f Sufficiently clear.
Point g What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and children in the field of social affairs is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children in obtaining access and facilities in the field of social affairs.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20 - 27 - Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Letter a What is meant by the Regency KLA task force is a coordinating institution at the regency level that coordinates policy efforts, programs, and activities to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.
Letter b The KRA task force is a coordinating institution at the sub-district level that coordinates policy efforts, programs and activities to realize a child-friendly village/urban village.
Letter c The K/DRA task force is a coordinating institution at the urban village/village level that coordinates policy efforts, programs, and activities to realize a child-friendly village/urban village.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Letter a Services for a person with a certain diagnosis.
Letter b Media services are services received in connection with the prevention and treatment of health disorders. Medicolegal services are medical service standards and operational service standards in the field of medicine.
Letter c Psychosocial services are services to restore individuals or families or groups following certain incidents (natural disasters or social disasters) so that they become strong individually or collectively.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
- 29 -

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY NUMBER J..<b;'. t:\