REGENT OF CENTRAL BANGKA
BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL BANGKA REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF CENTRAL BANGKA,
Considering : a. that women and men have equal rights to participate in various fields of life;
b. that women are a national asset who play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations, therefore they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so that they can actualize their potential optimally;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1);
3. Law Number 13 Year 1998 concerning Elderly Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 190);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
5. Law Number 27 Year 2000 concerning Establishment of Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 217, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4033);
6. Law Number 5 Year 2003 concerning Establishment of South Bangka Regency, Central Bangka Regency, West Bangka Regency and East Belitung Regency in Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 25, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4268);
7. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4279);
8. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
9. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
10.Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58);
11.Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12);
12.Law Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of Convention on The Rights of Persons With Disabilities (Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
13.Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
14.Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
15.Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;
With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL BANGKA REGENCY and

HEAD OF BANGKA TENGAH REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Central Bangka Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Central Bangka.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Central Bangka Regency.
5. Gender is a concept that refers to roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in the family, society and community culture where we live including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
6. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that directly or indirectly is based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, tribe, race, ethnicity, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political conviction, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individual and collective in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
7. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capabilities, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
9. Violence is any act against the law, with or without using means, against a person's physical and psychological integrity that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
11. Regional cooperation is an agreement between governor and governor or governor and regent/mayor or between regent/mayor and other regent/mayor, and or governor, regent/mayor with third parties, made in writing and giving rise to rights and obligations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Empowerment and Protection of Women, is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.

Article 3
The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is carried out with the aim of:
a. increasing the participation of women, both individually and in groups, as potential and resources in the conduct of social and community life;
b. preventing all forms of discrimination;
c. empowering women, both individually and in groups, as well as communities/society experiencing gender problems, so that they are able to fulfill their needs independently;
d. preventing and addressing risks arising from women's vulnerability so that their survival needs can be met in accordance with minimum basic needs;
e. the decreasing of the opportunity gap between women and men in the achievement of development; and
f. the decreasing of acts of violence against women.

CHAPTER III
HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN FREEDOMS
Article 4
Human Rights and fundamental human freedoms, consist of:
a. The right to life;
b. The right to form a family and procreate;
c. The right to self-development;
d. The right to obtain justice;
e. The right to personal freedom;
f. The right to security;
g. The right to welfare; and
h. The right to participate in government.

Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously physically and spiritually;
b. live in a family within the bond of a legal marriage;
c. sustain life and improve her standard of living;
d. have work that she likes and is also entitled to fair employment conditions;
e. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and pathways of education in accordance with the requirements determined;
f. a healthy and clean environment;
g. receive fair wages in accordance with her work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity;
h. vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to the applicable laws and regulations;
i. obtain special protection in the implementation of her work or profession against matters that may threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive function; and
j. special rights inherent to women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.
(2) Women who are adults and or are married have the right to perform legal acts independently unless otherwise determined by their religious law.
(3) A legal marriage can only take place based on the free will of the woman and the man in accordance with the laws and regulations.
(4) A wife during the marriage bond has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband over all matters relating to their married life, relations with their children and ownership rights and management of joint property.
(5) After the dissolution of her marriage, a woman has the same rights and responsibilities as her former husband over all matters relating to their children, taking into account the best interests of the child.
(6) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights as her former husband over all matters relating to joint property without reducing the rights of the child, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(7) Every woman who is in a condition of disability, elderly age, pregnant is entitled to obtain facilities and special treatment.
(8) Every elderly woman, with physical and/or mental disability, has the right to obtain care, education, training and special assistance at the expense of the regional government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 6
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility in efforts to empower women.
(2) The efforts to empower women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations.
(3) In order to improve the position, role and quality of women as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation and state, women must be empowered.
(4) The empowerment of women as referred to in paragraph (3) is directed toward obtaining opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural activities, orderliness, and equal standing in enjoying the results of development.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 7
(1) Women have the right to obtain special protection from matters that threaten their safety and/or health.
(2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive function is guaranteed and protected by law.
(3) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of health services related to:
a. menstruation;
b. pregnancy;
c. childbirth; and
d. breastfeeding.

Article 8
Women victims of acts of violence have the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage, and confidential handling, whether provided by individuals, groups, or institutions, both governmental and non-governmental.

Article 9
(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
(2) Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through the fulfillment of women's rights to receive equal treatment from employers.
(3) Employers who employ female workers are obligated to provide protection in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(4) The protection that must be provided by employers to women as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 10
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to provide protection to women so that they can realize and enjoy a proper standard of living.
(2) Provisions regarding Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 11
(1) The Regional Government facilitates the establishment of women's protection institutions.
(2) The Regent establishes policies, programs and activities for women's protection to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the Region.
(3) The implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's protection as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out by forming, developing, strengthening or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions.
(4) The membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) shall consist of relevant Regional Work Units, community leaders, religious leaders, and universities.
(5) Further provisions regarding the establishment of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 12
The implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women, can be carried out through efforts to:
a. conduct cooperation with the business sector, non-governmental organizations, private companies, Foundations, and other domestic institutions as well as international institutions, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. conduct regional cooperation, in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations;
c. provide and facilitate protection services for women;
d. compile a data system for the protection of women; and
e. implement coordination of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women among Regional Work Units.

Article 13
(1) The provision and facilitation of protection services for women as referred to in Article 12 letter c shall be in the form of:
a. victim identification;
b. legal assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. psychosocial rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration;
f. repatriation assistance; or
g. other forms.
(2) The provision and facilitation of protection services for women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided to women who are:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. elderly who are not independent;
d. persons with disabilities;
e. victims of sexual exploitation;
f. heads of households;
g. in conflict-prone and disaster areas;
h. workers; and
i. other vulnerable groups.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 14
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. active role in policy formulation;
b. cooperation; and/or
c. complaints/reports.
(4) The procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
FUNDING
Article 15
(1) Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection in the Region is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Central Bangka Regency.
(2) In the event that the Region receives funding assistance for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection from the Government, it must be implemented in accordance with the laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Article 16
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to identify developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically from the planning stage through the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection for the current year.
(4) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(5) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(6) The Regent submits a report on the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to the Governor.
(7) The implementation of reporting as referred to in paragraph (6) is conducted annually and/or when necessary.

CHAPTER IX
SANCTIONS
Article 17
Every person who intentionally commits violence against women shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Central Bangka Regency.
Enacted in Koba on the date of 5 May 2014

REGENT OF CENTRAL BANGKA,
Seal/signed

ERZALDI ROSMAN
Promulgated in Koba on the date of 5 May 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY
CENTRAL BANGKA REGENCY,
Stamp/signed

IBNU SALEH
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CENTRAL BANGKA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 186 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL BANGKA REGENCY BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE (4.2/2014)