MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG
LAMPUNG PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY
NUMBER: 03 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG,

Considering : a. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women, every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence and to improve the quality of life of women which is one of the responsibilities of the Regional Government;
b. that in the effort to fulfill women's rights, efforts need to be made by families, communities, and the Regional Government, as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 Year 1959 concerning Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 Year 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 55, Emergency Law Number 5 Year 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 57) concerning Establishment of Level II Regions Including Municipality Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 19 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 105 Concerning The Abolition Of Forced Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 55, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3834);
5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4279);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 11 Year 2008 concerning Information and Electronic Transactions (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4843);
11. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
12. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 3 Year 1982 concerning Amendment of Regional Boundaries of Level II Municipality of Tanjungkarang-Telukbetung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1982 Number 6, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3213);
14. Government Regulation Number 24 Year 1983 concerning Change of Name of Level II Municipality of Tanjungkarang-Telukbetung to Level II Municipality of Bandar Lampung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1983 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3254);
15. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
16. Government Regulation Number 09 Year 2008 Concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses/Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (TPPO) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
17. Government Regulation Number 39 Year 2012 concerning Implementation of Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 68, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5294);
18. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Protection of Women (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 2 Year 2008);
19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions, as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 Year 2011 (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 67 Year 2011);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 01 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 Year 2010);
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 19 Year 2011);
22. Regulation of the Minister of Health of the Republic of Indonesia Number 61 Year 2014 concerning Reproductive Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 169);
23. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment And Child Protection Number 8 Year 2016 concerning Results of Mapping of Government Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment And Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 8 Year 2016);
24. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 04 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for Protection of Women And Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532): With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY and

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Bandar Lampung.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bandar Lampung City.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Bandar Lampung.
5. Protection is all preventive actions, services and empowerment to protect and guarantee the rights of women from acts of violence.
6. Women are human beings of female sex and persons recognized by law as women.
7. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering either physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
8. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
9. Victim is a person who experiences misery and/or threat of violence resulting in suffering either physically and/or psychologically either directly or indirectly.
10. Prevention is the effort of regional government and society in creating conditions that prevent the occurrence of violence, mistreatment, exploitation and neglect and trafficking against women.
11. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
12. Empowerment is an effort to strengthen women to be able to conduct business/endeavor and work independently.
13. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a Regional Technical Implementation Unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for Women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection and other problems.
14. Safe House is a temporary residence, used to provide protection to victims.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
(1) Protection of women is based on the principles of: a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of women;
e. the right to life, survival, and development;
f. empowerment;
g. legal certainty; and
h. participation.
(2) Protection of women aims to guarantee the fulfillment of rights to live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence, discrimination, exploitation and trafficking in persons for the realization of quality and welfare for women.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 3
The Scope of Protection of Women includes: a. Prevention;
b. Services; and
c. Empowerment.

Part One
Prevention

Article 4
Every Woman has the right:
a. to live and to maintain her life and existence;
b. to obtain education and to benefit from science and technology, arts and culture;
c. to obtain health services;
d. to form a family within the bond of a lawful marriage;
e. to develop herself;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and to receive fair remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to associate, assemble and express opinions;
i. to live in tranquility, safety, peace, happiness, prosperity, physically and mentally;
j. to obtain social security;
k. to embrace and worship according to her respective religion and belief;
l. to special protection in emergency conditions/situations.

Article 5
(1) Prevention in the context of protection covers the fields of education, infrastructure, public services and spatial planning, government and institutional governance, economy, employment, social and cultural;
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented through:
a. improvement of quality of life;
b. establishing and developing protection strategies and policies; and
c. establishing and developing institutional capacity related to the protection of women.

Article 6
The improvement of women's quality of life as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter a can be carried out through:
a. providing access for women to education services, health and other strategic fields;
b. encouraging the involvement of women in various development activities;
c. providing knowledge, skills and character values, morals and family resilience;
d. encouraging programs that can increase women's independence in various fields, both legal, political, social, economic, employment, cultural and other strategic fields.

Article 7
In formulating and developing strategies and policies for the protection of women, as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter b, this may be carried out through:
a. presenting communication, information and education materials regarding the protection of women;
b. conducting socialization, advocacy and social campaigns in the context of protecting women both to the community and to every element responsible for the protection of women;
c. conducting ongoing cooperation with the community in the protection of women;
d. strengthening and developing gender data systems;
e. enhancing and involving the role and active participation of the community in the protection of women;

Article 8
(1) In order to establish and develop institutional capacity related to the protection of women, as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter c, this may be carried out through:
a. strengthening coordination mechanisms and networking of women's protection units;
b. the Regional Government establishes a task force consisting of representatives from the regional government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics;
c. improvement of management resources through education and training for law enforcement officials, medical personnel, psychologists, psychiatrists, and victim assistants;
d. strengthening institutional capacity for Gender Mainstreaming;
e. optimizing technical service units;
f. providing adequate facilities and infrastructure in the context of women's protection.
(2) To implement the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), this shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Second Part
Services

First Paragraph
Forms of Violence

Article 9
Forms of violence against women comprise:
a. physical violence caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or cause death;
b. psychological violence caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person;
c. sexual violence caused by:
1. sexual harassment;
2. sexual exploitation;
3. forced contraception;
4. forced abortion;
5. rape;
6. forced marriage;
7. forced prostitution;
8. sexual slavery;
9. sexual torture;
10. neglect.
d. Abandonment caused by:
1. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of women properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
2. acts that abandon a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
3. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting women from working properly inside or outside the home.
e. Exploitation caused by:
1. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
2. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits whether material or immaterial; and/or
3. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, and/or not limited to all activities of prostitution and sexual abuse

Second Paragraph
Rights of Victims

Article 10
Every victim has the right to receive:
a. protection from family, police, prosecutor's office, court, advocate, social institution, or other parties either temporarily or based on the determination of a protection order from the court;
b. health services in accordance with medical needs;
c. special handling related to the confidentiality of the victim;
d. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
e. spiritual guidance services.

Third Paragraph
Form of Service

Article 11
(1) Complaint handling constitutes a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women submitted by victims, families or the community.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. conducting interviews and observation of the victim's condition;
b. making recommendations for follow-up services;
c. conducting coordination and referral to follow-up services and related parties;
d. carrying out administration of the complaint process.

Article 12
(1) Health services constitute efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. conducting examinations;
b. treatment;
c. follow-up care for victims;
d. coordinating the implementation of health rehabilitation and reproductive health services;
e. conducting medico-legal examinations including the collection of evidence from victims and preparation of visum et repertum;
f. conducting supporting examinations and laboratory tests on evidence;
g. conducting consultations with specialist doctors or making referrals;
h. preparing case reports.

Article 13
(1) Social rehabilitation constitutes services aimed at restoring and developing the capabilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. providing assistance during the case handling process;
b. conducting counseling.

Article 14
(1) Legal assistance constitutes legal services provided by legal companions and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. Accompanying and/or defending in every legal handling process;
b. preparing reports on the progress of legal handling.

Article 15
(1) Repatriation constitutes an effort to return female victims of violence from the city area to their areas of origin.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. conducting coordination with relevant agencies for the repatriation of victims;
b. preparing progress reports on the process of accompanying the repatriation of victims;
c. conducting monitoring for at least three months after the victim is returned to their family.

Article 16
(1) Social reintegration constitutes efforts to reunite victims with their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. Economic and social empowerment;
b. Education; and
c. Monitoring and/or further guidance.

Third Part
Empowerment

Article 17
(1) In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation, and state, women must be empowered.
(2) The empowerment of women as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed towards obtaining their opportunities and rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in economic, socio-cultural, political, and legal activities.

Article 18
The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) shall be carried out by:
a. providing knowledge, skills and job training;
b. facilitating the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitating the strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitating and providing capital assistance; and
e. facilitating the development of marketing networks.

Article 19
Empowerment of women in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to address health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts primarily in the field of reproductive health;
c. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 20
The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.

Article 21
The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.

BAB IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ORGANIZERS
Part One
Regional Government

Article 22
(1) Regional Government is obligated and responsible to:
a. make policies that take into account the interests of women, especially in terms of fulfillment and protection of their rights;
b. facilitate efforts to organize services for the fulfillment of rights and provide support for facilities and infrastructure in organizing the protection of women;
c. guarantee the protection, maintenance, and welfare of women by taking into account the rights and obligations of women;
d. supervise the implementation of protection of women;
e. conduct cross-institutional coordination among government institutions as well as with the community and the Business Sector;
f. conduct data collection and inventory of women's data;
g. provide safe houses.
(2) Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate operational guidelines for minimum service standards for efforts to fulfill rights and protection for women;
b. implement services for the fulfillment of rights and protection of women;
c. conduct supervision of efforts to fulfill women's rights and services for the protection of women; and
d. develop cooperation networks among government institutions as well as with Higher Education Institutions, the community and the Business Sector.

Second Part
Society

Article 23
(1) The community is responsible for carrying out prevention, risk reduction, and handling of cases of women who are victims of violence, exploitation, and trafficking in persons.
(2) The community's responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women;
b. providing information and/or reporting to law enforcement officers or the competent authorities if acts of violence occur;
c. protecting victims; and
d. providing emergency assistance.

Third Part
Business World

Article 24
The business sector has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. provide contribution and guarantee in the implementation of the administration of women's protection;
b. provide facilities and infrastructure to enhance efforts for the fulfillment of rights and protection of women; and
c. be responsible for conducting prevention, risk reduction and handling of cases of women victims of violence, exploitation, human trafficking.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
Guidance, Coordination, Implementation and Supervision of the Protection of Women

Article 25
(1) The Mayor conducts guidance, coordination of implementation, and supervision of the protection of women.
(2) The Mayor may delegate the guidance, coordination of implementation, and supervision, as referred to in paragraph (1), to the Regional Apparatus Organization that carries out the main duties and functions in the field of the protection of women.
(3) The procedures and mechanisms for guidance, coordination, implementation, and supervision shall be further regulated by a Mayor Regulation.

Part Two
Service Provision

Article 26
(1) The implementation of women's protection services is carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA and in coordination with OPD and related Agencies or institutions in accordance with the field of Women's services.
(2) The implementation of service delivery as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by the Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
EVALUATION, REPORTING
AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Article 27
(1) OPD conducts prevention services, risk reduction services and case handling services for women who are victims.
(2) OPD that implements the administration of women's protection is obligated to carry out evaluation and prepare accountability reports to the Mayor.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING
Funding for the protection of women may be sourced from the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget, the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget both Provincial and Municipal and/or other lawful sources that are non-binding in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

BAB VIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 28
Any person or entity/institution/organization that deliberately fails to fulfill the rights and protection of women may be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with applicable regulations and laws.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bandar Lampung City.
Enacted in Bandar Lampung, on the date of 17 June 2019

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG,
Stamp/Signed

HERMAN HN
Promulgated in Bandar Lampung on the date of 17 June 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY,
Stamp/Signed

BADRI TAMAM
LOCAL GAZETTE OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 03
REGISTER NUMBER OF LOCAL REGULATION OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY LAMPUNG PROVINCE : 03/857/BL/2019