COPY
REGENT OF MOROWALI
CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MOROWALI REGENCY NUMBER 11 YEAR 2022

CONCERNING
THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF MOROWALI,

Considering:

a. that children and women are creations of God Almighty who constitute important elements of society, and in the future children will become actors in all fields of community and state life;

b. that Indonesian women have an important role in community activities, development and family matters as well as having the obligation to care for, protect and raise Indonesian children to grow and develop as the nation's next generation;

c. that based on the Provisions in Article 17 paragraph (1) of Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as amended by Law Number 1 Year 2022 concerning Financial Relations between the Central Government and Regional Governments, Regions have the right to establish policies for the protection of women and children which constitute mandatory affairs in accordance with their authority;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children From Acts of Violence.

Bearing in mind:

1.
2.

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 51 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Buol Regency, Morowali Regency and Banggai Kepulauan Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 179, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3900) as amended by Law Number 11 of 2000 concerning Amendment to Law Number 51 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Buol Regency, Morowali Regency and Banggai Kepulauan Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3966);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as last amended by Law Number 1 of 2022 concerning Financial Relations Between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6757);
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MOROWALI REGENCY and

REGENT OF MOROWALI,
DECIDES:
To Enact: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child in the womb.
2. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
3. Protection is all service actions to fulfill rights, as well as guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence.
4. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as receive protection from violence and discrimination.
5. Protection of women is an effort aimed at protecting women and their rights in order to obtain a sense of security from acts of violence.
6. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and distress whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
7. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
8. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, lack of confidence or severe psychological suffering to a person.
9. Victims of acts of violence hereinafter referred to as victims are individuals or groups of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by individuals.
10. Regional Technical Service Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a regional technical implementing unit, established by the regional government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection and other problems.
11. Coordination Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence hereinafter abbreviated as FKPKK is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked and collaborative manner.
12. Region is Morowali Regency.
13. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent in the administration of Government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
14. Regional Government is the Government of Morowali Regency.
15. Regional Governance is the administration of government affairs by the Government and DPRD according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
16. Regent is the Regent of Morowali.
17. Office of Village Community Empowerment, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as Dinas PMDP3A is the regional apparatus of Morowali Regency that implements government affairs in the field of women and children.

Article 2
The scope of regulation for the protection of Women and Children from acts of violence includes:
a. forms of violence;
b. rights of Women and Children from acts of violence;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. prevention;
e. services for victims of acts of Violence;
f. empowerment;
g. cooperation;
h. guidance and Supervision;
i. funding; and
j. criminal provisions.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 3
Forms of Violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence; and/or
d. domestic neglect.

Article 4
Physical violence as referred to in Article 3 letter a results in: a. the victim experiencing pain or serious injury;
b. the death of the victim; and
c. causing illness or impediment to carrying out official duties or livelihood or daily activities.

Article 5
Psychological violence as referred to results in:
a. Fear;
b. loss of self-confidence;
c. loss of ability to act;
d. a sense of helplessness; and/or
e. severe psychological suffering in a person.

Article 6
In Article 4 letter b, sexual violence as referred to in Article 3 letter c includes:
a. acts of sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations in an improper or unwanted manner;
c. coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes; and
d. sexual violence through social media.

Article 7
Domestic neglect as referred to in Article 3 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the reasonable needs of a Child, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or provide for a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household, whereas according to law one is obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 8
Women and Children victims of acts of Violence obtain the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to recovery of health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of their identity;
f. the right to restitution;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
j. the right to assistance.

Article 9
(1) In the event that victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 8 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 10
(1) Safe houses as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) provide temporary shelter and/or accommodation for victims of Violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The organization and/or management of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the PMDP3A Office.
(3) For security purposes and at the request of victims of Violence, the manager or organizer of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) may place victims of Violence in certain locations that are kept confidential.
(4) Further provisions regarding the organizer/operator of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 1 I
A child as a victim of a criminal act, in addition to obtaining the rights of Violence as referred to in Article 8, also obtains special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development; b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and/or
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Regional Government

Article 12
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to:
    a. implement the policy for the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence established by the government;
    b. establish policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children from acts of violence; and
    c. conduct cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, and various Non-Governmental Organizations concerned with Women and Children in the implementation of the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) The Regional Government is responsible for:
    a. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; and
    b. allocating a budget for the implementation of the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region.
(3) In the implementation of the obligations of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) and the implementation of the responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for the protection of victims.
(4) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3) constitutes part of the Medium-Term Development Plan.

Article 13
The Regent, in carrying out the obligations as referred to in Article 12, delegates them to the PMDP3A Office and/or the relevant Regional Apparatus in accordance with their authority.

Second Part
Society and Family

Article 14
(1) The community and family have the obligations and responsibilities as follows:
 a. to prevent the occurrence of Violence against Women and Children;
 b. to provide information and/or report acts of Violence against Women and Children to law enforcement or the authorized party;
 c. to participate in assisting in the handling of victims of acts of Violence;
 d. to protect victims; and
 e. to provide emergency assistance.
(2) The form of participation of the community and family shall be carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION
Article 15
(1) Prevention efforts for Violence against Women and Children shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the PMDP3A Office;
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:
a. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, various Non-Governmental Organizations that care about Women and Children;
b. building community and family participation and awareness towards the prevention and protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of Women and Children victims of Violence;
e. providing critical education about the rights of Women and Children as victims of Violence to the community; and
f. opening complaint posts for the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

Article 16
(1) Prevention of acts of Violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 15, shall be implemented by the PMDP3A Office and Regional Apparatus that administer affairs in the fields of: a. education;
b. labor;
c. health;
d. social affairs;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual;
g. public peace and order; and
h. communication and information.
(2) Prevention of acts of Violence by the PMDP3A Office and related Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner.

CHAPTER VI
SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 17
(1) Forms of services provided to Women and Children victims of acts of Violence, include:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. spiritual counselor services;
e. repatriation and social reintegration; and
f. rehabilitation.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government in cooperation with Regional Apparatus/related institutions shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Regional Government and implemented by Regional Apparatus/related institutions whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. education;
b. employment;
c. health;
d. social affairs;
e. Women's empowerment and Child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public peace and order.
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may cooperate with related institutions, other Regional Governments, and community parties.

Article 18
Complaint services as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter a include:
a. identification or initial recording of victims; and
b. consent for action to be taken.

Article 19
Health services as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to more adequate health services if necessary may refer to other parties with a multidisciplinary approach including:
1. health services;
2. medicolegal;
3. psychological assistance.

Article 20
Legal assistance as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter c is to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by means of:
a. providing legal consultation which includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the level of reporting, investigation, prosecution, and examination in court hearings and assisting victims to completely describe the violence they have experienced; and
c. conducting coordination with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 2 1
(1) The report-delivery service as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter d is intended to accompany Women and Children as victims of acts of violence after mediation by UPTD PPA and other Women and Children complaint units has been unsuccessful.
(2) The return and social reintegration service as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter d aims to return the victim so that they are accepted back into their social environment.
(3) The return and social reintegration service for the victim is carried out after the implementation of outreach/socialization related to the rights of Women and Children as victims of violence.

Article 22
(1) Rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (f) letter e include:
a. motivation and psychosocial diagnosis;
b. care and nurturing;
c. vocational training and entrepreneurship development;
d. spiritual mental guidance;
e. physical guidance;
f. social guidance and psychosocial counseling;
g. accessibility services;
h. social assistance and aid;
i. resocialization guidance;
j. follow-up guidance; and/or
k. referral.
(2) Forms of vocational training and entrepreneurship development as mentioned in paragraph (1) letter c, include:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice;
c. apprenticeship;
d. entrepreneurial skills training;
e. facilitation of joint business group formation;
f. business capital in the form of business supporting tools; and
g. business implementation assistance.

Article 23
Psychological services as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (1) letter g constitute an action carried out to restore the psyche of Women and Children as victims of acts of violence.

Article 24
(1) The provision of services to victims as referred to in Article 17 shall be implemented with:
a. every day (including holidays);
b. promptly;
c. safe and comfortable;
d. a sense of empathy;
e. non-discrimination;
f. outreach;
g. free of charge; and
h. confidentiality guaranteed.
(2) Service providers or service managers are prohibited from collecting any fees whatsoever from victims of violence.

Article 25
(1) Protection services for Women and Children from acts of violence are carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA as an integrated service center in the protection of Women and Children as victims of acts of violence.
(2) Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated by UPTD PPA to other service units in a networked and collaborative manner.

Article 26
(1) In an effort to provide and organize services for victims, the Regional Government establishes FKPKK.
(2) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, main tasks, and functions as well as membership of FKPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 27
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection for victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
  a. establishing family partners at the RT/RW or Kelurahan/Village level by the community;
  b. establishing Women and Children protection units within community organizations;
  c. conducting independent socialization of Women's and Children's rights;
  d. providing first aid to victims; and
  e. reporting to the authorized Regional Apparatus/related institutions if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, mental and spiritual guidance institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER VII
EMPOWERMENT
Article 28
Forms of empowerment for Women victims of Violence include: a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint family business enterprises; and
c. capital assistance.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION
Article 29
(1) In order to achieve the objective of protecting the rights of Women from acts of Violence, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. other Regional Governments; and
b. non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of Violence;
c. return and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses which are followed up in accordance with applicable law.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 30
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of the protection of Women and Children and acts of Violence.
(2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by the PMDPSA Office and the community.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted with professional and transparent principles.
(5) The PMDP3A Office is obligated to report periodically to the Regent regarding the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of Violence.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 31
The costs of activities related to the implementation of protection for Women and Children shall be borne by:
a. the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legitimate receipts in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 32
Any person who discloses the whereabouts of a victim of violence who is being placed in a confidential location as referred to in Article 10 paragraph (3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

Article 33
Organizers or managers of services who are proven to collect fees from victims of Violence as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2) letter g shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 34
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of its promulgation.
In order that everyone may know, this Regional Regulation shall be promulgated by placing it in the Regional Gazette (Lembaran Daerah) of Morowali Regency.
Enacted in Bungku on date 79 4gtfw, e,)a

MOROWALI REGENT,

signed.

TASLIM
Promulgated in Bungku on the date zg @,e;4lvs ee.

ACTING REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MOROWALI REGENCY,
YUSMAN MAHBUB
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MOROWALI REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER...O$
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF THE REGIONAL REGULATION OF MOROWALI REGENCY, CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE NUMBER: *lr t;1zoz.
Copy conforms to the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF MOROWALI REGENCY
BAHDIN, S.H., M.H.
Supervisor, Level IV/b

NIP. 19820602 200604 1005
EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MOROWALI REGENCY
NUMBER YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Protection from violence that threatens the safety and health of women and children must be provided from an early stage. Protection is necessary to prevent violence and physical, mental and sexual exploitation. For example, women and children who are victims of abuse, neglect, eviction and maltreatment by parents or other people. For women and children experiencing these problems, the government must provide Safe Houses and an adequate budget, and the role of various parties to help handle violence problems faced by children and women includes social community organizations, volunteers, social workers, medical personnel, advocates and religious figures.

The plight of children along with their rights and the condition of violence against children and women that frequently occurs in the region should be a common concern for all stakeholders, including the regional government, to play a role in preventing and overcoming such plight and violence.

For the regional government of Morowali Regency, in facing the overall conditions above, various actions are taken to fulfill children's rights as well as to prevent and assist in handling acts of violence against children and women, which is pursued by establishing a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children From Acts of Violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Letter a
What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity and worth as a human being respected" is upholding human rights.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
What is meant by "the right to restitution" is the payment of compensation charged to the perpetrator based on a court decision that has permanent legal force for material and/or immaterial losses suffered by the victim or their heirs.

Letter g
What is meant by "the right to social rehabilitation" includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name and citizenship.

Letter h
What is meant by "the right to complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.

Letter i
Sufficiently clear.

Letter j
What is meant by "the right to assistance" includes among others: psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious counselors, advocates, and family members.

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 1O
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 1 1
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "basic service rights" includes, among others: the right to education, health and access to parents during the handling process.
Letter c What is meant by "the right to equal protection" is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, conviction, religion, politics, ethnicity or social life, property, disability, birth or other status.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "the right to obtain freedom" is freedom to express one's views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Letter a What is meant by a "work network" includes: family partner institutions/actors, dasawisma, and family groups existing in the Region.
Letter b Prevention efforts within the family and/or closest relatives can be carried out by strengthening resilience within the household such as: practicing religious values, managing household time, and communication between family members.
Prevention efforts within the community include: fostering environmental concern regarding acts of violence that occur in their environment.
Letter c What is meant by a "violence prevention system" includes: mapping locations or areas prone to the occurrence of violence and carrying out preventive efforts for the community.
Letter d Socialization can be carried out through mass media, electronic media, and direct counseling to the community.
Letter e Critical education for women victims of violence is an effort to build women's awareness about their rights. The purpose of implementing critical education is so that it can help in making decisions and not become a victim of repeated violence. Forms of critical education for women victims of violence consist of: trainings on gender equality and gender justice, education about reproductive health for women, and providing understanding of laws and regulations concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 18
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "persetujuan dilakukan tindakan (informed crllr,.s,ent)" is consent for medical action given by the victim or their closest family after receiving a complete explanation regarding the medical action that will be performed on the victim.
Article

Article Article
Article Article
Article Article
Article Article
Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
What is meant by "visum et repertum" is a written statement made by a doctor in the field of forensic medicine at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of a medical examination of a victim based on their expertise and under oath, for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
What is meant by "visum et psychiatricum" is a statement given by a psychiatrist regarding the mental health condition of a victim that is needed to clarify a case and for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
Sufficiently Clear.
Paragraph (1) Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
What is meant by "other service units" is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence. This service unit may be located at Integrated Service Centers (PPT) and Integrated Crisis Centers (PKT) based in Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Women and Children Service Units (UPPA), Trauma Center Shelters (RPTC), Children's Social Shelters (RPSA), BP4, and other community/faith-based organizations, prosecutors' offices, courts, Women Crisis Centers (WCC), and other similar institutions.
Article

Article Article
Article Article
Article Article
Sufficiently Clear. 29 Sufficiently Clear. 30 Sufficiently Clear. 31 Sufficiently Clear. 32 Sufficiently Clear. JJ Sufficiently Clear. 34 Sufficiently Clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MOROWALT REGENCY NUMBER..Ob{