Whereas:

COPY
REGENT OF DONGGALA
CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF DONGGALA,

Considering:
a. that women and children are creations of Almighty God who constitute important elements of Indonesian society and nation;
b. that Indonesian women have an important role in social activities, development and family life and have the obligation to care for, protect and raise Indonesian children to grow and develop as the nation's next generation;
c. that Indonesian children are Indonesian human resources who will eventually become actors in all fields of social and state life;
d. that in social life, women and children in Donggala Regency often experience violence or unpleasant treatment so that it is deemed important to protect them;
e. based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, a Regional Regulation of Donggala Regency concerning Protection for Women and Children is established.

In View of: 
1. Law Number 29 Year 1959 Concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi Donggala (State Gazette Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);

2. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4235);

3. Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);

4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

5. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

10. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1437) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

11. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

12. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

16. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

17. Presidential Decree Number 33 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF DONGGALA REGENCY
and

REGENT OF DONGGALA
DECIDES:
To Enact: REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY CONCERNING PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Bupati is the Bupati of Donggala.
2. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution of Donggala Regency as an element of regional government administration.
3. Regional Government is the Bupati of Donggala and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the regional apparatus work unit of Donggala Regency that handles the interests of women and children.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the apparatus work unit located within the SKPD of Donggala Regency.
6. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child who is still in the womb.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person determined by law.
8. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
9. Protection is all actions and services to fulfill rights, as well as to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence.
10. Child protection is all efforts to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Referral is the effort made to protect and fulfill the rights of victims of violence.
12. Violence is any act against a person, especially women and children, that results in or may result in physical, sexual, psychological suffering and misery and/or neglect, including threats of certain acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
13. Physical violence is an act that results in pain, injury, or causes severe injury, miscarriage or unconsciousness.
14. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness or severe psychological suffering in a person.
15. Sexual violence is the coercion of sexual relations, coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
16. Victim of acts of violence hereinafter referred to as victim is an individual or group of people who suffer physically, mentally as well as economic loss, emotional, deprivation of fundamental rights as a result of an act of violation of human rights (HAM), or criminal acts and acts of violence that occur both by state apparatus or by regional government apparatus or by other persons.
17. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
20. Institution is a non-governmental organization (NGO) that conducts assistance.
21. Regional Action Plan is the foundation and guideline for related agencies and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
23. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral lines up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of women and/or children.
24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
25. Supervision is the activity of observing, listening, examining, reviewing, assessing the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. non-discrimination;
c. justice.

Article 3
The objectives of the protection of women and children are to:
a. provide and increase a sense of security for women and children;
b. help prevent acts of violence against women and children;
c. help prevent exploitation activities against women and children;
d. provide services to women and children in facing problems;
e. help improve the quality of life of children

Article 4
The scope of regulation for the protection of women and children includes:
a. Rights of Women and Children;
b. Duties and authorities;
c. Handling of acts of violence;
e. Financing;
f. Supervision;
g. Community participation.

CHAPTER III
FULFILLMENT OF THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN
Part One
Rights of Children

Article 5
In the implementation of child protection in the region, children have the right to: a. to live, grow and develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and to receive guidance and protection from violence, negligence and discrimination;
b. to a valid birth certificate obtained and/or procured by their parents in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations; c. to worship according to their religion, to think and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under parental guidance;
d. to know, be raised and cared for by their own parents; e. in the event that for any reason parents cannot guarantee the growth and development of the child or the child is in a state of neglect, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by other people in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; f. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual and social needs; g. to obtain education and teaching in accordance with their abilities, interests and talents; h. to express opinions and have their opinions heard; i. to rest and utilize time to develop their talents and abilities; j. to receive protection from the family, community and Regional government against discriminatory treatment and exploitation both economically and socially, neglect, cruelty, violence, abuse, injustice and other mistreatment;
k. to regain formal or non-formal education for children who drop out of school;
l. to receive exclusive breast milk (Mother's Milk) as a priority;
m. to receive guidance;
n. to obtain other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Second Part
Women's Rights

Article 6
In the implementation of the protection of women in the region, women have the right to:
a. basic needs;
b. a sense of comfort;
c. a sense of security;
d. maximum health services in facing acts of violence;
e. assistance services, legal aid and spiritual guidance in facing acts of violence; and
g. confidentiality regarding the problems faced.

CHAPTER IV
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES
Part One Duties

Paragraph 1
The duties of the government in implementing Child protection

Article 7
The duties of the Regional Government in the implementation of Child protection include: a. formulation of long-term, medium-term, and short-term strategic plans for Child protection as an integrated part of the Development planning Document;
b. implementation and supervision of the implementation of Child protection.
The Regional Government provides guidance and counseling for children to embrace religion in accordance with the religion and beliefs of their parents.

Article 9
(1) Regional governments provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb through community health centers and hospitals.
(2) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
(3) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are provided free of charge for families who are unable or poor families.
(4) Regional governments implement activities to support the provision of breast milk to infants.

Article 10
(1) The regional government provides basic and secondary education.
(2) The regional government is obliged to provide assistance with education costs or free education for students from poor families or neglected children.

Article 11
(1) The regional government is obligated to accommodate and care for children who are neglected by their parents.
(2) The accommodation and care of children as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through cooperation with institutions, social foundations or orphanages.

Article 12
The regional government provides special protection for children who are victims of riots or social conflict in the form of fulfillment of basic needs consisting of clothing, shelter, housing, education, health, social and recreation, security guarantees, and equality, including special treatment for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 13
(1) The regional government shall undertake prevention of transplantation of a child’s organs to other parties and acts of violence against children.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are determined by forms of activities which include:
a. Early detection and intervention;
b. Socialization and education;
c. Seminars or workshops;
d. Preparation of an effective information system;
e. Cooperation with institutions that have activities in the prevention of acts of violence against children.

Article 14
The local government is obligated to assist in handling acts of violence against children.
Paragraph 2 Duties of the Government in the Implementation of Women's Protection

Article 15
The Duties of the Regional Government in the Implementation of Women's Protection include:
a. preparation of long-term, medium-term, and short-term strategic plans for Women's Protection as an integrated part of the Development Planning Document;
b. implementation and supervision of the Implementation of Women's Protection.

Article 16
(1) The local government shall carry out prevention of acts of violence against women.
(2) Prevention efforts against acts of violence against women shall be carried out in the form of activities which include:
a. Regional Action Plan;
b. Outreach/dissemination;
c. Seminars or workshops;
d. Preparation of an effective information system;
e. Cooperation with institutions that have activities in the prevention of acts of violence against women.

Article 17
Regional governments are obligated to assist in handling acts of violence against women.

Second Part
Authority

Article t8
(1) The Regent may cooperate with related parties in assisting efforts to shelter and/or care for neglected children or handle acts of violence against women and children.
(2) The Regent in conducting cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may assign officials within the regional government environment.
(3) Officials assigned as referred to in paragraph (2) act for and on behalf of the Regent.
(4) Assignment to officials as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 19
(1) The related parties with whom cooperation is carried out by the Regent as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) include:
a. Social community organizations, institutions or orphanages that have activities related to the protection, care, shelter, guidance, and empowerment of children and/or women;
b. Social workers or volunteers;
c. Advocates; and
d. Clergy/spiritual counselors.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of a cooperation agreement.

CHAPTER V
HANDLING OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 20
(1) The regional government is obligated to prepare medical personnel at community health centers (Puskesmas) or at hospitals specifically to handle victims. (2) Medical personnel as referred to in paragraph (1) are obligated to provide complete health services to victims.

Article 21
Regional governments are obligated to assist in providing adequate special rooms for victims at the Resort Police Institution (Polres) and at every Sector Police office (Polsek).
Article 22 (1) Social workers or volunteer personnel as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) letter b are tasked with accompanying victims in facing the process of resolving acts of violence.
(2) Social workers or volunteer personnel, in addition to being tasked as referred to in paragraph (1), carry out activities including:
a. counseling or guidance to strengthen and provide a sense of security for victims;
b. providing information regarding the rights of victims to obtain protection from the police and the issuance of protection orders from the court;
c. escorting victims to safe houses or alternative residences; and
d. conducting integrated coordination in providing services to victims with agencies or related parties needed by victims.

Article 23
(1) Regional governments are obligated to prepare Safe Houses to be used for temporary handling of victims of violence against women and children.
(2) Safe Houses as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided in every Sub-district.

Article 24
Advocates as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) letter c assist:
(1) in providing legal services for victims or providing legal consultation in the form of information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
(2) Advocates are obligated to accompany and/or represent victims at the investigation level, prosecution, and examination in court hearings and assist victims to completely describe the violence they have experienced.
(3) Information about violence from victims that is personal in nature must be kept confidential by advocates.
(4) Advocates may coordinate with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 25
Religious counselors as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) letter d have the duty to:
(1) provide spiritual guidance or strengthening of faith and piety to victims.
(2) In addition to providing spiritual guidance, religious counselors are obligated to provide explanation regarding the rights and obligations of victims.

CHAPTER VI
FINANCING
Article 26
(1) The costs of activities related to the implementation of protection for women and children shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget as well as other lawful revenues in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(2) Activity expenditures sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget shall be budgeted in the Regional Work Unit that oversees the affairs of implementing protection for women and children in accordance with the needs and financial capacity of the Region.
(3) The budget allocation as referred to in paragraph (1) must be budgeted by the Regent and DPRD and determined each fiscal year in the APBD.

CHAPTER VII
SUPERVISION AND GUIDANCE
Article 27 (1) Supervision and guidance of the implementation of protection of women and children shall be carried out by the Regent.
(2) Supervision and guidance activities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out on a daily basis by the Regional Work Unit in charge of child protection.
(3) The results of supervision and guidance activities by the Regional Work Unit must be reported to the Regent.
aAB V I

: COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 28
(1) The community has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to participate in assisting/supporting efforts for the protection of women and children. (2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 29
(1) Forms of community participation can be in the form of:
a. Supervision; or
b. Provision of assistance;
(2) Community supervision includes activities:
a. observing or seeing the condition of fulfillment of women's and children's rights; and
b. providing information on every condition that tends to lead to acts of violence against women and children to the police apparatus and/or regional government.
(3) Provision of assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b in the form of:
a. security or temporary shelter for victims;
b. financial support to meet the needs of victims according to the community's capacity;
c. Financial assistance and/or facilities to the regional government in supporting the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Donggala Regency. Enacted in Donggala on 28 August 2014

REGENT OF DONGGALA
KASMAN LASSA
Promulgated in Donggala on 29 August 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF DONGGALA REGENCY,
AtDtL t{uR. SH., M.Si
Principal Supervisor, Level I
NIP. 196005111986031019
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DONGGALA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 5
Copy in accordance with the original:

DONGGALA REGENCY
A-" NOREG 86 REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY, CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE: 05/YEAR 2014

ELUCIDATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY
NUMBER 5 OF 2014
CONCERNING
PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The State through the government and regional governments currently places very great attention on the existence of children. Based on their existence as the nation's future generation who are qualified and dignified, the government and regional governments are obligated to recognize the existence of children's rights in their human rights. The human rights inherent in children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, the Right to Growth and Development, the Right to Protection and the Right to Participation. To fulfill the Right to life, children need food in sufficient quantities, healthy and nutritious, as well as optimal health access. In supporting the realization of children to grow and develop, children need various adequate educational facilities and infrastructure, development of talents and interests. In order to realize the right to protection and the right to participation, children need serious attention from various parties, both government, regional government and society.
Specifically regarding protection efforts from violence that threatens the safety and health of children and women must be provided from an early age. Protection is needed to prevent violence and physical, mental and sexual exploitation. For example, women and children who are victims of abuse, neglect, eviction and maltreatment by parents or other people. For women and children experiencing these problems, the government must provide Safe Houses and adequate budget, the role of various parties to help handle violence problems faced by women and children include social community organizations, volunteers, social workers, medical personnel, advocates and religious figures.
The condition of children's deterioration along with their rights and the condition of violence against women and children that frequently occurs in the region should be a common concern for all stakeholders without exception, including regional governments to play a role in preventing and overcoming such deterioration and violence.
For the regional government of Donggala Regency in facing the overall conditions above, various actions are taken to fulfill children's rights as well as: prevent and assist in handling acts of violence against women and children which is endeavored by establishing a Regional Regulation concerning Protection for Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently Clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article I
Article I
Sufficiently clear. Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Self-explanatory.

Article 1 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Letter a:

Article 14
Article 15
Article 16

Paragraph (1)
Letter b: Sufficiently clear.
Letter c: Socialization activities in the form of explanations regarding children's rights, implications of violations of children's rights and laws and regulations related to child protection to the community.
Socialization can use various means or media adjusted to the material to be conveyed.
Letter d: Socialization can use various means or media adjusted to the material to be conveyed. Education is conducted related to children's rights, maltreatment and violence against children.
Seminar and workshop activities can be carried out by Universities in Central Sulawesi, NGOs or other institutions that handle child protection.
Seminars or workshops are focused on the theme "protection of children's rights".
Letter e: preparation of information systems in the form of provision of data about the condition of regional children or telephone facilities, facsimile, website or other means for the purposes of oral reports/complaints from victims/the community.

Sufficiently clear.
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Letter a: Sufficiently clear.
Letter b: Socialization activities in the form of explanations regarding children's rights, implications of violations of women's rights and laws and regulations related to the protection of women to the community.
Socialization can use various means or media adjusted to the material to be conveyed.
Letter c: Seminar and workshop activities can be carried out by Universities in Central Sulawesi, NGOs or other institutions that handle women's issues.
Seminars or workshops are focused on the theme "protection of women".
Letter d: Preparation of information systems in the form of provision of data about the condition of regional children or telephone facilities, facsimile, website or other means for the purposes of oral reports/complaints from victims/the community.
Letter e: Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Paragraph (1)
Letter a: Sufficiently clear.
Letter b: Sufficiently clear.
Letter c: Sufficiently clear.
Letter d: What is meant by clergy (rohaniawan) in this provision are religious scholars, religious leaders, imams, pastors, and priests, both personally and institutionally/structurally.
Paragraph (2)
Cooperation agreements with related parties are made in writing.

Article 20
Paragraph (1): What is meant by a hospital in this provision is prioritized for regional government-owned hospitals.
Paragraph (2): Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Regional government assistance is in the form of budgetary support and/or goods needed by the Police in providing special rooms.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) The construction of Safe Houses is prioritized within the vicinity of each Sub-district Office.
Article 24 - Sufficiently Clear.

Article 25
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.
- Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Article 27
At the time of preparation of the RAPBD, the Regent allocates and proposes a budget for the purposes of implementing protection for women and children.
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficient.

Article 30
- Sufficiently clear.
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DONGGALA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 5
Copy in accordance with the original: &\Ed*

NOREG 86 REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE REGENCY OF CENTRAL SULAWESI: 05/YEAR 2014

DONGGALA. PROVINCE