REGENT OF MUNA
SOUTHEAST SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MUNA REGENCY
NUMBER 7 OF 2019

REGARDING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN MUNA REGENCY

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF MUNA.
Considering : a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against humanity;
b. that in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of women and children and improve quality of life, it is necessary to regulate the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the Regional Government in the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is deemed necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and children victims of violence in Muna Regency.
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia; 2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277); 3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886); 4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the stipulation of a government regulation in lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as most recently amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
10. Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence.
14. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products, as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Regulations;
With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MUNA REGENCY
REGENT OF MUNA
DECIDES:
To Establish :REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN MUNA REGENCY CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Muna Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Muna Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Muna.
4. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Council of Muna Regency.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Woman is a person who has female genitalia, can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and includes persons who are legally recognized as Women.
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children in the womb.
8. Violence is any act against a person that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
9. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
10. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
11. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, serious wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
12. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
13. Sexual violence is any act in the form of forced sexual intercourse, sexual abuse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural and/or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
14. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
15. Victim is a woman and child who experiences physical suffering, psychological suffering, sexual suffering, either directly or indirectly resulting from acts of violence.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
18. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for self-empowerment of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to their families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
22. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions in order to carry out their roles normally again both in the family and in society.
23. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with their families, communities, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
24. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
25. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, Safe House, Child Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
26. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.
27. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in the context of implementing activities for the prevention and protection of women and children victims of violence.
28. Safe House is temporary housing provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
29. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, tribe, race, ethnicity, group or class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs resulting from reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individual and collective in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
30. Human trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse

BAB II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of women and children victims of violence is conducted based on the principles of: a. respect for human rights; b. gender equality and justice; c. non-discrimination; d. protection of victims' rights; e. legal certainty.

Article 3
(1) The objectives of protection for women and children victims of violence are to: a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including human trafficking; b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children; c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children; d. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters and witnesses; e. facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
(2) Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic neglect;
e. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER III RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. to have their dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. protection from the family, the community, the regional government and/or other parties, either temporarily or based on a government stipulation, and protection from the court;
c. health services according to medical needs;
d. special handling related to the confidentiality of the victim;
e. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. spiritual guidance services;
g. to determine their own decision;

CHAPTER IV OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 5
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children victims of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government and village government;
b. community;
c. family;
d. parents.

Article 6
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide protection to women and children victims of violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children victims of violence based on Laws and Regulations;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence;
d. facilitating assistance, legal aid and legal services according to the needs of victims;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence according to regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence.
(3) The obligations of the Village Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a include:
a. establishing policies for the protection of women and children victims of violence, such as Village Regulations on the Protection of Women and Children or Village Head Regulations;
b. incorporating programs for the protection of women and children in the Village Medium-Term Development Plan;
c. allocating budget for activities related to the implementation of protection of women and children in the Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
d. establishing village posts for integrated services for women and children victims of violence;
e. providing service programs for women and children victims of violence in the village;
f. appointing administrators and victim assistance officers for village posts;
g. conducting prevention activities in the village;
h. coordinating and cooperating with related parties including the community, community-based services and the business sector;
i. conducting fostering and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children at the village level.
(4) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one regional action plan as a basis for OPD in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(5) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (4) is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or the authorized parties;
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence;
d. providing protection to victims;
e. providing emergency assistance.

Article 8
The obligations of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letters c and d are, by law, to have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 9
(1) Prevention is intended to reduce potential risks and vulnerability of women and children from all forms of violence both occurring in the domestic and public sphere, including preventing recurrence of violence experienced by victims.
(2) Prevention of violence against women and children includes:
a. prevention of violence in the family and community environment including villages;
b. prevention of violence in the educational environment;
c. prevention of violence in the workplace environment; and
d. prevention of violence in public transportation.
(3) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out in the form of:
a. socialization especially to vulnerable groups;
b.
c.
d. establishing village posts for integrated services for women and children victims of violence;
e. providing service programs for women and children victims of violence in villages;
f. appointing administrators and victim assistance officers for village posts;
g. conducting prevention activities in villages;
h. conducting coordination and cooperation with related parties including with the community, community-based services and the business sector;
i. conducting guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children at the village level.
(4) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one regional action plan as a basis for OPD in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(5) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (4) constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or the authorized parties;
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence;
d. providing protection to victims;
e. providing emergency assistance.

Article 8
The obligations of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letters c and d are to have full legal responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 9
(1) Prevention is intended to reduce potential risks and vulnerability of women and children from all forms of violence both occurring in the domestic and public sphere, including preventing recurrence of violence experienced by victims.
(2) Prevention of violence against women and children includes:
a. prevention of violence in the family and community environment including villages;
b. prevention of violence in the education environment;
c. prevention of violence in the workplace environment; and
d. prevention of violence in public transportation.
(3) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out in the form of:
a. socialization especially to vulnerable groups;
b. publications, cultural performances, youth jamborees and campaigns;
c. training;
d. forming and facilitating groups or forums for children, adolescents, women and the community;
e. encouraging/establishing educational institutions as zones free from violence against women and children;
f. establishing child-friendly districts.
(4) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a shall be the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of family affairs, community and village empowerment, information affairs and those in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(5) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b shall be the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of education affairs, including religious education.
(6) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of labor affairs, trade and industry affairs, and small and medium enterprises and cooperatives affairs.
(7) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of market affairs, public works affairs, information affairs and transportation affairs.
(8) Implementation of prevention of violence against women and children shall be carried out by involving community organizations, non-governmental organizations, legal aid institutions, business sector, communities, children and adolescent groups, mass media and other related parties.

CHAPTER VI
SERVICES
Part One Forms of Services
Article 10
(1) Forms of services to women and children victims of violence include:
a. complaint services;
b. medical services;
c. psychological services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. law enforcement and legal aid services;
f. return and social reintegration services; and
g. assistance services;

Article 11
(1) Complaint services as referred to in Article 10 letter a, include:
a. services for providing information regarding rights and services provided to victims;
b. toll-free complaint telephone services;
c. outreach services; and
d. consultation services.
(2) Complaint services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization that handles affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 12
(1) Medical services as referred to in Article 10 letter b, include:
a. consultation services;
b. emergency services;
c. examination services;
d. treatment and care services, both outpatient and inpatient;
e. referral services; and
f. medical services related to law such as visum et repertum and DNA tests.
(2) Medical services as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through:
a. special mechanisms in the emergency department;
b. special medical personnel who have been trained in medical services for women and children victims of violence;
c. coordination with the Integrated Service Center, Regional Apparatus Organizations, law enforcement officials, victim assistance institutions and other related parties.
(3) Medical services as referred to in paragraph (1) are the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of health affairs.
(4) The cost of medical services as referred to in paragraph (1) is the responsibility of the Regional Government.

Article 13
(1) Psychological services as referred to in Article 10 letter c, include;
a. counseling services;
b. psychological examination services;
c. clinical psychological services; and
d. psychiatrist services.
(2) Psychological services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted by specially trained officers.
(3) Psychological services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations that handle health affairs and women's empowerment and child protection affairs and may cooperate with professional organizations and other related parties.

Article 14
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 10 letter d, include:
a. shelter services or safe houses;
b. assistance services by social workers;
c. peer group services; and
d. victim family strengthening services.
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by specially trained officers.
(3) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of social affairs.

Article 15
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in Article 10 letter e, include:
a. legal consultation services;
b. assistance by legal counsel;
c. temporary protection from the police against threats and retaliation experienced by victims;
d. protection in a safe house from the Witness and Victim Protection Agency and/or the Integrated Service Center;
e. assistance in every legal process from victim assistance institutions and/or from family; and
f. assistance of linguists or interpreters including sign language;
(2) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by trained officers.
(3) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations that handle legal affairs and those that handle women's empowerment and child protection affairs which in their implementation may cooperate with advocate professional institutions, legal aid organizations, victim assistance institutions, law enforcement agencies, Regional Office of Law and Human Rights as well as other related parties.

Article 16
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in article 10 letter f include:
a. repatriation and/or pick-up services;
b. population document services such as birth certificates, identity cards and family cards;
c. care services;
d. school scholarship provision services;
e. skills enhancement and economic empowerment services;
f. family strengthening and/or counseling services;
g. community strengthening and/or counseling services or educational institution organizers; and
h. social protection program provision services in the fields of education, health, economy, social and housing.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of social affairs, education affairs, health affairs, settlement and public works affairs, manpower affairs and cooperatives and SMEs affairs, community and village empowerment affairs, trade and industry affairs, and population affairs.
(3) Implementation of repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with the business sector, zakat agencies, community organizations, non-governmental organizations and other related parties.

Article 17
(1) Assistance services as referred to in article 10 letter g include:
a. assistance services at hospitals or other medical service institutions;
b. assistance services at law enforcement institutions;
c. assistance services at government institutions and social institutions;
d. peer group services.
(2) Assistance services as referred to in paragraph (1) are the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization that handles the affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Implementation of assistance services can be carried out in cooperation with social organizations, non-governmental organizations, victim assistance institutions and universities.

Article 18
Service costs as referred to in article 10 constitute an obligation of the Regional Government.

Part Two Principles and Service Standards
Article 19
(1) Services to women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 10 are carried out comprehensively and in an integrated manner across sectors, professions, and disciplines of knowledge.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted with the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. equality;
c. protection and confidentiality;
d. honesty;
e. empowerment; and
f. integratedness.
(3) Services to women and children victims of violence are carried out based on service standards in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) The service mechanism for women and children victims of violence is conducted according to standard operating procedures.
(5) Standard operating procedures as referred to in paragraph (4) are further regulated by the Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VII INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 20
(1) Services for women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) shall be carried out through an integrated service mechanism.
(2) The integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established at the regency level, sub-district level and village or urban village level.

Article 21
(1) Integrated services for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) at the regency level shall be carried out by the Regency Integrated Service Center.
(2) The establishment and facilitation of the implementation of the Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) at the regency level shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(3) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established with the tasks of:
a. providing integrated and comprehensive services to victims;
b. providing complaint services integrated with assistance, medical and legal services;
c. making case handling referrals in accordance with the services needed by victims;
d. conducting coordination and cooperation in case handling with related parties;
e. conducting data collection on case handling;
f. providing various information needed by victims and the community;
g. conducting prevention of cases of violence against women and children.
(4) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
a. related regional apparatus organizations;
b. government and/or private hospitals;
c. police;
d. state prosecutor's office;
e. district court;
f. advocates;
g. religious organizations;
h. community organizations;
i. professional organizations;
j. family empowerment and welfare;
k. victim assistance institutions; and
l. non-governmental organizations.
(5) The structure of the Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
a. advisor;
b. chairperson;
c. secretary;
d. service secretariat;
e. divisions.
(6) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated through a regent's decree.

Article 22
(1) Integrated services for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) at the sub-district level shall be carried out by the Sub-District Integrated Service Center.
(2) The establishment and facilitation of the operation of the Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) at the sub-district level shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs and the governance section.
(3) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established with the following tasks:
  a. providing integrated and comprehensive victim services at the sub-district level;
  b. providing complaint services;
  c. making referrals for case handling in accordance with the services needed by victims to the Regency Integrated Service Center and related parties at the sub-district level;
  d. conducting coordination and cooperation in case handling with related parties at the sub-district level;
  e. conducting data collection on case handling at the sub-district level;
  f. providing various information needed by victims and the community at the sub-district level;
  g. conducting prevention of cases of violence against women and children at the sub-district level.
(4) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
  a. sub-district government;
  b. technical implementing units of agencies in the sub-district;
  c. sector police;
  d. community health centers;
  e. family empowerment and welfare;
  f. community organizations;
  g. religious organizations.
(5) The structure of the Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
  a. advisor;
  b. chairperson;
  c. secretary;
  d. service secretariat;
  e. divisions.
(6) The structure of the Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (5) shall be stipulated through a decree of the head of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs.

Article 23
(1) Integrated services for the protection of women and children (PTPPA) at the village or urban village level shall be carried out by the Village or Urban Village Post.
(2) The establishment and facilitation of the operation of the Village or Urban Village Post shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of women’s empowerment and child protection affairs and the Village Government.
(3) The Village or Urban Village Post as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established with the tasks of:
 a. providing complaint services;
 b. providing counseling services;
 c. providing assistance services;
 d. providing referral services to the Sub-district and Regency Integrated Service Centers and to other related parties;
 e. providing social reintegration services;
 f. coordinating case handling;
 g. conducting data collection on case handling at the village or urban village level;
 h. conducting prevention at the village or urban village level.
(4) The Integrated Service Center for the protection of women and children (PPTPPA) as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
 a. village or urban village government;
 b. health clinics and/or village or urban village midwives;
 c. family empowerment and welfare;
 d. community organizations;
 e. religious organizations;
 f. community-based service institutions;
 g. women’s organizations; and
 h. religious leaders, community leaders and customary leaders.
(5) The structure of the Village or Urban Village Post as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of:
 a. advisors;
 b. chairperson;
 c. secretary; and
 d. divisions.
(6) The structure of the Village or Urban Village Post as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established through a decree of the village head or the head of the urban village (lurah).

CHAPTER VIII COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 24
(1) The community and business sector have the right to participate in the prevention of cases of violence against women and children, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out individually or collectively, either personally or institutionally.

CHAPTER IX MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 25
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence, the Regional Government shall conduct monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence in the region.
(3) Monitoring shall be conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus Organizations that implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Monitoring shall be conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence for the current year.

Article 26
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER X GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 27
(1) Guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence shall be conducted by the regency government and village government.
(2) Guidance and supervision by the regency government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall include the implementation of protection for women and children at the regency, sub-district and village or urban village level.
(3) Guidance and supervision by the village government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall include the implementation of protection for women and children at the village level.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall include:
   a. service guidelines and operational standards;
   b. routine coordination;
   c. technical guidance and training, provision of facilities and infrastructure and human resources;
   d. monitoring and evaluation;
   e. reporting.
(5) Guidance and supervision shall be conducted at least once a year and its implementation shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus Organization in charge of women's empowerment and Child Protection affairs and the Regional Inspectorate.
(6) The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (5) shall be reported to the Regent and submitted to the relevant Regional Apparatus Organizations, Village Government, community and business sector.

CHAPTER XI REPORTING
Article 28
(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports on the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for women and children victims of violence to the Governor with copies submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting on implementation as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted annually.

CHAPTER XII FINANCING
Article 29
The costs of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 30
(1) Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or Non-Governmental Organizations and Universities that carry out protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XIII CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of its promulgation.
In order that everyone may know thereof, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Muna Regency.
Promulgated in Raha on 10-11-2019
Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY,

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MUNA REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 7.
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF MUNA REGENCY, SOUTHEAST SULAWESI PROVINCE: (6/145/2019)