I don't see any text to translate in your message. You've provided instructions for translation, but there's no actual source text between the quotation marks.

Please provide the text you'd like me to translate into English, and I'll be happy to help while preserving all numbering, signposting, clause markers, and the original structure.

REGENT OF BUTON
PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2021
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND
CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BUTON,

Considering : a. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience acts of torture and violence and therefore must receive protection;
b. that to provide direction, foundation and legal certainty to all parties in the implementation of protection for women and children in Buton Regency, regulation is necessary;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

Bearing in Mind 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 29 Year 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
- 2 -
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234), as has been amended by Law Number 15 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 183, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6398);
8. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);
- 3 -
11. Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 2 Year 2016 concerning Governmental Affairs Which Are the Authority of the Buton Regency Government as an Autonomous Region (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2016 Number 112)
12. Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 6 Year 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Buton Regency (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2016 Number 116), as has been amended by Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 4 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 6 Year 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Buton Regency (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2019 Number 146);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BUTON REGENCY
And

REGENT OF BUTON
DECIDES:
To Establish REGULATION

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND
CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Buton Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as the organizer of Regional Government in the implementation of governmental affairs which are the authority of the Autonomous Region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Buton as an element who leads and who becomes.
4. Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives in the implementation of governmental affairs which are the authority of the Region.
5. Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter referred to as PPPA Office is the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Buton Regency.
6. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection, hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD-PPA is a regional technical implementation unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection and other problems.
7. Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence, hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner.
8. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
9. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 years, including a child in the womb.
10. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
11. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
12. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
13. Guardian is a person or body that in reality exercises custodial power as a parent over a child.
14. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
15. Judicial body is the general judiciary that has the authority to receive, examine, and adjudicate, as well as resolve every case submitted to it, to realize law enforcement and justice.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, and psychological to the victim.
18. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
19. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
20. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the area of Buton Regency.
21. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecution, court, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
22. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
23. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
24. Prosecution is the action of the public prosecutor to transfer a case to the competent district court in matters and in the manner regulated by law with a request that it be examined and decided by a judge in a court session.
25. Lawsuit is a notification accompanied by a request by an interested party to a judge to take action according to law against a person who has harmed him/her in a civil manner.
26. Safe House is a shelter for victims during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and danger from perpetrators.
27. Standard Operating Procedure, hereinafter abbreviated as SOP, is the standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaint/identification, rehabilitation, health, social rehabilitation, legal services up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
28. Child-Friendly Regency, hereinafter abbreviated as KLA, is a regency that has a Child Rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and resources of government, community and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
29. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Buton Regency.

Article 2
Protection of women and children victims of violence is conducted based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment.

Article 3
The protection of women and children victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. provide services to victims; and
c. empower women victims of violence.
Article 4 The scope of regulation for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in this regional regulation includes prevention efforts, services, and empowerment of victims of violence in the Region.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.
- 7­

Article 6
Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, termination of pregnancy, unconsciousness and/or cause death.

Article 7
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is caused by an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of the ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.

Article 8
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.

Article 9
Neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the household sphere, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
- 8­

Article 10
Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e occurs due to:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 1l
Other violence as referred to in Article 5 letter f is caused by:
a. threat of violence, includes any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, image, symbol, or body movement, whether with or without using means that creates fear or restricts a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something that is contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 12
Every victim has the right to:
a. have their dignity respected as a human being;
b. obtain health and psychological recovery;
c. determine their own decisions;
d. obtain information;
e. obtain special handling related to victim confidentiality;
f. obtain restitution;
g. obtain social rehabilitation;
h. obtain complaint handling services;
- 9 -
i. obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or obtain assistance at every level of the process in accordance with statutory provisions;
j. obtain an invitation examination.

Article 13
(1) Children as victims of violence, in addition to obtaining rights as referred to in Article 12, also obtain special rights as follows:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and/or
e. the right to freedom.
(2) In the event that a Child is a perpetrator of sexual violence or a perpetrator of a criminal act, the child has the right to obtain legal assistance and other assistance as well as to receive special treatment related to the confidentiality of their identity.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Regional Government

Article 14
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement victim protection efforts.
(2) Victim protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. establishment of UPTD-PPA;
b. policy determination;
c. preparation of program and activity plans;
d. provision of facilities and infrastructure support;
e. supervision of service delivery to victims in accordance with minimum service standards; and
f. budget allocation.
(3) In carrying out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for victim protection.
(4) The Regional Action Plan for victim protection as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be established by Regent Regulation.
- 10-
Article 15
In carrying out the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 14, the Regent shall grant authority to the SKPD that has the duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Second Part
Society and Family

Article 16
In efforts to protect victims, the community and family have the following obligations and responsibilities:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children;
b. report if violence occurs;
c. protect victims; and
d. provide emergency assistance.

CHAPTER VI
VICTIM PROTECTION
Part One
Prevention

Article 17
(1) Prevention of violence against women and children is carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by regional apparatus that has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. establishing a working network in violence prevention efforts;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. providing counseling/guidance;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women and child victims of violence; and
e. providing critical education on the rights of women and children for the community.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 17 shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus and UPTD whose main duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. education;
b. health;
c. social affairs;
d. labor;
e. women's empowerment and child protection; and
f. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of the occurrence of violence by Regional Apparatus and UPTD as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on technical guidelines in the Regional Action Plan.

Second Part
Integrated Services for Victims

Article 19
(1) In the context of implementing integrated services for Victims, the Regional Government establishes UPTD-PPA.
(2) The implementation of services for victims by UPTD-PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to other service units in a networked manner.
(3) In implementing services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), UPTD-PPA is under and responsible to the Head of the PPPA Office and must coordinate with related divisions.
(4) Further provisions regarding the establishment and working procedures of UPTD-PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 20
(1) Services for victims as referred to in Article 19, include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services; b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal aid services;
f. psychological services; and
g. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) The form of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by UPTD-PPA and may cooperate with related Regional Apparatus and the community.

Article 21
(1) Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 20 letter a shall be conducted by UPTD-PPA to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. interviews and observation of the victim's condition;
b. initial identification or recording of the victim;
c. consent for action to be taken;
d. recommendation for follow-up services;
e. coordination and referral to follow-up services and related parties; and
f. administration of the complaint process.

Article 22
Accompaniment services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (1) letter b, include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the medico-legal process;
c. accompanying victims during the mediation process, examination at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other companions; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 23
(1) Health Services as referred to in Article 20 letter c constitute efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects for both basic health services and referral.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. examination and treatment;
c. follow-up examination of victims;
d. coordination of health rehabilitation implementation;
e. medico-legal examination including collection of evidence from victims and preparation of visum et repertum;
f. supporting examination and laboratory testing of evidence;
g. specialist doctor consultation or making referrals; and
h. case reporting.

Article 24
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 letter d constitute services provided by companions in order to:
a. restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation; and
b. provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving problems.
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by means of:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 25
(1) Legal aid services as referred to in Article 20 letter e constitute services provided to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. legal consultation which includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. assistance to victims at the investigation, prosecution and examination levels in court proceedings and helping victims to completely describe the violence they have experienced;
c. coordination with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should; and
d. reporting on case developments.

Article 26
(1) The service for repatriation of Victims and social reintegration as referred to in Article 20 letter f aims to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) The service for repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out after the implementation of socialization related to the rights of women as victims.
(3) The service for repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. Provincial Regional Government;
b. other Regional Governments; and
c. related government and non-government agencies and institutions.

Article 27
(1) The provision of services to victims as referred to in Article 20 shall be implemented with the principles of:
a. swift;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. its confidentiality is guaranteed.
(2) Service providers or service managers are prohibited from collecting any fees from victims.
- 14 -

Third Part
Empowerment

Paragraph I
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 28
Forms of empowerment for women victims of violence include:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 29
Job training as referred to in Article 28 letter a, includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 30
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 28 letter b, include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training;
b. facilitation of the establishment of joint business groups; and
c. mentoring in the implementation of business activities.

Article 31
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 28 letter c, includes:
a. assistance for facilities and infrastructure; and
b. facilitation of working capital assistance.

Paragraph 2
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 32
(1) Regional Governments and the community are obligated to fulfill the rights of child victims of violence.
(2) The form of fulfillment of the rights of child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the fulfillment of the basic rights of children in accordance with their needs.

Article 33
(1) The fulfillment of children's rights is implemented in an integrated and systematic manner across all sectors on an ongoing basis through KLA development policies.
(2) The KLA development policy as referred to in paragraph (1) contains provisions regarding:
 a. the KLA concept;
 b. children's rights; and
 c. the KLA development approach.
(3) The KLA development policy as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed at the fulfillment of children's rights, including:
 a. civil rights and freedoms;
 b. family environment and alternative care;
 c. basic health and welfare;
 d. education, use of leisure time, and cultural activities; and
 e. special protection.
(4) The stages of KLA development as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
 a. preparation;
 b. planning;
 c. implementation;
 d. monitoring;
 e. evaluation; and
 f. reporting.
(5) Further provisions regarding KLA development policy are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 34
(1) In order to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of KLA development policy in the Region, a KLA Task Force shall be established.
(2) The KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall have the following principal duties, namely:
 a. coordinating the implementation of KLA policy and development;
 b. determining the tasks of the members of the KLA Task Force;
 c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication of information and education on KLA policy;
 d. collecting baseline data;
 e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
 f. conducting dissemination of baseline data;
 g. determining the focus and priorities of programs in realizing KLA, which are adjusted to the potential of the Region;
 h. preparing a regional action plan and KLA working mechanism for 5 (five) years; and
 i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once every 1 (one) year.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures for appointment and dismissal of membership of the KLA Task Force shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 35
(1) To assist the smooth implementation of the tasks of the KLA Task Force, a secretariat is established.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1), has the duty to provide technical and administrative support to the KLA Task Force.
(3) The KLA Task Force is domiciled in the Regional Apparatus that has the main tasks and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Fourth Part
Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 36
(1) In an effort to provide and organize service handling for victims, the Regional Government may establish FPKK.
(2) FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize service handling of UPTD-PPA;
b. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on violence.
(3) The management and membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by Regent's Decree.
(4) The membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be grouped into the following roles:
a. health role;
b. psychology role;
c. legal role;
d. social role; and
e. economic role.
(5) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, main duties, and functions as well as membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
INFORMATION/REPORTING SYSTEM
Article 37
(1) The Regent implements an information/reporting system for the protection of women and children victims of violence. (2) The information/reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
-17

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 38
(1) Local Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in the region.
(2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a encompasses aspects related to planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b encompasses aspects related to planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c is conducted in accordance with laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d is conducted periodically.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING
Article 39
The costs of implementing the protection of children and women victims of violence, as well as the implementation of CFC development policies shall be charged to:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and/or
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 40
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection for Victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 41
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, UPTD-PPA and other women and child protection institutions that have already been established, in carrying out their duties, must adjust to this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 42
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Buton Regency.
Enacted in Pasarwajo on 23 [month unclear] 2021

REGENT OF BUTON,
A BAKRY
- 18­
c. carry out dissemination/awareness-raising of women's and children's rights independently;
d. provide first aid to victims; and
e. report to the authorized agency if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, community social institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private entities, and mass media.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 41
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, the UPTD-PPA and other women and children protection institutions that have already been established in carrying out their duties must adjust to this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 42
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Buton Regency.
Enacted in Pasarwajo on the date of 23 February 2021

BUPATI BUTON,
Seal/signature

LA SAKRY
Promulgated in Pasarwajo on 23 February 2021

REGENCY AREA OF BUTON,
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUTON REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER.I.30 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI NUMBER: 6/30/2021 - 19­

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY
NUMBER 6 OF 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

The State has the obligation to provide protection to citizens in accordance with the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. That women and children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence and therefore need to receive protection. Violence against Women and Children constitutes a violation of human rights and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.

Furthermore, violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child. The existence of Women and Children Victims of Violence has not yet received adequate services so that minimum services for victims of violence are required.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Buton Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence, particularly in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and children victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.
- 20­

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "counseling" is the provision of assistance by an expert or a person who is trained in such a way that the psychological understanding and capacity of the victim increases in solving the problems faced.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "medico-legal" is an examination conducted by a doctor for the purposes of investigation.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
-2 2 ­

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently explained.
Article 41
Sufficiently explained.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUTON REGENCY NUMBER, 5