REGENT OF THE MENTAWAI ISLANDS
PROVINCE OF WEST SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE MENTAWAI ISLANDS REGENCY NUMBER ... OF 2025

REGARDING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF MENTAWAI ISLANDS,

Considering:
a. that every woman and child has the right to receive protection of their human rights, to be free from various forms of violations, violence, threats, pressure and discrimination, and must receive opportunities, facilities and empowerment to achieve justice and welfare in their lives,
b. that in the framework of efforts to empower and protect women and children in Mentawai Islands Regency, there is a need for concrete action from the Regional Government through increasing the participation of the community and families broadly,
c. that in the framework of implementing the authority of the Regional Government as referred to in the Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number Year 2023 concerning the Implementation of Concurrent Government Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, it is necessary to have regulations regarding women's empowerment and child protection,
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection,

In view of:
2. Law Number Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 31, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143),
3. Law Number Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277):
4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of the ILO Convention Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835),
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606):
6. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279), as amended by Law Number Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856):
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4419):
8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4720),
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856),
10. Law Number Year 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871),
11. Law Number Year 2023 concerning the Criminal Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6842):
12. Presidential Regulation Number 18 Year 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 44),
13. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 Year 2021 concerning Community Participation in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2021 Number 1499),

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

MENTAWAI ISLANDS REGENCY
REGENT OF MENTAWAI ISLANDS
DECIDES:
To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article
In this Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Mentawai Islands Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Mentawai Islands Regency.
4. Regional Governance is the administration of government affairs by the regional government and DPRD according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
5. Regent is the Regent of Mentawai Islands.
6. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin, and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
7. Village Government is the Village Head or called by another name assisted by village apparatus as elements of Village Government administration.
8. Agency is a Regional Apparatus that administers Regional Government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
9. Regional Apparatus is the organization of regional apparatus within the Regional Government.
10. Regional Technical Implementation Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD is an organization that carries out operational technical activities and/or certain supporting technical activities at the Agency.
11. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is the Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection of Mentawai Islands Regency.
12. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that women can regulate themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and actively participate in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
13. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
14. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including children still in the womb.
15. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
16. Gender Equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings, to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural activities, national defense and security, and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
17. Gender Mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies and programs.
18. Discrimination is treatment that differentiates a person based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture, language, physical and/or mental condition.
19. Intimidation is any action, speech or other verbal behavior intended to endanger or threaten safety, freedom, peace or other violations of rights, whether physically or mentally.
20. Exploitation is an action to exploit, utilize, or extort with the aim of obtaining benefits for personal, family or group interests.
21. Human trafficking is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring, or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits even though obtaining consent from the person holding control over another person, for the purpose of exploiting that person.
22. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife or husband and wife and child or father and child or mother and child or blood family in a straight line up or down to the second degree.
23. Person with Disability is every person who experiences physical, intellectual, mental, and/or sensory limitations for a long period of time who in interacting with the environment may experience obstacles and difficulties to participate fully and effectively with other citizens based on equal rights.
24. Street children are children whose lives are irregular by spending most of their time outside the home to earn a living on the streets or in public places.
25. Children in conflict with the law are children who have reached the age of 12 (twelve) years but have not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years and are not married who are suspected, accused, charged, or sentenced to punishment for committing a criminal act and who become victims of a criminal act or who see and/or hear directly the occurrence of a criminal act.
26. Special Protection is protection provided to women and children who are in emergency situations, who are isolated, economically and/or sexually exploited who are trafficked, become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances and other addictive substances, victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking (trafficking), physical or mental violence, persons with disabilities or victims of neglect.
27. Handling is action that includes identification, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of children who become victims of violence, abuse, exploitation, and or neglect.
28. Public Participation Forum for Women and Child Welfare hereinafter referred to as Forum Puspa is a forum formed to increase community participation in the welfare of women and Children.
29. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter referred to as KLA is a regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and capability and resources of government, community, business world that is planned, sustainable in policies, programs, activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.

Article
The Regulation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is based on:
a. respect for human rights,
b. non-discrimination,
c. justice and Gender Equality,
d. best interests of women and children,
e. victim protection, and
f. togetherness.

Article
The objectives of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection are:
a. to improve the quality of life of women, children, and Family quality,
b. to increase the institutional capacity of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region, including the development of Gender and Child data systems, and
c. to provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including Special Protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. implementation of Child Protection;
c. protection services for women victims of violence and Special Protection for Children, improving Family quality, strengthening and improving institutions, cooperation, community participation, guidance and supervision, sanctions, and closing provisions.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article (1) Women's Empowerment is implemented through the implementation of women's rights and obligations, fulfillment of women's rights, and PUG. (2) Fulfillment of rights, protection and PUG as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by Families, communities, business actors, Village Government, and Regional Government.
Article Women's Empowerment is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings in order to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy,
b. social culture,
c. politics, and
d. law.
Article Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article letter is implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training,
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups,
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups,
d. facilitation and capital assistance, and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.
Article Women's Empowerment in the social cultural field as referred to in Article letter is implemented through:
a.
b.
c.
d. improvement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of education in stages according to potential to improve social status, improvement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts primarily in the field of reproductive health, improvement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration, and facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.
Article Women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article letter includes: (1)
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels,
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office,
c. participation in general elections, and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions. Women's Empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with (2) the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 10
Empowerment of Women in the field of law as referred to in Article ... letter ... includes:
(1)
  a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
  b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Empowerment of Women in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One Rights and Obligations of Women
Article 11
Every woman has the right to:
a. obtain respect for her worth and dignity as a human being,
b. obtain decent work in accordance with her worth, dignity and capability,
c. obtain special rights in relation to her reproductive function personally and/or in the workplace,
d. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence, and neglect,
e. obtain identity and marital status,
f. obtain education at every type and level of education,
g. obtain freedom in the public and political sphere,
h. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation, and
i. obtain protection from acts of Discrimination.

Article 12
(1) Every woman has the obligation to:
a. uphold religious values and customary values;
b. maintain morals, honor, decency, ethics, and behavior in family and community life; and
c. mutually respect, mutually love and help each other with all family members and relatives.
(2) Every woman in a marriage bond is obligated to carry out obligations as a wife and/or mother, care for and educate Children together with her husband in accordance with religious norms, customs, and laws and regulations.

Part Two Fulfillment of Women's Rights
Article 13
The fulfillment of women's rights is the obligation and responsibility of:
a. every person,
b. family,
c. community organizations,
d. business actors,
e. Village Government; and
f. Regional Government.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Every Person in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 14
Every person in the fulfillment of women's rights has the obligations and responsibilities:
a. not to smoke in work spaces where there are female workers who are pregnant or breastfeeding,
b. to maintain the honor and dignity of women in accordance with religious norms and customs,
c. to prevent the occurrence of discriminatory acts, exploitation, and intimidation against women,
d. to report to the authorities if aware of any violations of women's rights, and
e. to prevent the occurrence of violations of women's rights.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Family Members in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 15
(1) Every family member in the fulfillment of women's rights has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. prevent the occurrence of domestic violence,
b. prevent the occurrence of divorce, and
c. provide opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural matters.
(2) The husband as head of the family together with the wife is responsible for guiding every family member in the fulfillment of women's rights as referred to in paragraph (1).
Paragraph on Obligations and Responsibilities of Community Organizations in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 16
(1) Every community organization in the fulfillment of women's rights has the obligations and responsibilities to: a. accommodate women's representation in management, b. have programs in the field of Women's Empowerment, and c. participate in preventing violations of the fulfillment of women's rights.
(2) Every community organization that does not fulfill its obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) shall not be provided with services for processing a certificate of registration from the Regional Government.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Business Actors in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 17
(1) Every business actor, in fulfilling women's rights in general, has the obligations and responsibilities:
   a. to protect female workers from threats of violence, discrimination, harassment, and intimidation;
   b. to provide job vacancies for women;
   c. to provide opportunities for women to be employed according to the type of work that can be performed by women;
   d. to include all employees as participants in national health insurance and employment insurance in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
   e. to comply with all applicable rules in fulfilling women's rights; and
   f. to provide a lactation room.
(2) In addition to the obligations and responsibilities of business actors in general as referred to in paragraph (1), specifically:
   a. every owner/manager of a business in the field of industry and trade has the obligations and responsibilities:
      1) not to assign female employees who are pregnant or breastfeeding to work at night;
      2) to provide a lactation room; and
      3) to designate certain workplaces/work rooms as smoke-free zones.
   b. every manager/owner of a business in the field of hotels, lodging, homestays, guesthouses, resorts, tourist cottages, and other similar accommodation is prohibited from:
      1) allowing women to stay in one room with men, unless they have a husband-and-wife relationship or are biological children;
      2) allowing a man to visit the room of a female guest/occupant, unless they have a family relationship;
      3) allowing a woman to visit the room of a male guest/occupant, unless they have a family relationship; and
      4) providing massage and spa services without permission from the Regional Government.
   c. every owner/manager of entertainment and recreation venues is prohibited from providing a place for the practice of prostitution or potentially leading to prostitution.
(3) Every business actor/owner/manager who does not fulfill the obligations and prohibitions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(4) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of: verbal warning, written warning, administrative fine, temporary closure of business activities, or revocation of business license which is the authority of the Regional Government. The administrative fine as referred to in paragraph (4) letter c is at most Rp50,000,000,- (fifty million (S) rupiah).

Article 18
The procedure for imposing administrative sanctions as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (4) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Village Government in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 19
(1) The Village Government in fulfilling women's rights has the obligations and responsibilities to:
a. formulate policies in the field of women's empowerment at the Village level,
b. facilitate the establishment of women's organizations at the Village level,
c. provide budget to support empowerment activities for dasawisma groups and women's groups at the Village level,
d. compile profile data of women at the Village level,
e. implement the implementation of women-friendly and Child-caring Villages in the programs and activities of the village revenue and expenditure budget,
f. increase women's representation in the structure of Village apparatus, membership of the Village Consultative Body, and management of Village customary institutions,
g. increase women entrepreneurs in the Village,
h. increase women's involvement in the management of village revenue and expenditure budget, and
i. make efforts to fulfill women's rights.
(2) In the event that the village government does not fulfill the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, the Regional Government may postpone the distribution or reduce the allocation of village funds.
(3) The procedures and percentage amount of budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) as well as the postponement of distribution or reduction of village fund allocation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20
(1) The Village Government conducts guidance and supervision of the fulfillment of women's rights.
(2) The guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in the form of socialization, counseling and monitoring.
(3) The procedures for guidance, supervision and monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by a Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph on the Obligations and Responsibilities of the Regional Government in the Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 21
The Regional Government in efforts for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection has the obligations and responsibilities:
a. to formulate short-term, medium-term, and long-term strategic plans for women's protection:
b. to provide legal aid facilities in the form of advocacy and assistance for victims and or families of victims of violence against women,
c. to encourage the responsibility of all stakeholders to fulfill obligations and responsibilities in the protection of women,
d. to ensure that every program and activity/sub-activity involving the community includes targets for women's empowerment,
e. to provide budget for the family welfare empowerment mobilization team and women's organizations at the Regional level in accordance with statutory provisions,
f. to facilitate the provision of shelter homes for families of mothers giving birth,
g. to facilitate the establishment of women's organizations at the Regional level:
h. to provide shelter facilities for victims of violence:
i. to provide special rooms for breastfeeding women in every office owned by the Regional Government, and
j. to coordinate the implementation of the fulfillment of women's rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Article 22
(1) In carrying out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 21, the Regent establishes an integrated team.
(2) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of relevant Regional Government Agencies by involving vertical agencies in the Region, religious leaders, community leaders, the business sector, and members of the press.
(3) The establishment, duties, functions and working procedures of the integrated team as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Gender Mainstreaming

Article 23
(1) The Regional Government guarantees the quality of life of women by institutionalizing PUG in every implementation of government in the Region.
(2) The institutionalization of PUG in every implementation of government in the Region as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be the responsibility of the Regent.

Article 24
The institutionalization of PUG as referred to in Article 23 is implemented in the form of program policies and activities/sub-activities based on the duties and functions of Regional Apparatus.

Article 25
Further provisions regarding the institutionalization of PUG as referred to in Article 23 and Article 24 shall be regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY
Article 26
(1) Child Protection is implemented through the administration of the fulfillment of rights and Child Protection and Special Protection for Children.
(2) The Regional Government is responsible for the administration and coordination of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part One
Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency

Article 27
Efforts to fulfill the rights of Children are organized through KLA (1) based on the principles of Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. (2) KLA efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented based on the principles of: a. non-discrimination; b. the best interests of the Child,
c. the right to life, survival, and development of the Child, d. respect for the views of the Child, and e. good governance.
(3) The implementation of KLA as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with statutory provisions.

Second Part
Rights, Obligations, and Special Protection of Children

Article 28
Every Child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop, and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination;
b. obtain a name as personal identity and citizenship status;
c. worship according to their religion, think, and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under the guidance of parents or guardians;
d. know their parents, be raised, and be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules necessitating separation for the best interests of the Child;
e. have their growth and development guaranteed, not be neglected, by being cared for or appointed as a foster child or adopted as an adopted child by others;
f. obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
g. obtain education and teaching in the context of personal development and the Child's level of intelligence in accordance with the Child's interests and talents;
h. receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and Violence committed by educators, educational personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties;
i. obtain special education and obtain extraordinary education;
1. special education for Children with Disabilities;
k. obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards for Children with disabilities; express and have their opinions heard; receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with the values of decency and propriety; rest and utilize leisure time; associate with Children of the same age; play, recreate, and create in accordance with their interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development; receive protection from discriminatory treatment;
m. receive protection from exploitation both economic and sexual, neglect, cruelty, Violence, and abuse, injustice, misuse in political activities, and sexual crimes;
n. receive protection from involvement in armed conflict, social unrest, and events containing elements of violence and warfare; obtain protection from being targets of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhumane punishment; meet directly and maintain personal relations regularly with both parents in cases where the Child is cared for not by their parents; receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both parents in accordance with the Child's abilities, talents, and interests; obtain financial support for living from both parents; obtain freedom in accordance with legal rules; in cases of arrest, detention, or criminal imprisonment of a Child carried out as a last resort, and for Children deprived of their freedom receive humane treatment and placement of the Child separated from adults; obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of legal proceedings; self-defense and justice before an objective and impartial Children's court in closed sessions to the public.

Article 29
Every Child is obligated to: respect parents, guardians, and teachers, love Family, society, and care for friends, love the homeland, nation, and state, perform worship in accordance with the teachings of religion and their beliefs, and have ethics and noble character in accordance with religious values and customs.
e.

Article 30
Every Child has the right to receive Special Protection.
(1) Children who require Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. Children who are victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances;
f. Children who are victims of pornography;
g. Children with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immuno deficiency syndrome (AIDS);
h. Children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. Children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. Children who are victims of sexual crimes;
k. Children who are victims of terrorist networks;
l. Children with Disabilities;
m. Children who are victims of abuse and neglect;
n. Children with deviant social behavior; and
o. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(3) The forms of Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three Fulfillment of Rights and Protection of Children
Article 31
The fulfillment of rights and protection of children is the obligation and responsibility of:
a. every person,
b. family,
c. community organizations,
d. business actors, the Village Government, and
e. the Regional Government.
f. Paragraph on the Obligations and Responsibilities of Every Person in the Fulfillment of Rights and Protection of Children

Article 32
Every person in fulfilling the rights and Protection of Children has the obligation and responsibility:
a. not to smoke near or at Children's play areas,
b. to prevent the occurrence of all forms of violence against Children,
c. not to employ Children as domestic helpers,
d. not to order children to buy cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, and other addictive substances, and
e. to prevent the occurrence of exploitation of Children.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Families in Fulfilling the Rights and Protection of Children

Article 33
Every adult in the family, in fulfilling the rights and protection of children, has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence against children in the family;
b. prevent the occurrence of exploitation of children;
c. prevent attempts to take children out of the home/Region for any reason without the permission of the parents; and
d. report to the authorities if aware of any attempt resulting in the non-fulfillment of children's rights and protection in the family.

Article 34
In addition to the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 33, every parent of a Child in the fulfillment of the rights and Protection of the Child has the obligations and responsibilities:
a. to fulfill the decent living needs of the Child;
b. to fulfill the decent educational needs for the Child; and
c. not to employ the Child for other parties.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Community Organizations in the Fulfillment of Rights and Protection of Children

Article 35
Every community organization in the fulfillment of rights and Child Protection has the obligations and (1) responsibilities:
a. to have an organizational program in the field of Child Protection; and
b. to participate in providing facilities for Children who require Special Protection.
Every community organization that does not fulfill its obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) letters a and b shall not be provided with services for the processing of a certificate of registration from the Regional Government.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Business Actors in the Fulfillment of Rights and Child Protection

Article 36
(1) Every business actor in the fulfillment of rights and Child Protection in general has the obligations and responsibilities:
a. not to employ children as employees/workers,
b. to comply with all applicable regulations in the fulfillment of rights and Child Protection.
(2) In addition to the obligations and responsibilities of business actors in general as referred to in paragraph (1), specifically:
a. every owner/manager of business in the field of industry and trade has the obligations and responsibilities:
1) not to assign female employees who are pregnant or breastfeeding to work at night, and
2) to provide a special room for breastfeeding mothers.
b. every manager/owner of business in the field of hotels, lodging, homestays, guesthouses, resorts, tourist cottages, boarding houses, and other similar accommodation is prohibited from allowing Children to stay overnight without being accompanied by Parents or guardians, except with the permission of parents or guardians,
c. every owner/manager of shopping centers, minimarkets, and other similar shopping places is prohibited from:
1) serving Children to purchase cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, and contraceptives,
2) allowing children to visit during school hours.
d. every owner/manager of entertainment venues is prohibited from:
1) allowing children to visit during school hours, except when accompanied by teachers/educators, and
2) allowing Children to visit after 20.00 WIB without being accompanied by parents/guardians.
(3) Every business actor/owner/manager who does not fulfill the obligations and prohibitions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(4) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of: verbal warning, written warning, administrative fine, temporary closure of business activities, or revocation of business license which is the authority of the Regional Government.
(5) Administrative fine as referred to in paragraph (4) is at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(6) The procedure for imposing administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be further regulated by the Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Village Government in the Fulfillment of Rights and Child Protection

Article 37
The Village Government in the fulfillment of rights and Child Protection has the obligations and responsibilities: (1)
a. formulating policies in the field of Child Protection,
b. facilitating the establishment of Child organizations at the village level,
c. providing budget to support activities for the fulfillment of rights and Protection of Child victims of violence and Children requiring Special Protection at the Village level,
d. compiling child profile data at the Village level,
e. implementing the implementation of Child-friendly Village in programs and activities of the village revenue and expenditure budget,
f. providing scholarship budget for education for underprivileged Children,
g. providing budget for Integrated Service Posts (Posyandu) at the Village level,
h. providing budget for Early Childhood Education management institutions,
i. preventing the occurrence of violence and exploitation of Children,
j. preventing attempts to take Children out of the Village/Region without parental permission and the knowledge of the Village Head, and
k. making efforts to fulfill the rights of Children requiring Special Protection.
(2) In the event that the Village Government does not fulfill the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, letter f, letter g, and letter h, the Regional Government may postpone the distribution or reduce the allocation of village funds.
(3) The procedures and percentage amounts of budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, letter f, letter g, and letter h as well as the postponement of distribution or reduction of village fund allocation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 38
(1) The Village Government conducts guidance and supervision of the fulfillment of children's rights and child protection. (2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in the form of socialization, counseling and monitoring.
(3) The procedures for guidance, supervision and monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by a Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government in the Fulfillment of Children's Rights and Child Protection

Article 39
The Regional Government, in efforts to fulfill the rights and Protection of Children, has the following obligations and responsibilities:

a. to formulate short-, medium-, and long-term strategic plans for the Protection of Children;

b. to provide legal aid facilities in the form of advocacy and assistance for victims and/or the families of victims of violence against Children;

c. to encourage the responsibility of all stakeholders to fulfill their obligations and responsibilities in fulfilling the rights and Protection of Children;

d. to provide a budget for programs for the fulfillment of rights and Protection of Children at the Regional level;

e. to facilitate the establishment of children's organizations at the Regional level;

f. to provide shelter facilities for child victims of violence; and

g. to coordinate the implementation of the fulfillment of rights and Protection of Children in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40
(1) In carrying out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 39, the Regent shall form an integrated team. (2) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of relevant Regional Apparatus by involving vertical agencies in the Region, religious leaders, community leaders, the business sector, and members of the press.
(3) The establishment, duties, functions and working procedures of the integrated team as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four Regional Child Forum
Article 41
(1) To implement KLA, membership of the Regional Child Forum consists of children from cross-communities domiciled in the Region. (2) The Regional Government establishes the Regional Child Forum. (3) Guidance of the Child Forum is conducted by the KLA Task Force. (4) Provisions regarding the establishment of the Regional level Child Forum are stipulated by Regent's Decree. (5) Establishment of the Sub-district level Child Forum is stipulated by the Sub-district Head.
(6) Establishment of the Village level Child Forum is stipulated by the Village Head.

Article 42
The Regional Children's Forum has the function as a forum for Children's participation in accommodating the aspirations, voices, opinions, desires, and needs of Children regarding the fulfillment of Children's Rights and Special Protection of Children in the regional development process.

Article 43
(1) The Children's Forum has the following roles:
   a. to serve as pioneers and reporters; and
   b. Children's participation in development planning.
(2) The implementation of the role as pioneers and reporters through Children's Participation in development planning as referred to in paragraph (1) shall take the form of issues related to the fulfillment of Children's Rights and Special Protection for Children.
(3) The Children's Forum has organizational elements consisting of:
   a. advisor,
   b. companion,
   c. facilitator,
   d. management, and
   e. members.

Article 44
Provisions regarding the Regional Children's Forum shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
SERVICES FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE AND CHILD PROTECTION

Article 45
The Regional Government is responsible for providing (1) protection services for women victims of violence and Special Protection for Children.
Protection services for women victims of violence and (2) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) are located at the UPTD PPA.
The provision of services as referred to in paragraph (1) (3) includes:
a. follow-up referral services for women victims of violence requiring coordination at the Regional level; and
b. Special Protection for Children services requiring coordination at the Regional level.
The establishment of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) is stipulated by Regent Regulation in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 46
Services for women victims of violence (1) as referred to in Article 45 paragraph (3) letter [letter not specified in source text] constitute women who are in the condition of: women victims of the criminal act of human trafficking, women in conflict-prone and disaster areas, women workers, elderly women, women with Disabilities, women heads of Households, women victims of sexual exploitation, and/or women from other vulnerable groups.
Services for Children requiring Special Protection as referred to in Article 45 paragraph (3) letter [letter not specified in source text] constitute Children who are in conditions requiring Special Protection.
(2)

Article 47
Provision of services at UPTD PPA in the context of (1) Protection services for women victims of violence and for Children requiring Special Protection includes:
a. public complaints;
b. victim outreach;
c. case management;
d. temporary shelter;
e. mediation; and
f. victim assistance.
(2) UPTD PPA in providing services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with service standards that have been established by laws and regulations.

Article 48
(1) In providing Protection services to women victims of violence and for Children requiring Special Protection, UPTD PPA is equipped with service facilities and infrastructure in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) In addition to the facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (1), UPTD PPA is equipped with human resources who will provide services for case handling.

Article 49
UPTD PPA in providing protection services to women victims of violence and for Children in Need of Special Protection coordinates with: a. hospitals, community health centers and other health service facilities,
b. correctional centers,
c. sector police,
d. resort police,
e. regional police,
f. district prosecutor's office,
g. high prosecutor's office,
h. district courts and high courts,
i. service centers for placement and protection of Indonesian workers,
j. regional office of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, regional office of the Ministry of Law, special correctional institutions for Children, and/or
m. social welfare organizing institutions.

Article 50
In addition to the coordination as referred to in Article 49, UPTD PPA may coordinate with the Village Government and the Provincial Government of West Sumatra.

Article 51
(1) In the event that case handling has been completed by the UPTD PPA, the UPTD PPA shall report to the Dinas for follow-up after case handling. (2) Follow-up after case handling as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of providing services for Families in order to realize Gender Equality and the rights of Children.

CHAPTER VI
IMPROVEMENT OF FAMILY QUALITY
Article 52
(1) In implementing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region, the Regional Government is responsible for improving the quality of Families.
(2) The improvement of Family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
   a. integrate policies, programs, and development activities whose targets are directed toward improving Family quality;
   b. strengthen and develop institutions providing Family quality improvement services; and
   c. provide standardized Family quality improvement services.
(3) The improvement of Family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented to enhance the role of Families in developing self-potential so as to be more capable of being independent and creating/producing work.
(4) The Regent may assign the Village Head for the improvement of Family quality in the development of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 53
(1) The improvement of Family quality is implemented by taking into account:
a. Gender Equality in carrying out family functions;
b. protection; and
c. the best interests of the Child.
(2) Gender Equality in carrying out Family functions as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes religious functions, socio-cultural functions, affection functions, protection functions, reproduction functions, socialization and education functions, economic functions, and environmental development functions.

Article 54
The Regent conducts monitoring, evaluation, and reporting on the improvement of Family quality in the development of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 55
The scope of Family Quality Improvement includes: a. planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of Family Quality Improvement that is responsive to Gender and Children's Rights in policies, programs, and activities targeted at Families; b. strengthening and development of institutional service providers for family quality improvement in realizing Gender Equality and Children's Rights; and c. standardization of institutional service providers for family quality improvement in realizing Gender Equality and Children's Rights.

Article 56
(1) The Regent as well as the Village Head are responsible for the implementation of improving the quality of Families in realizing Gender Equality and Children's rights, according to their respective levels and authorities.
(2) The improvement of Family quality as referred to in (2) in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. formulation of technical policies for improving Family quality,
b. coordination of Family quality improvement among regional apparatus,
c. preparation of regional action plans for achieving the Family quality index in Regional Government down to Villages by involving the community,
d. integration of regional action plans into planning and budgeting documents,
e. coordination of the implementation of regional action plans,
f. management of Family quality index data for program/activity intervention in Regional Government, and
g. monitoring, evaluation, and reporting.

Article 57
In improving the quality of Families as referred to in Article 56, the Regional Government (1) provides services for Families to realize Gender Equality and Children's Rights with a working area across Villages.
The provision of Family quality improvement services (2) as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through: a. socialization of standardization guidelines for Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, b. advocacy for the implementation of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, c. coordination of standardization guidelines for Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, d. implementation of standardization guidelines for Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, e. assistance in the implementation of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region;
f. certification of human resources at Family quality improvement service provider institutions based on guidelines for competency certification of human resources at Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region;
g. strengthening and development of standardized Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, h. conducting technical guidance and supervision of the implementation of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region,
i. assistance and guidance in the implementation of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region,
j. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region, and
k. development/replication of standardization of Family quality improvement service provider institutions in the Region. (3) The provision of services as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Agency.

Article 58
(1) The provision of services for Families in realizing Gender Equality and Children's Rights as referred to in Article 57 is provided through:
a. provision of entrepreneurship training in order to improve the economy,
b. provision of legal counseling to increase legal awareness;
c. provision of opportunities to participate in development activities,
d. provision of assistance for women, Children and Families, and/or
e. enhancement of the Family's role in undertaking efforts related to child marriage in accordance with the age stipulated in the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) The Agency may coordinate with related Regional Apparatus in the provision of services for Families in realizing Gender Equality and Children's Rights as referred to in paragraph (1).
(3) In addition to related Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (2), the Agency may coordinate with other agencies and/or institutions.

Article 59
(1) Community participation in improving the quality of Families is carried out in the form of partnerships, among others, through:
a. institutional strengthening for improving the quality of Families in realizing Gender Equality and the rights of Children;
b. strengthening and developing standardized service provider institutions for improving the quality of Families;
c. providing information through socialization and advocacy regarding improving the quality of Families;
d. playing an active role in promoting the importance of improving the quality of Families as the foundation of community and state strength; and/or
e. actively participating in supporting the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of improving the quality of Families in the Region.
(2) In addition to the forms of partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), the community also encourages the improvement of Families in realizing Gender Equality and the rights of Children, among others, through:
a. public dialogue;
b. public consultation;
c. deliberation;
d. conveying aspirations;
e. supervision;
f. working visits;
g. socialization and advocacy;
h. seminars and workshops;
i. public hearings or discussions; and/or
j. studies on women's and Children's issues.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented with the following mechanisms:
a. socialization of guidelines for implementing policies on improving the quality of Families to community institutions;
b. establishment and development of coordination forums for improving the quality of Families together with the government or other communities;
c. participating in the implementation of improving the quality of Families; and/or
d. monitoring and evaluation.

Article 60
The improvement of Family quality as well as monitoring, evaluation and reporting of Family quality improvement shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPMENT
Article 61
(1) Regional Governments are responsible for conducting strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection services in the Region.
(2) In conducting strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Governments shall provide budget in accordance with the Region's financial capacity.

Article 62
(1) Service provider institutions for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection are community organizations with legal entity status and/or possess a registration certificate from the Regent for those without legal entity status.
(2) Service provider institutions for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are Women's Empowerment and Child Protection institutions at the Regional level and/or with a working area coverage across Villages.

Article 63
Strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection services as referred to in Article 61 includes: a. management strengthening, b. provision of data and information, c. partnership development,
d. support for expertise, programs, and assistance, e. strengthening of leadership and cadre development,
f. provision of awards, and/or
g. facilitation of research and development.

Article 64
Further provisions regarding the strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection services shall be regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
GENDER AND CHILD DATA
Article 65
(1) Regional Government organizes Gender and Child data in the context of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) In conducting the organization of Gender and Child data system as referred to in paragraph (1), the Region may establish or develop a disaggregated data forum/working group.
(3) The disaggregated data forum/working group as referred to in paragraph (2), has the following tasks:
 a. coordinating data management units, research units, planning units, and reporting units both internally and externally in the organization of Gender and Child data system,
 b. encouraging implementing units/work units to collect and utilize disaggregated data and gender and child analysis in preparing planning, implementation, evaluation and reporting of Gender responsive and Child sensitive development activities,
 c. encouraging data management units, research units, and reporting units to document and disseminate disaggregated data into publications and database systems that are updated regularly,
 d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the organization of gender and child data system at least (one) time in (one) year, and
 e. reporting the results of the implementation of the organization of Gender and Child data system to the Regent.

Article 66
(1) In order to accelerate the realization of the implementation of Gender data and Child data, as well as for ease of communication, a system mechanism for the implementation of Gender and Child data is required. (2) The system mechanism for the implementation of Gender and Child data as referred to in paragraph (1) namely:
a. indicators and types of data needed,
b. data collectors,
c. data collection methods and data flow,
d. data collection period, and
e. beneficiaries.

Article 67
Funding for the implementation of the Gender and Child data system is sourced from the state revenue and expenditure budget, the provincial regional revenue and expenditure budget and the Regional revenue and expenditure budget as well as other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 68
The procedures for organizing gender and child data as referred to in Article 65 through Article 67 shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX COOPERATION
Article 69
(1) In the implementation of Protection of Women and Children, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with:
a. other regional governments,
b. commissions/agencies/government institutions in the field of protection of women and children, and the police,
d. advocates,
e. health workers,
f. state prosecutor's office,
g. district court,
h. correctional counselors of correctional centers,
i. social workers,
j. volunteer assistants,
k. spiritual counselors,
l. non-governmental organizations engaged in the field of protection of women and children, and
m. the community.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. socialization,
b. provision of legal aid,
c. health services,
d. victim assistance,
e. counseling,
f. social rehabilitation,
g. spiritual guidance,
h. repatriation and social reintegration, and
i. family welfare consultation institutions.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 70
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.
Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by:
a. individual Indonesian citizens,
b. community groups; and/or
c. community organizations.

Article 71
Public participation as referred to in (1)

Article 70 is carried out in:
a. providing input at the stage of formulation of laws and regulations,
b. planning and budgeting,
c. implementation, and
d. monitoring and evaluation,
regarding Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection carried out by the Regional Government and the Village Government.

Community participation in providing input at (2) the stage of formulation of laws and regulations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out by providing input regarding the substance of Gender Equality, protection of women’s rights, Fulfillment of Children’s rights, and Special Protection of Children so that:
a. in accordance with the needs of women and Children,
b. non-discriminatory towards women and Children,
c. providing convenience and special treatment towards women and Children.

Community participation in planning and (3) budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is carried out by integrating a Gender perspective and Children’s rights into community programs and activities.

Community participation in implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is carried out by conducting partnerships with the Regional Government carried out in the form of: (4)
a. strengthening the institutionalization of Women’s Empowerment and the institutionalization of Child Protection,
b. strengthening or increasing the capacity of women in access, participation, control, and benefits in all fields of development through technical guidance and supervision,
c. mutually providing facilitation support or assistance (specific needs of women and special needs of Children) in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations,
d. providing information through socialization and advocacy regarding women’s rights and Children’s rights as well as laws and regulations concerning women and Children,
e. preventing the occurrence of violence and human rights violations against women and Children including in conflict and disaster situations,
f. reporting if violence occurs against women and Children,
g. assisting women victims of violence so that they do not experience stigma and exclusion in their environment,
h. supporting the availability of facilities and infrastructure in creating a conducive atmosphere for the growth and participation of Children,
i. playing an active role in eliminating negative labeling of Children, and
j. supporting the development of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection developed in Regions and Villages including women-friendly and child-caring Villages.

Community participation in monitoring and evaluation (5) as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is carried out by conducting studies or reviews of policies, programs, and implementation of activities in the field of Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection.

Article 72
(1) Community participation in the implementation of the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as referred to in Article 71 is facilitated by the Agency by establishing a Regional level Puspa Forum. 
(2) The membership composition of the Puspa Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is determined by the Regent for a period of three (3) years.

Article 73
(1) The membership of the Regional level Puspa Forum as referred to in Article 72 consists of leadership elements and member elements.
(2) The leadership elements as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. chairperson,
b. vice chairperson,
c. secretary,
d. treasurer,
e. coordinating chairperson for the Women's Empowerment sector, and
f. coordinating chairperson for the Child Protection sector.
The leadership elements as referred to in paragraph (2) are appointed and dismissed by the Regent upon proposal from the chairperson of the Regional level Puspa Forum.
(3) The member elements as referred to in paragraph (1) are appointed and dismissed by the chairperson of the Regional level Puspa Forum.
(4) The Head of Service coordinates the Regional level Puspa Forum.

Article 74
The Regional-level Puspa Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) of Article 73 has the duty to coordinate and synergize community participation in the implementation of the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection at the Regional level.

In carrying out the coordinating duty as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional-level Puspa Forum shall conduct:
 a. communication;
 b. planning of time and activity schedule;
 c. flexibility in changes; and
 d. control.

In carrying out the synergizing duty as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional-level Puspa Forum shall conduct:
 a. alignment of vision, mission, and objectives;
 b. understanding of strengths and talents of team members;
 c. similarity of concepts and ways of thinking;
 d. good planning;
 e. clear division of work and roles; and
 f. efforts to build honest and mutually open communication.

In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional-level Puspa Forum shall perform the functions of:
 a. formulation of strategies and action plans of the Regional-level Puspa Forum;
 b. providing input for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities related to Gender Equality, protection of women's rights, fulfillment of Children's rights, and Special Protection for Children;
 c. implementing advocacy, socialization, training, and cooperation;
 d. conducting assistance in the development of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in Regions and Villages, including women-friendly and child-caring Villages;
 e. monitoring the progress of implementation of community participation for the welfare of women and Children; and
 f. implementing evaluation and reporting.

Article 75
The Regional-level Puspa Forum, in carrying out the task of coordinating as referred to in Article 74 paragraph (1), is conducted in the form of:
a. Regional-level coordination,
b. sectoral coordination, and
c. special coordination.
Regional-level coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is implemented at least (one) time in (one) year or at any time if necessary to strengthen communication, cooperation, and discuss the implementation of the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection at the Regional level.
Sectoral coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is implemented periodically at least (one) time in (four) months or at any time if necessary to discuss program activities that are its duties.
Special coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is implemented in the event it is necessary to resolve special problems that require quick and precise solutions related to the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Article 76
The Regional Puspa Forum conducts evaluation and reporting annually.
(1) The annual evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted one time in one year or at any time when necessary.
(2) The annual reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented one time in one year or at any time when necessary.
(3) In addition to the annual reporting as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional level Puspa Forum conducts periodic reporting before the end of the forum membership term.
(4) The Regional level Puspa Forum reporting is submitted to the Regent with a copy to the Governor.

Article 77
The Regent as coordinator of the Regional level Puspa Forum conducts Guidance to the Regional level Puspa Forum and to the Village heads.
(1) Guidance by the Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) to the Regional level Puspa Forum is conducted by means of:
a. providing capacity building, institutional strengthening, and
b. providing direction, input, suggestions, and considerations for the smooth implementation of community participation in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) Guidance by the Regent to the Village heads as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted by means of:
a. providing capacity building to the Village Government for institutional strengthening of the Regional level Puspa Forum,
b. providing direction, input, suggestions, and considerations for the smooth implementation of community participation in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, and
c. encouraging the establishment and development of Puspa Forums in Villages.

Article 78
(1) Parents, religious leaders, customary leaders, youth leaders and customary law community units participate in realizing protection for women and Children by preventing the occurrence of violence against women and Children.
(2) Prevention of Violence against women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall take into account local wisdom and local culture.
(3) Prevention of violence against women and Children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be realized in the form of:
a. guiding Children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics, morals, and customs,
b. strengthening the function of houses of worship, the role of religious institutions or other religious associations,
c. supporting efforts to protect women and Children,
d. creating environmental conditions that provide a sense of security for women and Children,
e. fostering a sense of care for the Family and surrounding environment,
f. strengthening the role of customary institutions in conducting socialization regarding the rights of women and Children, and
g. supporting the Women's Protection and Child Protection programs implemented by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 79
The Regional Government through the Agency conducts guidance (1) on the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.
Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in the form of: (2)
a. socialization,
b. technical guidance and training,
c. provision and dissemination of information through print and/or electronic media, and/or
d. advocacy.

Article 80
The Regional Government through the Agency conducts supervision (1) of the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.
Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of: (2)
a. monitoring,
b. evaluation, and/or
c. reporting.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
Article 81
In addition to investigators from the Indonesian National Police, investigations of violations in this Regional Regulation are carried out by Civil Servant Investigators (PPNS) within the Regional Government.

Article 82
In carrying out investigative duties, Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in Article 81 have the authority to:
a. receive, seek, collect and examine information or reports concerning criminal offenses;
b. examine, seek and collect information regarding individuals or entities about the veracity of acts committed in connection with criminal offenses;
c. request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal offenses;
d. examine books, records and other documents concerning criminal offenses;
e. conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents, as well as carry out seizures of such evidence;
f. request the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out investigative duties for criminal offenses;
g. order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and examine the identity of persons and/or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. take fingerprints and photograph a person related to a criminal offense;
1. summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
k. terminate the investigation after receiving instruction from the POLRI investigator that there is insufficient evidence or the incident does not constitute a criminal offense and subsequently through the police investigator notify this matter to the public prosecutor, suspect or their family, and carry out other necessary actions for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal offenses according to law that can be accounted for.

CHAPTER XIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 83
(1) Every adult who is not a biological parent or a blood sibling who brings a child to an entertainment venue at the time of:

a. school hours without permission from a teacher/educator; or
b. nighttime after 8:00 PM WIB without permission from parents/guardian,

shall be subject to imprisonment for a maximum of 30 (thirty) days or a maximum fine of Rp2,000,000.00 (two million rupiah).
(2) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a violation.

Article 84
(1) Every man is prohibited from inviting a woman to a hotel, lodging, homestay, guesthouse, resort, tourist cottage, boarding house, or other similar accommodation with the purpose of sleeping together in the same (one) room, unless they have a husband-and-wife relationship or a biological parent-child relationship.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be subject to a maximum sentence of confinement for (three) months or a maximum fine of Rp10,000,000.00 (ten million rupiah).
(3) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a violation.

Article 85
(1) Every boarding house owner is obligated to determine the conditions for occupying the boarding house based on gender, male or female, or family. (2) Every person as a boarding house owner in establishing the conditions for boarding house occupants as referred to in paragraph (1) is prohibited from accepting prospective boarding house occupants of different genders or mixed between men and women in (one) boarding house building, except for families. (3) Every person who violates the provisions as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of (three) months or a maximum fine of Rp50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).
(4) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (3) constitutes a violation.

Article 86
The procedures for imposing criminal sanctions as referred to in Article 83 through Article 85 shall be further regulated by a Regent's Regulation with reference to the prevailing laws and regulations in the field of criminal law.

CHAPTER XIV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 87
All implementing regulations governing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection shall remain in force insofar as they are not contrary to the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 88
The Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 89
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Mentawai Islands Regency.
Enacted in Tua pejat on the date of (8 February 2025

MENTAWAI ISLANDS,
GGURAN SIMANJUNTAK
Enacted in Tua pejat on the date of February 15, 2025 "3. REGIONAL SECRETARY

AYAN
MENTAWAI ISLANDS REGENCY, Mp Naa

MARTINUS
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KEPULAUAN MENTAWAI REGENCY YEAR 2025 NUMBER: NOREG REGIONAL REGULATION OF KEPULAUAN MENTAWAI REGENCY WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE (1/5/2025)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE MENTAWAI ISLANDS REGENCY NUMBER ... OF 2025

ABOUT
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the authority of regional governments to regulate and manage their own governmental affairs directed towards accelerating the realization of public welfare through improved services, empowerment and community participation. The authority of Regional Governments is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.
The implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare while always paying attention to the interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, governmental affairs related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, and basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled. Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to human beings by nature, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or seized by anyone. In the context of upholding Human Rights (HAM) to guarantee justice for every individual, efforts are made to prevent all forms of unbalanced treatment or treatment deemed detrimental to other parties, whether between individuals, between groups of individuals, or between individuals and between government and society, including the process of marginalization of women which causes women to be vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in both domestic and public spheres.
On one side, women's empowerment efforts aim to eliminate all forms of discrimination and gender stereotypes, ensuring women have equal access to education, health, economic opportunities, and political participation. This is important to optimize the role of women as agents of change and significant contributors to regional progress. On the other side, child protection becomes an essential foundation to ensure every child grows and develops optimally, free from violence, exploitation, neglect, and discrimination, so that they can become quality and competitive future generations.
Women's empowerment and child protection are implemented in order to realize gender equality and justice. To implement these affairs, efforts are needed to increase the capacity of women's resources and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender-disaggregated data. This Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is a concrete manifestation of the commitment of the Regional Government of Mentawai Islands Regency in creating a just, equal, and prosperous society, where every individual, regardless of gender and age, can feel and enjoy their basic rights fully. This Perda is formed as a response to social realities that show that women and children, as vulnerable groups, still often face various challenges and obstacles in accessing their rights and actively participating in development.
With the existence of this Perda, it is expected that a strong legal framework will be created, a coordinated institutional system, as well as directed and sustainable programs in efforts to empower women and protect children throughout the Mentawai Islands Regency.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
II.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article:
Letter:
What is meant by respect for human rights is the principle that underlies efforts in carrying out the protection and empowerment of women and children based on respect, protection and advancement of human rights as stipulated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
Letter:
What is meant by non-discrimination is the principle that underlies the regulation and implementation of protection of women and children without differentiating treatment, actions or policies based on background, ethnicity, religion, race, class, ethnic group, culture, language, gender and physical and/or mental condition.
Letter:
What is meant by justice and gender equality is a condition where women and men enjoy equal status and have equal conditions to fully realize their human rights and potential for the integrity and continuity of the household proportionally.
Letter:
What is meant by the best interests of women and children is all efforts to realize protection that is directed towards the best possible efforts and services in accordance with existing capabilities and potential by considering the survival and development of women and children.
Letter:
What is meant by victim protection is the principle in regulating the protection of women and children aimed at protecting the rights and interests of victims who experience various forms of violence, discrimination, mistreatment, exploitation, neglect, trafficking and various other forms of criminal acts.
Letter:
What is meant by "Togetherness" is a principle that encourages the role of all stakeholders to jointly make efforts to protect women and children to realize common welfare.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article: Sufficiently clear.
Article 10: Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

Article 50
Sufficiently clear.

Article 51
Sufficiently clear.

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear.

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear.

Article 56
Sufficiently clear.

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear.

Article 59
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear.

Article 61
Sufficiently clear.

Article 62
Sufficiently clear.

Article 63
Sufficiently clear.

Article 64
Sufficiently clear.

Article 65
Sufficiently clear.

Article 66
Sufficiently clear.

Article 67
Sufficiently clear.

Article 68
Sufficiently clear.

Article 69
Sufficiently clear.

Article 70
Sufficiently clear.

Article 71
Sufficiently clear.

Article 72
Sufficiently clear.

Article 73
Sufficiently clear.

Article 74
Sufficiently clear.

Article 75
Sufficiently clear.

Article 76
Sufficiently clear.

Article 77
Sufficiently clear.

Article 78
Sufficiently clear.

Article 79
Sufficiently clear.

Article 80
Sufficiently clear.

Article 81
Sufficiently clear.

Article 82
Sufficiently clear.

Article 83
Sufficiently clear.

Article 84
Sufficiently clear.

Article 85
Sufficiently clear.

Article 86
Sufficiently clear.

Article 87
Sufficiently clear.

Article 88
Sufficiently clear.

Article 89
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MENTAWAI ISLANDS REGENCY NUMBER