COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION
OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2022
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF OGAN KOMERING ULU,

Considering : a. that every woman and child has the right to survival, growth, and proper development as well as the right to protection from violence and discrimination as mandated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that discriminatory treatment and violence against women and children will have an impact on the quality of human resources in the future;
c. that in order to realize the vision and mission of development in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, respect, protection, fulfillment, enforcement, and advancement of the rights of women and children, it is deemed necessary to establish policies that can guarantee the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions and Municipal Cities of South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
7. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
8. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Government Regulation Number 61 of 2014 concerning Reproductive Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 169, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5559);
11. Government Regulation Number 78 of 2021 concerning Special Protection for Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2021 Number 174, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6704);
12. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 927);
13. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 7 of 2013 concerning Guidelines for Increasing Women's Political Participation in Legislative Institutions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2013 Number 1482);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY
REGENT OF OGAN KOMERING ULU
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regency is Ogan Komering Ulu Regency.
2. Regency Government is the Government of Ogan Komering Ulu Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Ogan Komering Ulu.
4. Regional Apparatus hereinafter abbreviated as PD is the Regional Apparatus within the Government of Ogan Komering Ulu Regency.
5. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occurs as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
6. Gender Equality hereinafter abbreviated as KG is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
7. Gender Analysis is a process that is systematically constructed to identify and understand the division of labor or roles of men and women, access to and control over development resources, participation in the development process and the benefits they enjoy.
8. Gender Mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy constructed to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs and development activities in the region.
9. Gender responsive is a policy, program, activity, and budgeting that reduces differences, needs, experiences, and aspirations of men and women.
10. Gender Responsive Budget hereinafter abbreviated as ARG is a budget that is responsive to the needs of women and men with the aim of realizing gender equality and justice.
11. Women's empowerment is an effort by women to obtain access to and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that women can organize themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
12. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
13. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.
14. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
16. Violence is any unlawful act that results in suffering or suffering physically, sexually, mentally, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens and/or endangers life and body and degrades dignity.
17. Special Protection of Children is a form of protection received by children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
18. Children in Emergency Situations are Children who are in environmental situations that threaten and disrupt the life and livelihood of Children caused by natural, non-natural, and/or social factors.
19. Children in Conflict with the Law are Children who are in conflict with the law, Children who are victims of criminal acts, and Children who are witnesses to criminal acts.
20. Children from Minority and Isolated Groups are Children who are disadvantaged, in frontier areas, and in outermost areas in an environment with different cultures, traditions, ethnicities, races, religions from other children whose numbers are far fewer than other groups of Children.
21. Children Who Are Economically Exploited are Children who are victims of acts of prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of Children by other parties or other similar actions to obtain material benefits.
22. Children Who Are Sexually Exploited are Children who are exploited to obtain benefits through sexual organs or other body organs of Children, including but not limited to all prostitution and sexual abuse activities.
23. Children Who Are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substances Abuse are Children who are persuaded, deceived, tricked, forced, and/or threatened to use narcotics, alcohol, psychotropics, and other addictive substances.
24. Children Who Are Victims of Pornography are Children who experience trauma or suffering as a result of pornography crimes.
25. Human Immunodeficiency Virus hereinafter abbreviated as HIV is a virus that attacks the immune system and if not treated can reduce the human immune system until the condition of Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome occurs.
26. Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome hereinafter abbreviated as AIDS is a collection of symptoms of reduced self-defense ability caused by the entry of the HIV virus into a person's body.
27. Children with HIV and AIDS are Children who are infected with HIV and/or AIDS either transmitted from parents or from other risk factors.
28. Kidnapped Children are Children who are taken by someone unlawfully with the intention of placing the Child under their power or the power of others or to place the Child in a helpless state.
29. Child Victims of Sale are Children who are transferred by a person or group of people to another party for compensation or other reasons.
30. Child Victims of Trafficking are Children who experience psychological, mental, physical, sexual, economic, and/or social suffering resulting from acts of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt with threats of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over the other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the Child being exploited.
31. Child Victims of Physical Violence are Children who experience violence that causes pain, illness, or serious injury.
32. Child Victims of Psychological Violence are Children who experience fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering.
33. Child Victims of Sexual Crimes are Children who experience forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural and/or unwanted manner, and forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
34. Child Victims of Terrorism Networks are Children who experience physical, mental suffering, and/or economic loss caused by acts of terrorism either as child victims, child perpetrators, children of perpetrators, and child witnesses.
35. Children with Disabilities are Children who experience physical, intellectual, mental, and/or sensory limitations for a long period of time who in interacting with the environment may experience obstacles and difficulties to participate fully and effectively based on equal rights.
36. Child Victims of Maltreatment are Children who are threatened physically and non-physically due to acts of violence, are treated wrongly or improperly in the family environment or their closest social environment, so that their basic needs are not met properly either physically, spiritually, or socially.
37. Child Victims of Neglect are Children who do not receive fulfillment of needs such as but not limited to health, safety, and welfare needs from parents or other persons who have legal responsibility to care for the Child resulting in losses in the Child's growth and development process.
38. Children with Deviant Social Behavior are Children who have attitudes and behaviors that do not consider the judgment and existence of other people in general around them, show irresponsible attitudes and lack of remorse regarding their mistakes, and often violate the rights and norms that live in society.
39. Children Who Are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to Their Parents' Condition are Children who are given negative social labels based on prejudice and aimed at separating, differentiating, discrediting, and ostracizing Children with bad marks or views from labeling related to their parents' condition.
40. Substitute Family is foster parents, adoptive parents, and guardians who carry out the role and responsibility to provide alternative care for Children.
41. Educational Institution is an educational unit as referred to in laws and regulations concerning the national education system.
42. Counseling is a process carried out in the form of interviews to help Children understand themselves better, so that Children can overcome difficulties in adjusting themselves to various roles and relationships and find appropriate problem solutions.
43. Social Assistance is a dynamic interaction between social workers and Children who need Special Protection to jointly face and solve the social problems they face.
44. Social Rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable Children to carry out their social functions properly in community life.
45. Social Reintegration is a process of preparing Children who need Special Protection to be able to return to the family and community environment.
46. Fulfillment of Children's Rights hereinafter abbreviated as PHA is a child protection strategy by integrating children's rights into every development activity from the preparation of planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of various laws and regulations, policies, programs, and activities by applying the principle of the best interests of the child.
47. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment, or exclusion, which directly or indirectly is based on differentiation of humans on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, legal status of children, and physical and/or mental conditions that result in reduction, deviation, or elimination, recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
48. Exploitation is an action with or without the consent of the victim which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical sexual, reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of someone by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
49. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
50. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
51. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
52. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations, business world.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 2
( 1 ) Women's empowerment in the Regency is implemented through the protection of women's rights.
( 2 ) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in order to fulfill women's rights in improving the quality of women's lives.
( 3 ) Women's rights as referred to in paragraph (2) must be guaranteed by the Regency Government.
( 4 ) Women's rights as referred to in paragraph (3) include the fields of education, health, employment, politics, law, economy, culture, and social affairs.

Part Two
Obligations of the Regency Government

Article 3
( 1 ) The Regency Government is obligated to guarantee the protection of women's rights.
( 2 ) The protection of women's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. formulation of gender-responsive regional policies;
b. institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) within the Regency Government;
c. empowerment of women in the fields of education, health, employment, politics, law, economic, cultural and social affairs in community organizations at the Regency level; and
d. strengthening and development of institutions providing women's empowerment services at the regency level.

Article 4
(1) The formulation of gender-responsive Regency policies as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (2) letter a shall serve as a guideline in the preparation of regional development plans.
(2) The preparation of development plans as referred to in paragraph (1) includes long-term plans, medium-term plans, and local government work plans.
(3) The long-term development plans, medium-term plans, and local government work plans as referred to in paragraph (2) must serve as guidelines for PD in the preparation of strategic plans and work plans within their respective work environments.
(4) The preparation of development plans as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted through gender-responsive planning through gender analysis and ARG that contains a priority scale for the implementation of women's empowerment.
(5) The preparation of the priority scale for the implementation of women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be guided by the national level priority scale.
(6) The national level priority scale as referred to in paragraph (5) shall become an inseparable part of the regional development plan.

Article 5
In order to guarantee the realization of gender-responsive policy formulation as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (2) letter a, Regional Apparatus that implements governmental affairs in the field of regional development planning shall:
a. involve Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment in the formulation of regional development plans; and
b. evaluate programs and activities at the Regional Apparatus level that are not gender-responsive.

Article 6
(1) The institutionalization of PUG as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (2) letter b shall be implemented in all PD within the Regency Government.
(2) To accelerate the institutionalization of PUG as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent may establish a PUG Working Group at the Regency level.
(3) Members of the PUG Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2) are all Heads/Leaders of PD.
(4) Further provisions regarding the duties and procedures for membership of the PUG Working Group shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 7
( 1 ) In the framework of strengthening and developing PUG, the Regent may establish a PUG Focal Point.
( 2 ) The PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1) is a PD apparatus that has the capability to implement gender mainstreaming in their respective work units.
( 3 ) The Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established in every PD.
( 4 ) Further provisions regarding the duties, membership composition and procedures for establishing the Focal Point shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 8
The empowerment of women in the field of education, the field of health, the field of employment, the field of politics, the field of law, and the economic, cultural and social fields in community organizations at the Regency level as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (2) letter c constitutes part of the temporary special policy provided by the Regency Government.

Article 9
Empowerment of women in the field of education is implemented by means including:
a. facilitating women to obtain education and instruction in all types, levels, and pathways of education in accordance with the requirements that have been determined;
b. education policy has encouraged equity, improvement, and the quality and relevance of education for all genders; and
c. equitable distribution of learning opportunities for women and men.

Article 10
Empowerment of women in the health sector is implemented through means including:
a. facilitating women's health through health program activities implemented by the government such as:
1. Maternal mortality reduction program;
2. Maternal and child health (KIA) program;
3. Healthy environment, water quality improvement and sanitation program;
4. Malaria eradication program;
5. Pulmonary tuberculosis eradication program;
6. HIV/AIDS prevention program;
7. Community nutrition improvement program;
b. Women are given the right to obtain special protection in the implementation of their work or profession against matters that may threaten their safety and/or health;
c. Women are given special rights inherent to women due to their reproductive function, guaranteed and protected by law.
-11-

Article 11
Empowerment of women in the field of employment is implemented by means including:
a. equal wages for male and female workers for the same work;
b. prohibition of discrimination against female workers;
c. prohibition of termination of employment for female workers who marry, become pregnant, and give birth;
d. guidelines for employing female workers at night;
e. providing flexibility for female workers who are breastfeeding children;
f. prohibition of discrimination against female workers in company regulations; and
g. addressing malnutrition among female workers.

Article 12
Empowerment of women in the political field is implemented through means including:
a. facilitating the improvement of human resources for prospective legislative candidates at the regency level, and members of political parties/women's community organizations in order to fulfill women's representation in legislative institutions in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. facilitating the increase of women's political participation in legislative institutions;
c. providing facilities and infrastructure for women's community organizations or community organizations whose vision and mission advocate for the fulfillment of rights and protection of women in the Regency in accordance with the capacity of Regional Finances;
d. conducting outreach/awareness-raising in order to increase awareness of women's rights and women's participation in the political field;
e. encouraging increased involvement of women in community organizations and decision-making activities within the Regency Government; and
f. encouraging the establishment of women's organizations/forums.

Article 13
Empowerment of women in the field of law is implemented by means including:
a. facilitating the improvement of legal knowledge and awareness for women; and
b. encouraging the establishment of organizations that provide free legal services for women.
-12-

Article 14
(1) Empowerment of women in the economic field is implemented by means including:
a. facilitating women in efforts to improve the family economy;
b. may provide capital assistance to women, especially migrant workers, women in remote areas, women as heads of households, and women victims of domestic violence; and
c. implementing home industry and non-agricultural industry development programs.
(2) The procedures for providing capital assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 15
Empowerment of women in the field of culture is implemented through means including:
a. facilitating women in preserving authentic regional culture;
b. encouraging women's activities in various arts and cultural activities.

Article 16
Empowerment of women in the social field is implemented through means including:
a. facilitating women in increasing social activities in the community environment; and
b. encouraging women's activities as agents of change in the community.

Third Part
Scope of Women's Empowerment

Paragraph 1
General

Article 17
Protection of Women is carried out by means of:
a. prevention of violence against women;
b. provision of services and handling of further referrals; and
c. strengthening and development of institutions providing women's protection services.
-13-

Paragraph 2
Prevention

Article 18
( 1 ) Prevention of violence against women as referred to in Article 17 letter a shall be implemented by means of increasing family and community awareness.
( 2 ) Increasing family and community awareness as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted in an integrated and continuous manner in the form of socialization, guidance and training, and/or counseling.
( 3 ) Socialization, guidance and training, and/or counseling as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented by the relevant technical PD in charge of the field, institutions, organizations, mass media, the business sector, academics, law enforcement, the community and Regional Technical Implementation Units in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 19
(1) In addition to the prevention of violence against women as referred to in Article 18, efforts to prevent violence against women are carried out by enhancing the insight, knowledge, skills, and independence of women.
(2) The prevention of violence against women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by means of:
a. enhancing informal education;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement, and social services; and
c. providing access to informal employment for women.

Paragraph 3
Provision of Services and Handling of Advanced Referrals

Article 20
The provision of services and handling of advanced referrals as referred to in Article 17 letter b is intended for:
a. women victims of domestic violence;
b. women victims of criminal acts of human trafficking;
c. women in emergency situations and special conditions; and
d. women victims of other acts of violence requiring coordination at the Regency level.
-14-

Article 21
(1) In addition to service provision and service referral handling as referred to in Article 20, the Regency Government is obligated to provide special services for:
a. women who are included in vulnerable and/or minority groups;
b. elderly women; and
c. women with special needs.
(2) Special services as referred to in paragraph (1) are provided in the form of:
a. facilitation in obtaining and enjoying their rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. facilitation in access to economic resources and natural resources, social security, and basic public services; and
c. provision of the specific needs of women in emergency situations and special conditions.
(3) Further provisions regarding special services as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 22
(1) In the context of providing services and handling advanced referrals for women as referred to in Article 20, the Regency Government may establish:
a. a Women and Children Protection (PPA) unit at the Regency level;
b. a task force; and/or
c. a special task force.
(2) The PPA unit, task force, and/or special task force as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by Regent Regulation.
(3) Further provisions regarding the duties, membership, procedures and/or work unit(s) of the PPA unit as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 4
Strengthening and Development of Institutions Providing Women's Protection Services

Article 23
Strengthening of institutions providing protection services for women shall be carried out through:
a. establishment of coordination forums or other forums in order to support the handling of victims of violence against women;
b. provision of service units and legal protection assistance for women victims of violence that conduct data collection related to violence against women;
c. provision of information education communication, advocacy, socialization, and technical guidance;
d. procurement of facilities and infrastructure for protection and services for women in disaster and evacuation areas;
e. enhancement of cross-sectoral coordination;
f. establishment of working groups;
g. formulation of regional action plans; and
h. information education communication both through electronic and print media and simulation regarding the protection of women.

CHAPTER III
IMPLEMENTATION OF CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 24
(1) In the framework of implementing Child Protection, the Regency Government is obligated to carry out activities:
a. formulation of policies, programs, and regional development activities with child rights perspective which are set forth in regional development planning documents;
b. formulation of norms, standard procedures and assessment criteria for the fulfillment and protection of children's rights which refer to the norms, standards, procedures and criteria established by the Government;
c. coordination of child-friendly Regency development is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
d. facilitation of the implementation of regional children's forums;
e. enhancement of Community participation in the implementation and protection of children's rights;
f. coordination and cooperation in the fulfillment and protection of Children;
g. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs for the fulfillment and protection of Children;
h. guidance of child protection institutions; and
i. providing special protection for Children.
(2) In addition to the activities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regency Government may conduct supervision and facilitation of child advocacy institutions in the Regency that are involved in assistance to Children who require special handling.
(3) Supervision and facilitation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Provision of facilitation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be adjusted to the regional financial capacity.

Article 25
(1) Coordination of the development of child-friendly regency as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter c is implemented to encourage the acceleration of the realization of a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by related agencies in accordance with their main duties and functions.
(3) Further provisions regarding the form and procedures for coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 26
(1) Guidance of Child Protection institutions as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter h is carried out in order to increase the effectiveness of the implementation of the fulfillment of children's rights.
(2) Guidance of Child Protection institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Head of the Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions administer governmental affairs in the field of child protection.
(3) Further provisions regarding guidance and institutional development as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.
-17-

Article 27
Activities in the Implementation of Child Protection in the Regency include:
a. fulfillment of children's rights; and
b. special protection of children.

Second Part
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 28
The fulfillment of children's rights is the obligation of the Regency Government, Parents, and the community.

Article 29
( 1 ) The Regency Government is obligated to fulfill the rights of children in the areas of:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare; and
d. education, utilization of leisure time, and arts and cultural activities.
( 2 ) In fulfilling the rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, the Regency Government has the obligation to:
a. endeavor that children obtain birth certificates free of charge;
b. provide infrastructure and facilities needed by children to express themselves, think, and create; and
c. provide infrastructure and facilities so that children can obtain the knowledge they need.
(3) In fulfilling the rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the Regency Government undertakes efforts to:
a. provide guidance to families or substitute families to fulfill the rights of children required during their care;
b. provide family consultation institutions for child caregivers;
c. provide child social welfare institutions as an alternative place for child caregivers in the event that families or substitute families cannot provide proper care; and
d. provide guidance to children as a vulnerable group.
(4) In fulfilling the rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, the Regency Government undertakes efforts to:
a. reduce infant mortality rates;
b. reduce malnutrition rates for children;
c. provide breast milk for infants;
d. provide immunization for children;
e. provide reproductive health services;
f. increase access to welfare improvement for poor families;
g. increase access to clean water for households;
h. create smoke-free zones; and
i. child-friendly community health centers.
(5) In fulfilling the rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, the Regency Government undertakes efforts to:
a. provide early childhood education;
b. implement 12 years of compulsory education;
c. establish child-friendly schools;
d. establish safe routes to/from school; and
e. provide child-friendly creative and recreational facilities;
(6) Further provisions regarding the form and procedures for fulfilling the rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 30
(1) Parents are obligated and responsible to: a. care for, nurture, educate, and protect the child;
b. develop the child in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent marriage at the age of a child.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may transfer to the family, which shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 31
(1) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to carry out prevention and handling of cases of child victims of neglect, violence, discrimination, exploitation, child trafficking, maltreatment, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances, and/or pornography.
(2) The responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. respecting, fulfilling, and protecting the rights of children;
b. conducting socialization about the adverse effects of neglect, violence, discrimination, exploitation, child trafficking, maltreatment, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances, and/or pornography;
c. making policies and/or policy changes regarding child protection;
d. providing assistance;
e. conducting training for stakeholders on handling cases of neglect, violence, discrimination, exploitation, child trafficking, maltreatment, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances, and/or pornography involving children;
f. assisting in the process of social rehabilitation and social reintegration;
g. providing temporary shelters for children; and
h. conducting coordination and cooperation with stakeholders related to handling cases involving children.

Third Part
Special Protection of Children

Article 32
(1) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to provide special protection to child victims of violence which includes:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. child victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. child victims of physical and/or mental violence;
j. child victims of sexual crimes;
k. child victims of terrorist networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. child victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(2) Special Protection for Children is carried out through efforts:
a. rapid handling, including treatment and/or rehabilitation physically, psychologically, and socially, as well as prevention of disease and other health disorders;
b. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery;
c. provision of social assistance for Children from underprivileged families; and
d. provision of protection and assistance in every judicial process.
(3) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided at technical implementing units of ministries/agencies, PD, and/or regional technical implementing units that have been established with reference to the service standards that have been determined.
(4) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented quickly, comprehensively, and in an integrated manner.

Article 33
The Regency Government in implementing Special Protection as referred to in Article 32 shall provide:
a. social workers and social welfare personnel;
b. competent and trained health personnel;
c. spiritual/worship guidance officers;
d. educators and education personnel; and/or
e. legal aid personnel.

Paragraph 1
Children in Emergency Situations

Article 34
(1) Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter a, shall be given to:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children victims of riots;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.
(2) In addition to Children as referred to in paragraph (1), Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations shall also be given to:
a. children victims of social disasters;
b. children victims of non-natural disasters; and
c. children of female convicts/detainees.
(3) In the event that Children as referred to in paragraph (2) are above 2 (two) years of age, the Child may be cared for by their family, foster parents, or child care institutions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be given in the form of care, nurturing, as well as fulfillment of basic needs and special needs of the child in accordance with the level of age and development.

Article 35
(1) Special Protection as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. prevention so that Children do not become victims in emergency situations;
b. recording the number of Children requiring Special Protection in emergency situations;
c. mapping the basic and specific needs of Children requiring Special Protection in emergency situations;
d. guarantee of security and safety of Children in Emergency Situations;
e. recording of Children and their families for tracing and family reunification;
f. priority emergency rescue, evacuation, and security measures;
g. recovery of physical and psychological health;
h. provision of legal assistance, accompaniment, physical, psychological, and social rehabilitation of Children in Emergency Situations;
i. care;
j. improvement of facilities needed by Children in Emergency Situations;
k. fulfillment of basic and special needs of Children consisting of food, clothing, shelter, education, provision of health services, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment;
l. fulfillment of special needs for Children with Disabilities and Children experiencing psychosocial problems;
m. exemption from education fees both conducted in formal and non-formal Educational Institutions during the emergency period; and
n. provision of services for the fulfillment of Children's identity rights and important documents lost due to emergency situations; and/or provision of Social Reintegration services.
(2) Special Protection of Children in Emergency Situations as referred to in paragraph (1) must be able to be received by Children in emergency situations as soon as possible, the implementation of which is in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Provision of services for the fulfillment of Children's identity rights and important documents lost due to emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter n shall be carried out by the Regency Government.

Paragraph 2
Children in Conflict with the Law

Article 36
(1) Special Protection for Children in Conflict with the Law as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter b shall be carried out through:
a. humane treatment with attention to needs according to their age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment, or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane, and degrading to dignity and degree;
f. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention or imprisonment, except as a last resort and for the shortest period of time;
h. provision of trial before a Children's Court that is objective, impartial, and in a session closed to the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity;
j. provision of accompaniment by parents/guardians and persons trusted by the Child;
k. provision of social advocacy;
l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility, especially for Children with Disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Special Protection for Children in Conflict with the Law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through efforts of:
a. prevention;
b. administrative settlement of cases;
c. rehabilitation; and
d. social reintegration.

Article 37
(1) The provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter c is provided in the form of:
a. legal consultation, legal assistance, and defense in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. provision of language interpreters for Children in the legal process including sign language interpreters for Children with Disabilities;
c. provision of information regarding the development of their case in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
d. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) The implementation of recreational activities as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter d consists of daily free physical exercise activities in open spaces, daily entertainment activities, arts, or developing skills.
(3) Avoidance from arrest, detention, or imprisonment as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter g is carried out by taking into account the age of the child, the type of crime committed, the threatened criminal penalty, and their criminal liability.
(4) The provision of justice before the Children's court that is objective, impartial, and in a hearing that is closed to the public as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter h is carried out by seeking the existence of a child-friendly court with facilities and infrastructure standards in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(5) Avoidance from publication of their identity as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter i is carried out by keeping confidential the name of the Child in Conflict with the Law, the name of parents, address, face, and other matters that can reveal the identity of the Child in Conflict with the Law.
(6) The provision of accompaniment by parents/guardians and persons trusted by the Child as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter j is carried out to assist and provide support to the Child so they are ready to follow the process of investigation, prosecution, and examination in court proceedings.
(7) The provision of social advocacy as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter k is intended to protect and defend Children in Conflict with the Law which is provided in the form of awareness of rights and obligations, defense, and fulfillment of rights.
(8) The provision of health services as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter o is carried out in the form of promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of health.

Article 38
(1) Prevention efforts so that children do not come into contact with the law as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (2) letter a are carried out so that:
a. Children do not become victims of criminal acts;
b. Children do not come into conflict with the Law; and
c. Children no longer commit criminal acts.
(2) Prevention so that children do not come into contact with the Law as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. print media, electronic media, and online media;
b. face-to-face in the form of counseling, discussions, lectures, campaigns; and
c. outdoor media.
(3) Prevention efforts so that Children do not come into conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b are carried out through:
a. dissemination;
b. providing places or spaces for play, healthy recreation, and channeling Children's creativity;
c. providing guidance on religious values and social values;
d. conducting supervision of environments that will have an impact on the occurrence of Children who come into contact with the Law;
e. increasing family resilience and welfare;
f. providing coaching and skills training;
g. providing places or spaces for play, healthy recreation, and channeling Children's creativity;
h. providing religious guidance, social values, and good character;
i. developing an environment that cares for Children in Contact with the Law; and/or
j. involving families in service, coaching, and guidance programs.

Article 39
Special protection for Children in Conflict with the Law in the form of administrative case resolution, rehabilitation, and social reintegration as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (2) letter b through letter d shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40
(1) Prevention efforts so that children do not come into conflict with the law as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regency Government.
(2) Special protection for Children in Conflict with the Law in the form of rehabilitation as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (2) letter c shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with statutory provisions.

Paragraph 3
Children From Minority and Isolated Groups

Article 41
Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter c is carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

Article 42
(1) The provision of facilities and infrastructure as referred to in Article 41 shall be carried out in the form of:
a. provision of culture-based public spaces, art and culture centers, along with equipment and training including places of worship;
b. provision of facilities needed in providing services for Children from minority and isolated groups; and
c. providing accessibility needed by Children from minority and isolated groups to obtain fulfillment of basic needs.
(2) In the event that Children from minority and isolated groups experience trauma as a result of violence, discrimination and other maltreatment, social rehabilitation, medical services, and/or mental health services shall be provided.

Article 43
(1) Special Protection for Children from Minority and Isolated Groups so that they do not experience violence, discrimination, and other mistreatment as referred to in Article 41 shall be carried out through preventive measures.
(2) Preventive measures as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. providing education to the community; and
b. coordination with the Regency Government.
(3) Preventive measures as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Children Who Are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually

Article 44
Special Protection for Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter d is carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the Community in the elimination of exploitation of Children economically and/or sexually.

Article 45
(1) Dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of laws and regulations as referred to in Article 44 letter a shall be carried out through:
a. legal counseling; and
b. means of communication, information, and education.
(2) Dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of laws and regulations as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regency Government.

Article 46
(1) Monitoring as referred to in Article 44 letter b is carried out by means of observation, identification, and recording to obtain data and information related to the condition of:
a. children who are Economically Exploited; or
b. children who are Sexually Exploited.
(2) Monitoring of Children who are Economically Exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out at economic center locations and outside economic centers.
(3) Monitoring of Children who are Sexually Exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is carried out through supervision of:
a. prostitution and solicitation practices in the environment;
b. locations suspected of being places of sexual exploitation of Children;
c. perpetrators suspected of sexually exploiting Children; and
d. raid actions to free Children from sexual exploitation.
(4) Monitoring and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regency Government.
(5) Reporting as referred to in Article 44 letter b is prepared after monitoring has been carried out on Children who are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited.
(6) Imposition of sanctions as referred to in Article 44 -28- letter b is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 47
The involvement of various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the Community in the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of Children as referred to in Article 44 letter c is carried out through:
a. formulation of policies regarding the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of Children in their environment;
b. cooperation to prevent Children from being economically and/or sexually exploited;
c. campaigns for the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of Children;
d. increased supervision to prevent Children from being economically and/or sexually exploited;
e. company support for the elimination of exploitation of Children through corporate social responsibility; and
f. reporting to the authorities if there is economic and/or sexual exploitation of Children.

Article 48
In the event that a Child who is Exploited Economically and/or Sexually requires restoration of their condition to its original state, services must be provided in the form of:
a. medical rehabilitation;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. legal assistance and social assistance; and/or
d. return and social reintegration.

Paragraph 5
Children Who Become Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic Substances, and Other Addictive Substances Abuse

Article 49
Special Protection for Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substance Abuse as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter e shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 50
Supervision efforts as referred to in Article 49 are carried out by means of:
a. strengthening of families and the Community so that Children are no longer involved in the abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances;
b. monitoring in the surrounding environment to prevent the circulation or abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances; and
c. reporting to authorized officials/agencies if circulation and abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances occur.

Article 51
Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 49 shall be carried out through:
a. communication, information, and education about the dangers for Children if involved in production and distribution as well as the dangers of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances;
b. enhancement of the role of parents, families, the Community, educators, education personnel, religious leaders, customary leaders, Community leaders in supporting the Social Reintegration process of Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic Substances, and Other Addictive Substances Abuse;
c. provision of understanding and awareness to Children regarding the dangers of smoking;
d. provision of understanding and awareness to Children about the dangers of Children involved in production and distribution as well as the dangers of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances;
e. involvement of Children as peers in order to provide understanding and change of mindset about the dangers of Children involved in production and distribution as well as the dangers of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances; and
f. inclusion of anti-narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances teaching materials in education units.

Article 52
(1) Treatment efforts as referred to in Article 49 are carried out to provide recovery of the physical and psychological condition of Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substances Abuse.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. outpatient care;
b. initial inpatient care;
c. continued care; and
d. post care.
-30-

Article 53
Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 49 is carried out through medical rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, and post-rehabilitation.

Article 54
(1) Supervision efforts as referred to in Article 50 shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Maintenance efforts as referred to in Article 52 and Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 53 shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 6
Children Who Become Victims of Pornography

Article 55
(1) Special Protection for Children who Become Victims of Pornography as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter f shall be implemented through efforts of guidance, assistance, and recovery of social, physical health, and mental aspects.
(2) Provisions regarding guidance, assistance, recovery of social, physical health, and mental aspects as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 56
Guidance as referred to in Article 55 paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with its authority by:
a. coordinating the prevention and handling of Child pornography;
b. conducting socialization;
c. providing education and training;
d. increasing public awareness and responsibility; and
e. conducting guidance through orphanage-based and non-orphanage-based systems.

Article 57
Assistance as referred to in Article 55 paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. guidance and counseling; and
b. other activities as required.

Article 58
Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 55 paragraph (1) shall be provided in the form of:
a. resocialization;
b. counseling on moral values sourced from religious teachings in accordance with the religion professed by the Child;
c. raising public awareness to be able to accept back Children who are victims or perpetrators of pornography; and
d. periodic monitoring.

Article 59
Physical and mental health recovery as referred to in Article 55 paragraph (1) shall be provided in the form of:
a. psycho-social therapy;
b. counseling;
c. beneficial activities;
d. referral to hospitals, safe houses, service centers, or other alternative places in accordance with needs; and/or
e. resocialization.

Article 60
(1) In the event it is necessary, the Regency Government and the Community may undertake prevention efforts so that Children do not become victims of pornography.
(2) Prevention efforts by the Regency Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. formulation and implementation of policies related to regional action plans on the prevention and handling of pornography;
b. optimization of the role of the Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Pornography;
c. capacity building of the Regional Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Pornography;
d. formulation and dissemination of communication, information, and education materials related to pornography prevention in schools and the Community;
e. guidance to the Community not to engage in activities that lead to pornography; and
f. guidance to Regional Apparatus, non-governmental organizations, and the Community to enhance efforts for the prevention and handling of pornography.
(3) Prevention efforts by the Community so that Children do not become Victims of Pornography shall be carried out through:
a. dissemination of communication, information, and education materials related to pornography prevention in the surrounding environment;
b. strengthening of the surrounding environment not to engage in activities that lead to pornography; and
c. enhancement of prevention and handling efforts of pornography in the surrounding environment.
(4) Provisions regarding the procedures for prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 61
(1) Guidance and assistance as referred to in Article 53 paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with its authority.
(2) Social, physical and mental health recovery as referred to in Article 55 paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 7
Children with HIV and AIDS

Article 62
Special Protection for Children with HIV and AIDS as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter g shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 63
Supervisory measures as referred to in Article 62 are carried out in the form of:
a. periodic or incidental inspections as well as integrated inspections concerning Children with HIV and AIDS;
b. examination of periodic and/or incidental reports related to prevention, handling, and protection of Children from HIV and AIDS;
c. health surveillance in the form of recording, reporting, and data analysis on mothers, pregnant mothers, or Children indicated with HIV; and
d. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of prevention, handling, and protection of Children from HIV and AIDS.

Article 64
Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 62 shall be carried out in the form of:
a. formulating and implementing policies related to action plans on the prevention and handling of Children with HIV and AIDS;
b. health promotion to increase public knowledge about the benefits of early detection and transmission of HIV and AIDS as well as to increase the knowledge and responsibility of mothers, pregnant mothers, Children, and married couples;
c. preventing the transmission of HIV and AIDS from mother to Child;
d. preventing Children from not using narcotics;
e. early detection by providing HIV and AIDS tests to pregnant mothers in areas with widespread and concentrated HIV and AIDS endemics;
f. early detection by providing HIV and AIDS tests to pregnant mothers with sexually transmitted infections and tuberculosis in low HIV epidemic areas;
g. using sterile medical equipment for Children to avoid HIV and AIDS;
h. avoiding blood transfusions contaminated with HIV and AIDS to Children;
i. providing information about the transmission of HIV and AIDS to Children;
j. changing Children's behavior to avoid HIV and AIDS;
k. keeping Children away from making tattoos; and
l. establishing communication, consultation, and information centers about HIV and AIDS at the village level.

Article 65
(1) Treatment as referred to in Article 62 is carried out to:
a. reduce or inhibit the development of HIV and AIDS virus in Children;
b. reduce the risk of HIV and AIDS transmission;
c. reduce or inhibit the worsening of opportunistic infections; and
d. improve the quality of life of Children suffering from HIV and AIDS.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
-34-

Article 66
(1) Treatment as referred to in Article 62 must be implemented with a choice of approach in accordance with needs:
   a. health service facility-based treatment; and
   b. community-based home treatment.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 67
(1) Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 62 is aimed at restoring the quality of life of Children to become productive.
(2) Rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through assistance, regular and correct medication consumption, health psychology Counseling, and Social Reintegration.
(3) Rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out for every transmission pattern of HIV infection in Children.

Article 68
The Regency Government is obligated to pursue equality in access, participation, and benefits in life for Children with HIV and AIDS.

Article 69
(1) Supervision Efforts as referred to in Article 63 shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Prevention Efforts as referred to in Article 64 and Treatment, care, and rehabilitation as referred to in Article 65 through Article 67 shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 8
Child Victims of Abduction, Sale, and/Or Trafficking

Article 70
Special Protection for Child Victims of Abduction, Sale, and/or Trafficking as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter h is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, and rehabilitation.

Article 71
Supervision as referred to in Article 70 is carried out through:
a. strengthening of families and the Community so that Children do not become victims of abduction, sale, and/or trafficking;
b. monitoring in the surrounding environment so that Children do not become victims of abduction, sale, and/or trafficking; and
c. reporting to authorized officials/agencies if abduction, sale, and/or trafficking occurs.

Article 72
The protection as referred to in Article 70 is carried out by providing a guarantee of security from threats that endanger the Child Victim of Abduction, Sale, and/or Trafficking in relation to the testimony that will be, is being, or has been given.

Article 73
Prevention as referred to in Article 70 is carried out by means of:
a. involving the Community in carrying out Special Protection of Children;
b. increasing understanding related to kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking of Children;
c. establishing bilateral and multilateral cooperation, both national and international;
d. strengthening family resilience to prevent Children from kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking; and
e. increasing the responsibility of the Community, business sector, and mass media to protect Children from kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking.

Article 74
Treatment and rehabilitation as referred to in Article 70 shall be carried out by means of:
a. physical and psychological rehabilitation;
b. medical treatment services, such as reproductive tract infections and communicable diseases;
c. mental health rehabilitation; and/or
d. Social Rehabilitation.
-36-

Article 75
(1) Supervision as referred to in Article 71 shall be conducted by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Protection as referred to in Article 72 shall be conducted by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Prevention as referred to in Article 73 shall be conducted by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Treatment and rehabilitation as referred to in Article 74 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 9
Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence

Article 76
(1) Special Protection for Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter i is carried out through efforts:
a. dissemination and socialization of provisions of laws and regulations that protect Child victims of acts of violence; and
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions.
(2) Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided in the form of:
a. prevention;
b. assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation; and
d. Social Rehabilitation.
(3) Handling of Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 77
Dissemination and socialization as referred to in Article 76 paragraph (1) letter a shall be conducted through dissemination and mass media.

Article 78
(1) Monitoring as referred to in Article 76 -37- paragraph (1) letter b is carried out by:
a. observing and identifying the development of cases of physical and/or psychological violence against Children;
b. anticipating problems arising from cases of physical and/or psychological violence against Children; and
c. following up on cases of physical and/or psychological violence against Children.
(2) Reporting as referred to in Article 76 paragraph (1) letter b is carried out periodically or at any time according to needs.
(3) Imposition of sanctions as referred to in Article 76 paragraph (1) letter b is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 79
The Implementation of Special Protection as referred to in Article 76 is also carried out in the education unit environment.

Article 80
(1) Dissemination and socialization of the provisions of laws and regulations that protect Children who are victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 74 shall be carried out by the Regency Government.
(2) Monitoring and reporting as referred to in Article 78 shall be carried out by the Regency Government.
(3) Implementation of Special Protection as referred to in Article 79 shall be carried out by:
a. the Regency Government through the Regional Apparatus (Perangkat Daerah) that administers governmental affairs in the field of education;
b. educators;
c. education personnel;
d. family; and/or
e. the Community, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 10
Child Victims of Sexual Crimes

Article 81
Special Protection for Child Victims of Sexual Crimes as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter j shall be carried out through: -38-
a. education on reproductive health, religious values, and moral values;
b. Social Rehabilitation;
c. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery; and
d. provision of protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, up to examination in court proceedings.

Article 82
(1) Education about reproductive health as referred to in Article 81 letter a is conducted so that Child Victims of Sexual Crimes:
a. have understanding to be protected from the risk of sexual crimes; and
b. know correct information about sexual education.
(2) Education about religious values and moral values as referred to in Article 81 letter a is conducted so that Child Victims of Sexual Crimes have strong faith and conviction to overcome their problems.

Article 83
(1) Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 81 letter b is carried out in the form of:
a. motivation and psychosocial diagnosis;
b. care and nurturing;
c. vocational training and entrepreneurship development;
d. mental spiritual guidance;
e. physical guidance;
f. social guidance and psychosocial counseling;
g. accessibility services;
h. social assistance and support;
i. resocialization guidance;
j. follow-up guidance; and/or
k. referral.
(2) In addition to the forms as referred to in paragraph (1), Social Rehabilitation is carried out in the form of:
a. physical therapy;
b. mental spiritual therapy;
c. psychosocial therapy;
d. therapy for livelihood;
e. fulfillment of decent living;
f. accessibility support; and/or
g. other forms that support social functioning.

Article 84
Psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery as referred to in Article 81 letter c is carried out by means of:
a. increasing self-confidence in Child Victims of Sexual Crimes;
b. eliminating feelings of shame, doubt, and guilt in Child Victims of Sexual Crimes; and
c. encouraging Child Victims of Sexual Crimes to have initiative.

Article 85
The provision of protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, up to examination at court hearings as referred to in Article 81 letter d is carried out through:
a. provision of information about the case process of Child Victims of Sexual Crimes and the right to obtain restitution;
b. provision of assistance at the investigation, prosecution, and court examination levels; and
c. provision of security and safety guarantees for Child Victims of Sexual Crimes.

Article 86
The implementation of prevention and handling of sexual crimes as referred to in Article 81 is also carried out in the educational unit environment by educators, education personnel, and the Community in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 87
(1) Education on reproductive health, religious values, and moral values as referred to in Article 81 letter a shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 83 letter b shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery as referred to in Article 81 letter c shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Provision of protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, until examination at court hearings as referred to in Article 81 letter d shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(5) Implementation of Special Protection as referred to in Article 86 shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 11
Child Victims of Terrorism Networks

Article 88
Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter k shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. provide education on education, ideology, and nationalism values;
b. provide counseling on the dangers of terrorism;
c. provide Social Rehabilitation; and
d. provide Social Mentoring.

Article 89
(1) Educational efforts regarding education as referred to in Article 91 letter a are carried out through:
a. instilling moral and mental values in order to live harmoniously and peacefully;
b. teaching character education and good morals; and
c. developing potential and personality as well as skills.
(2) Education regarding ideology for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 88 letter a is carried out by providing understanding about:
a. Pancasila as the state ideology;
b. the history, meaning, function of Pancasila as the foundation of the state, philosophy, way of life, and unifier of the nation; and
c. the application or actualization of Pancasila in daily life.
(3) Education regarding the values of nationalism as referred to in Article 88 letter a is carried out by providing understanding to:
a. foster a sense of love for the nation and homeland;
b. be willing to sacrifice for the nation and state;
c. be proud of the Indonesian nation and homeland;
d. prioritize the interests of the nation and state above other interests;
e. eliminate extremism; and
f. create harmonious, peaceful relationships and strengthen fraternal bonds.

Article 90
(1) Counseling on the dangers of terrorism as referred to in Article 89 letter b is conducted in the form of:
a. religious counseling;
b. personality counseling;
c. family counseling; and/or
d. community life counseling.
(2) Religious counseling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is conducted to:
a. increase faith and devotion to God Almighty;
b. foster tolerance in religious life; and
c. reduce extreme views by providing deradicalization.
(3) Personality counseling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is conducted to determine the psychological condition of Child Victims of Terrorism Networks and to encourage the Child to be able to control themselves and express the Child's interests and talents positively.
(4) Family counseling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c aims to establish good relations between Child Victims of Terrorism Networks and their families.
(5) Community life counseling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d aims to establish good relations between Child Victims of Terrorism Networks and the Community, to provide mutual assistance, to respect and appreciate one another, and not to violate norms that exist in the Community.

Article 91
The provisions regarding Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 81 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the form of Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 88 letter c.

Article 92
(1) Social Assistance for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 88 letter d is provided outside as well as within the criminal justice proceedings for Children.
(2) Social Assistance outside the criminal justice proceedings for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted by means of:
a. home visits;
b. conducting assessments;
c. identification of needs;
d. intervention plans;
e. implementation of interventions;
f. connecting to institutions that handle Child Victims of Terrorism Networks; and
g. providing reinforcement to Child Victims of Terrorism Networks.

Article 93
Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks is also provided in the form of:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Terrorism Networks to care and psychological health recovery;
b. medical rehabilitation;
c. reeducation and Social Reintegration; and
d. a guarantee of safety, whether physical, mental, or social, for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks.

Article 94
(1) Education about education, ideology, and nationalism values as referred to in Article 89 letter a shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Counseling about the dangers of terrorism as referred to in Article 91 letter b shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 91 letter c and Social Assistance as referred to in Article 91 letter d shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 95
(1) The fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Terrorism Networks to care and psychological health recovery as referred to in Article 93 letter a shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Medical rehabilitation as referred to in Article 93 letter b shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Re-education and Social Reintegration as referred to in Article 93 letter c shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Safety guarantees whether physical, mental, or social for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 93 letter d shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with its authority.
Paragraph 12 Children with Disabilities

Article 96
Special Protection for Children with Disabilities as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter 1 shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. humane treatment in accordance with the dignity and rights of the Child;
b. fulfillment of special needs;
c. equal treatment with other Children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development; and
d. Social Assistance.

Article 97
Humane treatment in accordance with the dignity and rights of the Child as referred to in Article 96 letter a shall be carried out through:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Children with Disabilities;
b. protection from violence;
c. respect for their mental and physical integrity based on equality with others; and
d. care and upbringing by the family or Substitute Family to grow and develop optimally.

Article 98
The fulfillment of special needs as referred to -44- in Article 99 letter b is carried out through:
a. physical and non-physical accessibility; and
b. provision of required services, including medications inherent to Children with Disabilities.

Article 99
Equal treatment with other Children to achieve the fullest possible social integration and individual development as referred to in Article 96 letter c shall be carried out through:
a. non-discriminatory treatment;
b. involvement of Children with Disabilities in expressing views according to their needs; and
c. provision of access for Children with Disabilities to develop themselves and utilize all abilities in accordance with their talents and interests.

Article 100
Special Protection for Children with Disabilities can also be carried out through:
a. habilitation and rehabilitation; and
b. provision of reasonable accommodation for Children with Disabilities in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 101
Humane treatment of Children in accordance with the dignity and rights of Children, fulfillment of special needs, equal treatment with other Children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development, and Social Assistance as referred to in Article 96 shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 13
Child Victims of Abuse and Neglect

Article 102
Special Protection for Child Victims of Mistreatment and Child Victims of Neglect as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter m shall be carried out through efforts of supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation, and social accompaniment.

Article 103
Supervision as referred to in Article 102 shall be carried out by means of: -45-
a. mapping of Children who are vulnerable to maltreatment and neglect; and
b. dissemination and advocacy of laws and regulations.

Article 104
Prevention as referred to in Article 102 shall be carried out by:
a. providing guidance to parents regarding the rights of Children so that they are not mistreated and neglected;
b. providing basic needs services;
c. providing access to education; and
d. providing skills training or independent work.

Article 105
Treatment as referred to in Article 102 shall be conducted in the form of:
a. medical rehabilitation; and/or
b. family care or Substitute Family for optimal growth and development.

Article 106
The provisions regarding Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 83 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the form of Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 102.

Article 107
Special Protection for Child Victims of Mistreatment and Neglect as referred to in Article 102 shall be carried out by the District Government in accordance with its duties, functions, and authorities.

Paragraph 14
Children With Deviant Social Behavior

Article 108
Special Protection for Children with Deviant Social Behavior as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter n is carried out through guidance on religious values and social values, Counseling, Social Rehabilitation, and Social Assistance.

Article 109
Guidance on religious values and social values as referred to in Article 108 is provided in the form of:
a. teaching to carry out religious obligations in accordance with the beliefs of Children with Deviant Social Behavior;
b. understanding to behave in accordance with moral norms and decency;
c. understanding not to commit violence and destruction; and
d. increasing awareness of the surrounding environment.

Article 110
The provisions regarding Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 83 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the form of Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 108.

Article 111
Special Protection for Children as referred to in Article 108 shall be carried out by involving the role of parents, the Community, Educational Institutions, and Religious Institutions.

Article 112
(1) Guidance on religious values and social values as referred to in Article 109 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Counseling, Social Rehabilitation, and Social Assistance as referred to in Article 108 shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 15
Children Who Become Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling Related to Their Parents' Condition

Article 113
Special Protection for Children who Become Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to the Condition of Their Parents as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) letter o shall be carried out through Counseling, Social Rehabilitation, and Social Assistance.

Article 114
The provisions regarding Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 83 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the forms of Social Rehabilitation as referred to in Article 113.

Article 115
(1) Children who have received Special Protection as referred to in Article 113 are returned to their family or Community.
(2) Before being returned to their family or Community as referred to in paragraph (1), the steps that must be taken are:
a. preparing the psychological condition of Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to their Parents' Condition to be willing to be returned to their family or Community;
b. ensuring that the family, Foster Family, or Community will accept and no longer carry out labeling and discrimination against Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to their Parents' Condition;
c. tracing other Foster Families if there is rejection from the family or Community;
d. ensuring that Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to their Parents' Condition are in a safe, comfortable condition, and their needs are fulfilled; and
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the development of Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to their Parents' Condition who have been returned to their family, Foster Family, or Community.

Article 116
The steps for monitoring and evaluating the development of Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling related to the Condition of Their Parents who have been returned to their family, Foster Family, or Community as referred to in Article 115 paragraph (2) letter e shall be implemented by the Regency Government in accordance with its duties, functions, and authorities.

Article 117
Counseling, Social Rehabilitation, and Social Assistance as referred to in Article 113 shall be carried out by the Regency Government in accordance with its duties, functions, and authorities.

Article 118
To prevent the occurrence of stigmatization from labeling of Children related to their parents' condition, the Regency Government shall:
a. provide education to the Community and play an active role in eliminating stigma against Children who are labeled related to their parents' condition;
b. provide space for Children who are labeled related to their parents' condition to obtain recreational activities; and
c. coordinate with service units that handle the protection of Children who are labeled related to their parents' condition in the event there is potential for violence and discrimination against Children in the Regency.

Fourth Part
Services or Handling of Advanced Referrals for Child Victims of Violence

Article 119
In the context of child protection, the Regency Government is obligated to:
a. provide services or advanced referral handling; and
b. conduct strengthening and development of institutions providing protection services for women and children.

Article 120
( 1 ) The provision of services or handling of advanced referrals as referred to in Article 119 letter a is intended for child victims of violence who require coordination at the Regency level.
( 2 ) The provision of services or handling of referrals as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through the PPA unit at the Regency level.
( 3 ) Further provisions regarding the duties, membership, and establishment of the PPA unit as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
IMPROVEMENT OF FAMILY QUALITY
Article 121
Improvement of family quality is implemented in order to realize gender equality and children's rights.

Article 122
Improvement of family quality is carried out through:
a. prevention of child marriage;
b. fulfillment of children's rights to exclusive breastfeeding;
c. bringing mothers closer to health services;
d. increasing family resilience.
-49-

Article 123
Prevention of child marriage as referred to in Article 122 letter a aims to:
a. increase the productivity of girls; b. develop the self-potential of girls; c. prevent pregnancy at too young an age;
d. reduce maternal and infant mortality rates;
e. reduce poverty rates; and
f. prevent the occurrence of domestic violence.

Article 124
The fulfillment of children's rights to exclusive breastfeeding as referred to in Article 123 letter b aims to:
a. guarantee the right of every child to obtain exclusive breastfeeding;
b. guarantee the health of children and optimal growth and development, especially during the golden age; and
c. prevent malnutrition.

Article 125
Bringing mothers closer to health services as referred to in Article 122 letter c aims to:
a. ensure the health of mothers and children before, during, and after childbirth; and
b. increase mothers' insight and knowledge about their own health and that of their families.

Article 126
Family resilience as referred to in Article 122 letter d aims to:
a. fulfill the rights of family members;
b. improve the quality of life of family members; and
c. improve family welfare.

Article 127
Further provisions regarding the form of activities and procedures for implementing family quality improvement as referred to in Article 122 shall be regulated by a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER V
GENDER AND CHILD DATA SYSTEM
Article 128
(1) The Regency Government organizes a gender and child data information system.
(2) The Regency Government establishes a forum/working group for the gender and child data system which is regulated in a Regent Regulation.
(3) In the context of forming a team, compiling, collecting, processing, analyzing and presenting gender and child data, the Regency Government coordinates with relevant PD at the regency level.
(4) The presentation of gender and child data is developed in the family information system application and the e-violence application/system.
(5) The presentation and utilization of gender and child data is used in accelerating the implementation of PUG in regional development.
(6) Further provisions regarding the implementation of the gender and child data information system as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Article 129
(1) The Regency Government establishes a coordination and cooperation forum in implementing the protection of women and children with:
a. other regency governments; and/or
b. other institutions/agencies.
(2) The implementation of coordination and cooperation in the provision of protection for women and children shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Child Protection.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment and procedures of the forum as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 130
In the framework of coordinating the implementation of protection for women and children, the Regency Government may establish networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that are active and/or concerned with women.
-51-

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 131
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of the protection of women and the protection of children.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be implemented in the context of prevention, handling and empowerment, and fulfillment of children's rights.
(3) The role of the community in the implementation of child protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. providing information through socialization and education regarding children's rights and laws and regulations concerning children;
b. providing input in the formulation of policies related to child protection;
c. reporting to the competent authorities if violations of children's rights occur;
d. playing an active role in the process of rehabilitation and social reintegration for children;
e. conducting monitoring, supervision and sharing responsibility for the implementation of child protection;
f. providing facilities and infrastructure and creating a conducive atmosphere for the growth and development of children;
g. establishing a Regency area coordination forum;
h. playing an active role by eliminating negative labeling of Children; and
i. providing space for children to participate and express their opinions.
(4) The role of community organizations and educational institutions as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by taking the necessary steps in accordance with their respective duties, functions, and authorities to assist in the implementation of child protection and the provision of information.
(5) The role of mass media as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials that are beneficial from the social, cultural, educational, religious and health aspects of children with due regard to the best interests of the Child.
(6) The role of the business sector as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. corporate policies with a child perspective;
b. products intended for children must be safe for children; and
c. contributing to the fulfillment of children's rights through corporate social responsibility.

Article 132
In the context of strengthening and developing services for child victims of violence, the community or social service institutions may establish special facilities.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 133
(1) The Regent is obligated to provide guidance for the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) The implementation of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the PD that administers the affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(4) Supervision shall be implemented in the form of:
a. monitoring; and
b. evaluation.
(5) In carrying out guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), the PD that administers the affairs of women's empowerment and child protection may cooperate and coordinate with other PDs within the Regency Government or other related agencies/institutions in the Regency.

Article 134
(1) The Regent is obligated to conduct supervision over the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) The implementation of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus that performs the supervisory function.
-53-

Article 135
(1) In addition to the Regional Apparatus that administers the affairs of women's empowerment and child protection, to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection in the Regency, every Regional Apparatus is obligated to conduct supervision in the form of monitoring and evaluation.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in a tiered manner in accordance with the respective authority of each.
(3) The results of monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be announced to the public.

Article 136
(1) Reports on the results of guidance and supervision shall be submitted to the regent.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out no later than once every 6 (six) months.
(3) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted in a networked manner or between Regional Apparatuses, and coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers the affairs of women's empowerment and the protection of women and children.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 137
Funding for the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other lawful sources, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
PROHIBITIONS
Article 138
Every education provider at the regency level is prohibited from:
a. creating school rules that have the potential to violate children's rights; and/or
b. expelling a Child from an educational institution without guaranteeing the continuity of the Child's education.

CHAPTER XI
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 139
(1) The head of an education unit who violates the provisions as referred to in Article 138 may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. transfer;
c. demotion;
d. dismissal from position; or
e. revocation of permit.
(3) The imposition of sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 140
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all implementing regulations related to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection shall remain in force insofar as they are not contrary to the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

Article 141
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children (Regional Gazette of Ogan Komering Ulu Regency Year 2012 Number 6), is revoked and declared no longer in force.

Article 142
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person may know of it, it is ordered that this Regional Regulation be promulgated by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Ogan Komering Ulu Regency.
Enacted in Baturaja on 4 March 2022
Acting REGENT OF OGAN KOMERING ULU,
sgd.

EDWARD CANDRA
EDWARD CANDRA
EDWARD CANDRA
EDWARD CANDRA
Promulgated in Baturaja Promulgated in Baturaja Promulgated in Baturaja Promulgated in Baturaja on 4 March 2022 on 4 March 2022 on 4 March 2022 on 4 March 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY
OGAN KOMERING ULU,
OGAN KOMERING ULU,
OGAN KOMERING ULU,
OGAN KOMERING ULU,
signed.
signed.
signed.
signed.

ACHMAD TARMIZI
ACHMAD TARMIZI
ACHMAD TARMIZI
ACHMAD TARMIZI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGIONAL GAZETTE OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGIONAL GAZETTE OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGIONAL GAZETTE OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 1

YEAR 2022 NUMBER 1
YEAR 2022 NUMBER 1
YEAR 2022 NUMBER 1
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF OGAN KOMERING ULU REGENCY, SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE : ( 1-35/2022 )

ULU, PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA : ( 1-35/2022 )
ULU, PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA : ( 1-35/2022 )
ULU, PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA : ( 1-35/2022 )
Copy In Accordance With The Original Copy In Accordance With The Original Copy In Accordance With The Original Copy In Accordance With The Original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF OKU REGENCY,
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF OKU REGENCY,
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF OKU REGENCY,
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF OKU REGENCY,
YUNIAR SYAFARINA, SH., M.Si YUNIAR SYAFARINA, SH., M.Si YUNIAR SYAFARINA, SH., M.Si YUNIAR SYAFARINA, SH., M.Si

PEMBINA LEVEL I
PEMBINA LEVEL I
PEMBINA LEVEL I
PEMBINA LEVEL I
NIP. 196406161999032001
NIP. 196406161999032001
NIP. 196406161999032001
NIP. 196406161999032001