REGENT OF MUSI RAWAS
PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY NUMBER 4 YEAR 2Ar8

REGARDING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN WHO ARE VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF MUSI RAWAS,

Considering : Whereas women and children are among vulnerable
a. groups who tend to experience violence and therefore need to receive protection;
whereas violence against women and children
b. continues to increase, therefore protection efforts are needed;
whereas all forms of violence against women
c. and children constitute violations of law and human rights and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their fitrah and nature without discrimination;
whereas based on the considerations as
d. referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Second Level Regions and Municipalities in South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection. Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606;
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
8. Law Number 44 of 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
11. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
12. Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law;
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 5, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4605);
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 05 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
16. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regional Development;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2015 concerning Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
18. Regulation of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3 of 2017 concerning Guidelines for Adjudicating Cases of Women in Contact with the Law.
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY and

REGENT OF MUSI RAWAS
DECREES:
To Stipulate: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS

VIOLENCE
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Kabupaten is Kabupaten Musi Rawas;
2. Kabupaten Government is the Government of Kabupaten Musi Rawas;
3. Bupati is the Bupati of Musi Rawas.
4. Domestic Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty within the domestic sphere.
5. Elimination of Domestic Violence is the guarantee provided by the state to prevent the occurrence of domestic violence, prosecute perpetrators of domestic violence, and protect victims of domestic violence.
6. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of a person holding control over another person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
7. Victim of Trafficking in Persons is a person who experiences psychological, mental, physical, sexual, economic, and/or social suffering, caused by the criminal act of trafficking in persons.
8. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, psychological to the victim.
9. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
10. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
11. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Women in conflict with the law are women in conflict with the law, women as victims, women as witnesses or women as parties.
14. Child is a person under 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
16. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
17. Guardian is a person or body that in reality exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
18. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
19. Child with Disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental impairments so as to disrupt their growth and development normally.
20. Child with excellence is a child who has extraordinary intelligence, or has special potential and/or talent.
21. Adopted child is a child whose rights are transferred from the environment of the authority of the family of parents, legal guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the child, into the family environment of adoptive parents based on a court decision or determination.
22. Foster child is a child cared for by a person or institution, to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health, because their parents or one of their parents is unable to guarantee the child's normal growth and development.
23. Custody is the power of parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop the child in accordance with their religion and abilities, talents, and interests.
24. Child's rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, society, government, and the state.
25. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
26. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate, optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
27. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse (napza), children victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of abuse and neglect.
28. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is, or has occurred.
29. Victim recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of domestic violence to be more empowered both physically and psychologically.
30. Implementation of Recovery is all actions that include services and assistance to victims of domestic violence.
31. Recovery implementation officer is a health worker, social worker, volunteer companion, and/or spiritual counselor.
32. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and self-recovery of victims of violence.
33. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for strengthening victims of domestic violence to resolve the problems they face.
34. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
35. Cooperation is a systematic and integrated method among recovery implementers in providing services to recover victims of domestic violence.
36. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with established operational standards.
37. Society is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
38. Every person is an individual or corporation.
39. Household means family members, relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (servants, drivers and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

Article 2
the implementation of protection for women victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of victims

Article 3
the implementation of child protection is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child covering:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values toward women and children;
c. socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. providing facilities needed for victim recovery, including:
1. skilled and professional personnel;
2. service centers, safe houses; and
3. other infrastructure and facilities needed for victim recovery.
e. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

Article 7
For the implementation of services to victims, Government Agencies and Regional governments in accordance with their respective functions and duties may undertake efforts to:
a. provide special service rooms at police offices;
b. provide apparatus, health workers, social workers, and spiritual counselors;
c. create and develop systems and mechanisms for cooperation in service programs that involve parties easily accessible to victims; and
d. provide protection for companions, witnesses, family, and friends of victims.

Article 8
To implement the efforts as referred to in Article 7, the government and regional governments in accordance with their respective functions and duties, may cooperate with the community or other social institutions.
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
 d. respect for the views of the child.

Article 4
The purpose of establishing this Regional Regulation is to provide protection and services to women and children who are victims of gender-based violence, based on the best interests of the child, occurring in the household and/or in public spaces, as well as to guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination, for the realization of Indonesian children who are of quality, of noble character, and prosperous.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 5
Every woman and child Victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. protection from family members, the police, the prosecutor's office, the courts, advocates, social institutions, or other parties either temporarily or based on the determination of a protection order from the court;
b. health services in accordance with medical needs;
c. special handling related to the confidentiality of the victim;
d. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
e. spiritual guidance services

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
The Regency Government and the Regency community are obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:

Article 9
Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of domestic violence is obligated to make efforts in accordance with their capabilities to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims;
c. provide emergency assistance; and
d. assist in the process of submitting applications for protection orders.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Section
Institutional

Article 10
(1) For the implementation of Protection for women and children, the Regency government is obligated to provide services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements; and
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(2) The Regency government in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(3) The implementation of the Protection Institution for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of P.ZTP2,A.
(4) Further provisions regarding P2IflP2,A are regulated in a Regent Regulation.
Second Part Forms and Mechanisms of Service

Article 11
(1) The form of Integrated Services for victims organized by YXIP2A includes:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery for physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services constitute a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in the context of traumatic recovery of the victim's condition, including the provision of space and the victim's house/home to protect victims from threats and intimidation against victims;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized based on Standard Operating Procedures.
(3) Provisions regarding Standard Operating Procedures as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.
Part Three Service Principles

Article 12
The provision of services for women and child victims is carried out with:
a. promptly;
b. safely;
c. empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; and
g. a guarantee of confidentiality.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF CHILD PROTECTION
Section Kesattr
Religion

Article 13
Every child receives protection to worship according to (1) their religion.
Before a child can determine their choice of religion, the religion adhered to by (2) the child is the religion of their parents.

Article 14
(1) The state, government, society, family, parents, guardians, and social institutions guarantee the protection of children in embracing their religion.
(2) The protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes fostering, guidance, and the practice of religious teachings for children.
Part Two Health

Article 15
(1) The Government is obliged to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains an optimal degree of health from the time they are in the womb.
(2) The provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) is supported by community participation.
(3) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
(4) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized in a manner as stated in the original text ("cuilra-cuilra").
(5) The implementation of provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3), and paragraph (4) shall be adjusted to the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 16
(1) Parents and family are responsible for maintaining the health of children and caring for children from the womb.
(2) In the event that parents and family are unable to carry out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), then the government is obliged to fulfill it.
(3) The obligations as referred to in paragraph (2), their implementation is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 17
The state, government, family, and parents are obligated to endeavor to ensure that children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.

Article 18
(1) The state, government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from attempts to transplant their body organs for other parties.
(2) The state, government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from acts of:
a. removal of children's body organs and/or children's body tissue without regard to the child's health;
b. sale and purchase of children's organs and/or body tissue; and
c. health research that uses children as research subjects without parental consent and does not prioritize the best interests of the child.

Third Part
Education

Article 19
The government is obligated to provide basic education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years for all children.

Article 2O
The State, government, family, and parents are obligated to provide the widest possible opportunity to children to obtain education.

Article 21.
Education as referred to in Article 20 is directed at: a. the development of the child's personality, talents, mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential;
b. the development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
c. the development of respect for their parents, their own cultural identity, language and values, the national values where the child resides, where the child originates from, and civilizations that are different from their own civilization;
d. the preparation of the child for a responsible life; and e. the development of respect and love for the environment.

Article 22
A child with physical and mental disabilities shall be given equal opportunity and accessibility to obtain regular education and special education.

Article 23
Children who have advantages are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.

Article 24
(1) The government is responsible for providing education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children who reside in remote areas.
(2) The government's responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.

Article 25
Children in and around the school environment must be protected from acts of violence committed by teachers, school administrators, or their peers/friends within the school concerned, or by other educational institutions.

Part Four
Social

Article 26
(1) The government is obligated to provide care and maintenance for neglected children, both in institutions and outside institutions.
(2) The provision of care as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by community institutions.
(3) To provide care and maintenance for neglected children, government institutions and community institutions, as referred to in paragraph (2), may establish cooperation with various related parties.
(4) In the case of providing care and maintenance as referred to in paragraph (3), it shall be carried out by the Social Service.

Article 27
(1) The government in conducting maintenance and care is obligated to endeavor and assist children, so that children can:
a. participate;
b. freely express opinions and think in accordance with their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information in accordance with the child's age stage and development;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and engage in cultural arts; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.
(2) The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the age, environment, and level of the child's ability, and so as not to hinder and disturb the child's development.

Article 28
In the event that a child is neglected because for some reason the parents neglect their obligations, then the institution as referred to in Article 27, the family, or the authorized official may submit a request to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 29
(1) The court determination as referred to in Article 4O simultaneously determines the place of shelter, maintenance, and care for the neglected child concerned.
(2) The Government or authorized institution shall provide the place as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Five
Special Protection

Article 3O
The Government and other state institutions are obligated and responsible to provide special protection to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza), children victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of mistreatment and neglect.
Article 31 Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 3O consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children victims of riots;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 32
Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 30 letter a shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of humanitarian law.

Article 33
special protection for child victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 30 letter b, letter c, and letter d, shall be implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, shelter, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with Disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 34
Every person is prohibited from recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests and from leaving children without protection of their lives.

Article 35
(1) Special protection for children in contact with the law as referred to in Article 30 includes children in conflict with the law and child victims of criminal acts, and constitutes the obligation and responsibility of the government and society.
(2) Special protection for children in contact with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
 a. humane treatment of children in accordance with the dignity and rights of children;
 b. provision of special accompanying officers for children from an early stage;
 c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
 d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the child;
 e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of children in contact with the law;
 f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
 g. protection from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling.
(3) Special protection for children who become victims of criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
 a. rehabilitation efforts, both within institutions and outside institutions;
 b. efforts to protect from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling;
 c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, whether physical, mental, or social; and
 d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Article 36
(1) Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 30 shall be carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, profess and practice their own religion, and use their own language.
(2) Every person is prohibited from obstructing children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, professing and practicing their religion, and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Article 37
(1) Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 3O is the obligation and responsibility of the government and society.
(2) Special protection for children who are exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. Dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of laws and regulations related to the protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various government agencies, companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and society in the elimination of exploitation of children economically and/or sexually.
(3) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing exploitation of children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 38
(1) Special protection for children who become victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza) as referred to in Article 30, and are involved in their production and distribution, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the government and society.
(2) Every person is prohibited from deliberately placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, production and distribution of napza as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 39
(1) Special protection for child victims of abduction, sale, and trafficking of children as referred to in Article 30 is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, and rehabilitation by the government and society.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing abduction, sale, or trafficking as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 4O
Special protection for child victims of violence as referred to in Article 30 includes: physical, psychological, and sexual violence carried out through efforts: dissemination and socialization of statutory provisions that protect child victims of criminal acts of violence; and monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions.
Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, (2) ordering to commit, or participating in committing violence as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 41
(1) Special protection for children with disabilities as referred to in Article 30 shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. treat children humanely in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;
b. fulfill special needs; and
c. obtain equal treatment with other children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development.
(2) Everyone is prohibited from treating children by disregarding their views in a discriminatory manner, including labeling and equalization in education for children with disabilities.

Article 42
(1) Special protection for child victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 30 shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, and rehabilitation by the government and society.
(2) Everyone is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

CHAPTER VI
RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Part One
General

Article 43
Persons with Disabilities have the right to:
a. life;
b. freedom from stigma;
c. privacy;
d. justice and legal protection;
e. education;
f. employment, entrepreneurship, and cooperatives;
g. health;
h. politics;
i. religion;
j. sports;
k. culture and tourism;
l. social welfare;
m. accessibility;
n. public services;
o. protection from disasters;
p. habilitation and rehabilitation;
q. concessions;
r. data collection;
s. to live independently and be involved in society;
t. expression, communication, and obtaining information;
u. freedom of movement and citizenship; and
v. freedom from acts of Discrimination, neglect, torture, and exploitation.

Article 44
In addition to the rights of Persons with Disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1), women with disabilities have the right:
a. to reproductive health;
b. to accept or refuse the use of contraceptives;
c. to receive greater Protection from multiple Discrimination;
d. to receive greater Protection from acts of violence, including sexual violence and exploitation.

Article 45
In addition to the rights of Persons with Disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1), children with disabilities have the right to:
a. receive special Protection from Discrimination, neglect, harassment, exploitation, as well as violence and sexual crimes;
b. receive care and upbringing from family or substitute family to grow and develop optimally;
c. have their interests protected in decision-making;
d. treatment of children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;
e. Fulfillment of special needs;
f. equal treatment with other children to achieve social integration and individual development; and
g. receive social assistance.

Second Part
Right to Life

Article 46
The right to life for Persons with Disabilities includes the right to:
a. respect for integrity;
b. not be deprived of life;
c. receive care and nurturing that ensures the continuity of life;
d. freedom from neglect, shackling, confinement, and isolation;
e. freedom from threats and various forms of exploitation; and
f. freedom from torture, and other cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment and punishment.

Third Part
Right to Freedom from Stigma

Article 47
The right to freedom from stigma for Persons with Disabilities includes the right to freedom from harassment, humiliation, and negative labeling related to their disability condition.
Part Four Right to Privacy

Article 48
The right to privacy for Persons with Disabilities includes the right to:
a. be recognized as an individual person who can demand and obtain equal treatment and Protection in accordance with human dignity in public;
b. form a family and continue descendants through a lawful marriage;
c. Respect for home and family;
d. obtain Protection for personal and family life; and
e. be protected in the confidentiality of personal data, correspondence, and other forms of personal communication, including health data and information.
Part Five Right to Justice and Legal Protection

Article 49
The rights to justice and legal protection for Persons with Disabilities include the right:
a. to equal treatment before the law;
b. to be recognized as a legal subject;
c. to own and inherit movable or immovable property;
d. to control financial matters or appoint a person to represent their interests in financial affairs;
e. to obtain access to banking and non-banking services;
f. to obtain the provision of Accessibility in judicial services;
g. to protection from all pressure, violence, persecution, discrimination, and/or deprivation or seizure of property rights; to choose and appoint a person to represent their interests in civil matters inside and outside the court; and
i. Part Six Right to Education

Article 5O
The right to education for Persons with Disabilities includes the right to: a. obtain quality education at educational units in all types, pathways, and levels of education in an inclusive and special manner; b. have Equal Opportunity to become an educator or educational personnel at educational units in all types, pathways, and levels of education;
c. have Equal Opportunity as providers of quality education at educational units in all types, pathways, and levels of education; and
d. obtain Reasonable Accommodation as students.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S PROTECTION
Women's Rights

Article 51
Women have the right to obtain education and instruction in employment, positions, and professions in accordance with the requirements that have been determined.

Article 52
(1) Women have the right to choose, be elected, be appointed, in employment, positions, and professions in accordance with the requirements and statutory regulations.
(2) Women have the right to obtain special protection in the implementation of their work or profession against matters that may threaten their safety and/or health in relation to Women's reproductive function.
(3) Special rights attached to Women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.

Article 53
Adult women and/or women who are married have the right to carry out legal acts on their own, unless otherwise stipulated by their religious law.

Article 54
In the examination of cases involving Women in Contact with the Law, judges must not:
a. display attitudes or issue statements that demean, blame and/or intimidate Women in Contact with the Law.
b. justify the occurrence of Discrimination Against Women by using culture, customary rules and other traditional practices or by using expert interpretations that are Gender biased;
c. question and/or consider the victim's sexual experience or background as a basis for acquitting the perpetrator or mitigating the perpetrator's sentence; and
d. issue statements or views that contain Gender stereotypes.

Article 55
During the course of trial examination, the judge shall prevent and/or reprimand the parties, legal advisors, public prosecutors and/or legal representatives who behave or make statements that demean, blame, intimidate and/or use the experience or sexual background of Women in Conflict with the Law.

Article 56
If a Woman Facing the Law experiences physical and psychological obstacles such that she requires assistance, then the Judge may grant the request of the Woman Facing the Law to have a companion/assistant present.

Article 57
The judge on their own initiative or upon request of the parties, public prosecutor, legal counsel and/or victim may order a Woman in Contact with the Law to have her testimony heard through examination via remote audio visual communication at the local court or at another location, if:
1) The mental/psychological condition of the Woman in Contact with the Law is unhealthy due to fear/psychological trauma based on the assessment of a doctor or psychologist;
2) Based on the judge's assessment, the safety of the Woman in Contact with the Law cannot be guaranteed if she is in a public and open place; or
3) Based on the decision of the Witness and Victim Protection Agency (LPSK), the Woman in Contact with the Law is declared to be in a witness and/or victim protection program and, according to LPSK, cannot attend the trial to give testimony either due to security reasons or due to obstacles, or due to physical and psychological obstacles.

CHAPTER VIII
ROLE OF THE COMMUNITY
Article 58
(1) The community has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to play a role in the protection of women and children.
(2) The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 59
The role of society shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the prevailing laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF VICTIM RECOVERY
Article 60
(1) The implementation of recovery activities for women and child victims includes:
a) Health services;
Health services are carried out by health workers at health facilities owned by the government, regional government, and the community, including the private sector, by providing medical treatment and health recovery services to victims.
b) Victim assistance;
Victim assistance is carried out by health workers, social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors by providing counseling, therapy, spiritual guidance and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims.
c) Counseling;
The provision of counseling is carried out by social workers, volunteer assistants, by listening empathetically and exploring problems for the psychological empowerment of victims.
d) Spiritual guidance;
Spiritual guidance is carried out by spiritual counselors by providing explanations regarding their rights and obligations, as well as strengthening faith and piety in accordance with the religion and beliefs they adhere to.
e) Resocialization.
Resocialization of victims is carried out by social agencies and social institutions so that victims can resume their social functions in society.

CHAPTER IX
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 61 Every person who intentionally fails to provide protection to women and children such that:
a. causes violence to occur;
b. allows violence to occur; and/or
c. does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 62
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Musi Rawas Regency.
Enacted in Lubuklinggau on 20 March 2018
REGENT OF MUSI RAWAS,

H.H GUNAWAN
Promulgated in Lubuklinggau on 28 March 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF THE REGIONAL REGULATION OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY, SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE ( ? IMUR /2018).

EXPLANATION
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY
NUMBER T. YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
GENERAL
I. The National Objectives of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, as regulated in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution in the fourth paragraph are stated to include: (1) protecting the entire Indonesian nation and the entire territory of Indonesia, (2) advancing public welfare, (3) educating the life of the nation and (4) participating in implementing world order based on: (a) independence, (b) eternal peace, and (c) social justice. To achieve these objectives, in accordance with the teachings of trias politica, there are three State powers namely executive power for the administration of government, legislative power as the formulator of laws and regulations and judicial power as the implementer of laws and regulations. In Indonesia, these three powers complement each other, for the implementation of clean and authoritative government, from the national level to the regional level.
The Republic of Indonesia is a State of Law (rechtstaat) and not a State of Power (machtstaat), so that all actions of its citizens, including those in the form of violence, committed by both men and women, are also regulated by law.
The Rights of Women and Children are recognized as Human Rights (HAM), which must be upheld and respected by all parties, but in reality there are still many women and children who become victims of violence. The commitment of the Central Government to protect children and women is reflected in the legislation below it.
Regional Autonomy that is implemented, has strategic value so that each region forms legislation (Regional Regulations), not only to express local wisdom, but also to become a guideline for Regional Governments to implement the legislation above it (the 1945 Constitution, and Laws) to address legal problems and social problems that occur specifically in each region.
This Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children, is based on Pancasila, and the 1945 Constitution, and refers to Laws that regulate the protection of women and children victims of violence, among which are Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, Law Number 29 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Justice, Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law, and other related Laws, Law Number 8 Year 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities, Supreme Court Regulation Number 3 Year 2017 concerning Guidelines for Adjudicating Cases of Women in Conflict with the Law, The principles of this Perda are principles contained in previous laws and regulations, for example the principle of respect for Human Rights and gender equality and justice, are actually already contained in

Article 27 of the 1945 Constitution, which essentially constitutes legal provisions on gender equality and justice, while simultaneously reflecting recognition of Human Rights, because what is referred to as every Citizen naturally consists of men and women, having equal standing in the fields of law and government.
Also in Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution, which essentially stipulates that every person, naturally both men and women, has the right to protection and freedom from fear. Article 28H paragraph (2), which essentially regulates the rights of citizens to obtain facilities and special treatment to obtain equality and justice, naturally including women and children victims of violence.
Violence with victims being women and children occurs both within marriage and outside marriage. Whereas Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage, which in Article 1 regulates the definition of marriage as a physical and spiritual bond between a man and a woman to build a household based on the One Supreme God. Article 30 stipulates that the obligations of husband and wife are to be mutually faithful, loving, and helpful.
In this Marriage Law, provisions are made regarding who constitutes biological children, as well as joint assets, including the manner of continuing their ownership or inheritance to the children. If this Law is complied with, it can prevent and eliminate Domestic Violence; unfortunately, what occurs in society is that Domestic Violence (KDRT) is increasingly rampant, precisely with modus operandi that are increasingly complex and cause increasingly horrifying consequences. The principle of non-discrimination is in line with the recognition of Human Rights, therefore it is very appropriate that the Government of Indonesia, by enacting Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), in Article 1 states the definition of discrimination against women and all its consequences if discrimination against women occurs.
Basically, working is only for adults, whereas children, namely persons under 18 years of age, have the obligation to pursue education and play. However, due to family economic limitations, there are some children who must work. Therefore Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Minimum Age Limit for Children to be able to work provides provisions that parents and employers should pay attention to the provisions of this Law, so that even though children are forced to work, they do not lose their youth and can still attend school to secure their future. Children who are forced to work are found in all areas, both in urban and rural areas. In order for children to obtain their rights, socialization of Law Number 20 Year 1999 is urgent to be carried out.
As a consequence of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as a State that participated in signing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights becomes the answer. Considering that although since Indonesia's Independence, the 1945 Constitution also stated recognition of Human Rights as regulated in Articles 27 to 34, in reality there are still many women and children who become victims of violence which clearly constitutes a violation of Human Rights. In Law Number 39 Year 1999 it is reaffirmed that women's rights are Human Rights (Article 45) and Article 52 paragraph (2), which states that Children's rights are Human Rights and for the benefit of children's rights they are recognized and protected by law even from the womb.
This means that children are recognized as having freedom and liberty in accordance with their dignity and worth as human beings, so that any form of violence whatsoever must not occur to children, because it constitutes a violation of Human Rights.
The commitment and political will of the Government of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia to protect children is reinforced by the enactment of Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection. In accordance with the types of crimes against children which nowadays increasingly occur, we need to study in depth the provisions of Articles 77 to 90, which already provide sufficiently severe criminal sanctions (threats). Examples related to this regional regulation for cases occurring in society are those violating Articles 81, 82 and 83. For this reason, let us carefully examine the contents of Articles 81, 82, 83 so that child victims of violence or sexual crimes in society receive legal protection in accordance with a sense of justice

Article 81 states: (1) Every person who intentionally commits violence or threat of violence to force a child to have intercourse with him or with another person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 15 (fifteen) years and a minimum of 5 (five) years and a fine of at most Rp.300,000,000,- (three hundred million rupiah) and at least Rp.5,000,000.- (five million rupiah). (2) The Criminal Provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall also apply to every person who intentionally commits deception, a series of lies, or persuades a child to have intercourse with him or with another person. (3) The Criminal Provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) committed by Parents, Guardians, Child Caregivers, Educators or Education Personnel, then the sentence shall be increased by 1/3 (one third) of the sentence as referred to in paragraph (1)
Article 82 states: (1) Every person who intentionally commits violence or threat of violence, coercion, deception, a series of lies, or persuades a child to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 15 (fifteen) years and a minimum of 5 (five) years and a fine of at most Rp. 5,000,000,000,- (Five billion rupiah). (2) The Criminal Provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) committed by Parents, Guardians, Child Caregivers, Educators or Education Personnel, then the sentence shall be increased by 1/3 (one third) of the sentence as referred to in paragraph (1)

Article 83 states: Every person who traffics, sells, or kidnaps a child for themselves or to be sold, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 15 (fifteen) years and a minimum of 3 (three) years and a fine of at most Rp. 300,000,000,- (three hundred million rupiah) and at least Rp. 60,000,000,- (sixty million rupiah).
These three Articles are very reformative Articles when compared with the provisions in the Criminal Code, which in articles 281 to 296 regulate provisions, where the heaviest criminal threat is Article 295, namely 12 years. When compared, the Child Protection Law has been quite severe in establishing criminal threats and fines as regulated in Article 81 to Article 83.
The problem is, even though the Law has established heavy threats or legal sanctions, there are still Law Enforcement Officials who have not optimally implemented them, so there is still a long way to go, between law in book and law in action. In cases as regulated in Article 81 to Article 83, Law Officials often conduct investigation and inquiry processes that are quite heavy and exhausting for child victims of violence, but in prosecution and judges' verdicts they are still light so they are not in accordance with justice.
Violence against women and children also occurs frequently within the household scope, even though we have had a law for 13 years, namely Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (KDRT), but nowadays domestic violence is increasing in number. For the prevention and handling of domestic violence in Musi Rawas Regency, the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Musi Rawas Regency has established an Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children (P2TP2A) of Musi Rawas Regency, based on the Decree of the Regent of Musi Rawas Number 703/KPTS/KPP/2015, namely concerning the Establishment of the Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A) of Musi Rawas Regency. The Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A) serves as a place for reporting, handling, rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of violence. If there is domestic violence or other violence affecting women and children, it must be reported to the P2TP2A, however the existence of P2TP2A is not yet widely known by the community.
Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, in essence is to realize a household that is sakinah, mawadah, and warohmah, this can be read from the objectives of eliminating domestic violence, namely: (a) preventing all forms of domestic violence (KDRT); (b) protecting victims of domestic violence, (c) taking action against perpetrators of domestic violence and (d) maintaining the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household. So that we better understand the prohibition of domestic violence, the important matters from Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning domestic violence will be briefly described as follows: Types of domestic violence, include:
a. physical violence, is an act that results in (1) pain, (2) falling ill, or (3) serious injury;
b. psychological violence, is an act that results in (1) fear, (2) loss of self-confidence, (3) loss of ability to act, (4) feeling of helplessness, (5) and/or severe psychological suffering to a person;
c. sexual violence includes: (1) forced sexual relations committed against a person including a child, who resides within the household scope, (2) forced sexual relations against one person within their household scope with another person including a child, for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes;
d. household neglect, includes (1) neglecting a person including a child within their household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person or child, (2) resulting in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
The rights of domestic violence victims are to obtain: (1) protection from family, police, prosecutor's office, court, advocates, social institutions, or other parties either temporarily or based on a court order;
(2) health services in accordance with medical needs; (3) special handling related to victim confidentiality;
(4) accompaniment by social workers and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations and (5) spiritual guidance services. All parties both from government elements, Law Enforcement Officials (APH) and NGOs, have become members of the P2TP2A of Musi Rawas Regency.
The obligation to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, is in sync with the provisions of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government. In this Law it is stipulated that the authority to carry out women's empowerment and child protection is handed over to Regional Governments, so it is a very good opportunity for Regional Governments including the Regional Government of Musi Rawas Regency, nowadays to establish Regional Regulations with a gender equality and justice perspective and children's rights.
This Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, is established in accordance with the provisions of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation. The material of this Law provides complete guidance regarding the formal juridical and material juridical requirements that must be met if we want to establish legislation, including Regional Regulations, starting from the preparation of Academic Papers (NA), to Draft Regency/City Regional Regulations. With this Law, all parties are obliged to make it the basis in the formation as well as during public consultation, in order to comply with the provisions of this Law, so that we can all focus on the format and substance of the Draft Regional Regulation being discussed.
o. obtain health services; and
p. obtain other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
The Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is not only for women and children victims of violence in normal conditions, but also for women and children with disabilities as regulated by Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities, which in Article 5 stipulates that: Persons with Disabilities have the right to:
a. life;
b. freedom from stigma;
c. privacy;
d. justice and legal protection;
e. education;
f. employment, entrepreneurship, and cooperatives;
g. health;
h. politics;
i. religion;
j. sports;
k. culture and tourism;
l. social welfare;
m. accessibility;
n. Public services;
o. protection from disasters;
p. habilitation and rehabilitation;
q. concessions;
r. data collection;
s. live independently and be involved in society;
t. express, communicate, and obtain information;
u. movement and citizenship; and
v. freedom from acts of Discrimination, neglect, torture, and exploitation.
Protection of children, not only those who are victims of violence, but also those undergoing judicial processes, as regulated in Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System, as an improvement to Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Courts, which in Article 3 stipulates that: Every Child in the criminal justice process has the right to:
a. be treated humanely with attention to needs according to their age;
b. be separated from adults;
c. obtain legal assistance and other assistance effectively; d. engage in recreational activities;
e. be free from torture, punishment or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane, and degrading to their dignity and honor;
f. not be sentenced to death or life imprisonment; g. not be arrested, detained, or imprisoned, except as a last resort and for the shortest time;
h. obtain justice before a Juvenile Court that is objective, impartial, and in a closed session to the public; i. not have their identity published;
j. obtain accompaniment from parents/Guardians and persons trusted by the Child;
k. obtain social advocacy;
l. obtain private life;
m. obtain accessibility, especially for disabled children; n. obtain education;
From the provisions of the legislation above, we can understand how great the attention of the Central Government is to protect its citizens who are in an unpleasant position, namely when becoming victims of violence, but in reality legal processes are still rarely carried out for victims of violence which nowadays are increasingly numerous and complex in their problems. In addition, it turns out that the verdicts of District Court judges are still many that are far from the demands of community justice, including families and victims of violence.
Hopefully with the enactment of this Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, in Musi Rawas Regency in particular, the handling, and rehabilitation as well as reintegration can be carried out well, and the process of preventing violence against women and children becomes smoother, so that there is less and ultimately no more violence against women and children. Amen.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE EXPLANATION.
Article 1
Article 2
Letter a Sufficiently clear, Letter b Justice, gender equality, this principle is very important because in reality there are still many victims who have not received justice, let alone recovery and reintegration, which are the rights of victims of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations, including Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, and Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Human Trafficking. If this principle is not guaranteed and not implemented, then victims will become marginalized parties, so that it can cause incidents that we do not expect, for example becoming mentally ill and even to the desire and implementation of the desire to commit suicide because they no longer have hope of being accepted by society, even by their own family. Many experiences like this have occurred in the Indonesian nation, let us end this humanitarian tragedy, because we acknowledge that even though they are victims and even perpetrators of violence, they remain part of the Indonesian nation, who are entitled to Human Rights that we jointly proclaim to be respected and implemented. Amen Letter c Non-discrimination, we often do not realize that we do this, for example discrimination based on differences in ethnicity, race, gender, religion, marital status, social status and many more. The principle of non-discrimination requires us to treat ourselves and others equally, fairly, justly as ordinary human beings.
Letter d The best interests of the victim, is a principle specific to women that can only be formulated by women themselves. Women victims of violence want to be given freedom in accordance with their interests, women want to forget the perpetrator who is actually a person they once loved, and so on. So we as a society or as law enforcement officials need to give women the opportunity to express their interests regarding everything related to the perpetrator as well as how to overcome the impact of the violence that befalls them.

Article 3
Letter a Non-discrimination, this principle we often do not realize when we practice it, for example differences in ethnicity, race, gender, religion, social status and many more. The principle of non-discrimination requires us to treat our own children and other people's children the same, equally, fairly as ordinary human beings.
Letter b The best interests of the child, is a principle specific to children which can only be formulated by the child themselves. For example, how the interests of child victims of violence in undergoing the sanctions imposed upon them, or how the child will face the perpetrator in court, must be asked in accordance with the interests of the child victim of violence. The child wants to forget the perpetrator who incidentally is someone close to them. So we as a community or as law enforcement officials need to give children the opportunity to express their interests regarding everything related to the perpetrator as well as how to address the impact of the violence that befell them.
Letter c What is meant by the right to life, survival and development is the most fundamental human right for children which is protected by the State, government, family, and parents.
Letter d What is meant by respect for the views of the child is respect for children's rights to participate and express their opinions in decision-making especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Paragraph (1) Htrnd Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e C*trp clear

Article 7
Letter a: Sufficiently clear.
Letter b: Sufficiently clear.
Letter c: Sufficiently clear.
Letter d: Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Clause (1)
Letter a: Sufficiently clear.
Letter b: Sufficiently clear.
Clause (2): Sufficiently clear.
Clause (3): Sufficiently clear.
Clause (4): Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Letter a. Sufficiently clear.
Letter b. Sufficiently clear.
Letter c. Sufficiently clear.
Letter d. Sufficiently clear.
Letter e. Sufficiently clear.
Letter f. Sufficiently clear.
Letter g. Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) A child may determine their choice of religion if the child has reached the age of reason and is responsible, and fulfills the requirements and procedures in accordance with the provisions of the religion they have chosen, and the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 14
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Paragraph (r) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (a) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Paragraph (1) Quite clear
Paragraph (2) Quite clear
Paragraph (3) Quite clear

Article 17
Diseases that threaten survival and cause disability, for example HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB), leprosy, polio.

Article 18
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 2O
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear
Pasl24
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Paragraph (1) What is meant by the maintenance and care of neglected children in institutions is through the system of government homes/shelters and private homes/shelters, while outside institutions it is the system of family or individual care.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Culimp clear

Article 3O
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Cukrp Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 4O
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 41
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Culmp clear

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "Multiple discrimination" is Discrimination experienced by women because of their gender as women and as Persons with Disabilities so that they do not get equal opportunities in the family, society, and state in various fields of life.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "replacement family" is foster parents, adoptive parents, guardians, and/or institutions that carry out the role and responsibility to provide care and upbringing to children.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Pressure, violence, maltreatment, discrimination, and/or deprivation or seizure or takeover of property rights include, among others, in the form of forcing someone to stay at a care institution, forcing the use of contraceptive devices, forcing the consumption of harmful drugs, shackling, confinement, or detention.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.

Article 5O
Letter a What is meant by "inclusive education" is education for students with Disabilities to study together with students without Disabilities in regular schools or higher education institutions.
What is meant by "special education" is education that only provides services to students

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "Counseling" is the provision of assistance by an expert or a person who is trained in such a way that the victim's psychological understanding and capacity increases in solving the problems they face.
Letter d What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is counseling provided by a spiritual leader.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.

Article 6O
Sufficiently clear.

Article 61
Sufficiently clear.

Article 62
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MUSI RAWAS REGENCY YEAR 2018 /)
NUMBER....',.