REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAGELANG REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 2

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAGELANG REGENCY NUMBER 2 YEAR 2016

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

AGAINST VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD THE REGENT OF MAGELANG, Considering:
a. that protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination aims to realize constitutional rights and human rights in accordance with the values of Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution;
b. that based on Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government together with the community is obliged to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for women and children victims of violence and discrimination;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Against Acts of Violence and Discrimination;

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of -1- Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) -2- as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
12. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 Year 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children (Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Year 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);
13. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 7 Year 2013 concerning the Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Year 2013 Number 7, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 53);

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MAGELANG REGENCY and

THE REGENT OF MAGELANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN AGAINST ACTS

VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is Magelang Regency.
3-

2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Magelang.
4. Regional House of Representatives of Magelang Regency, hereinafter referred to as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of Governmental Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
7. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and verbal that causes danger to life, body and/or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
8. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
9. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
10. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differences on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
11. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud and -4- abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
12. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.
13. Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering either physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals, including the victim's heirs.
14. Integrated Service Center for the Empowerment of Women and Child Victims of Violence and Discrimination, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services and rehabilitation to women and child victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
15. Task Force for the Prevention and Handling of Trafficking in Persons Crimes, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts for trafficking in persons crimes in Magelang Regency.
16. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction to be able to carry out their social functions normally.
17. Safe house (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
18. Social reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the work environment, family substitutes that can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
19. Recovery of victims is all efforts to strengthen victims of violence against women and children to be more empowered, both physically, psychologically, socially, economically and socially.
5-

20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of women and child victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward to the third degree.
22. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
23. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. empowerment; and
f. integration.

Article 3

The objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence and discrimination are to:
a. prevent acts of violence and discrimination against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence, discrimination and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect women and children from acts of violence and discrimination in obtaining their legitimate rights constitutionally

d. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children;

e. provide services and protection to women and child victims of acts of violence and discrimination, reporters, and witnesses; and

f. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
6-

CHAPTER III

PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION

Article 4

1. To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence and discrimination against women and children, the Regional Government carries out empowerment and awareness to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government undertakes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. facilitating the fulfillment of employment opportunities for women;
d. encouraging community participation and concern for the prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, educational institutions and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening an integrated service system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination in every village.

Article 5

1. Prevention of acts of violence and discrimination against women and children as referred to in Article 4, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. people's welfare; and
g. tranquility and public order.
2. Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan.
7-

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION

Article 6

Women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination shall receive the following rights:

a. the right to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to social rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling;
h. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
i. the right to assistance;
j. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
k. the right to basic services;
l. the right to equal protection;
m. the right to be free from various stigma; and
n. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V

SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION

Article 7

1. The Regional Government is obliged to provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided to witnesses and/or victims of violence and discrimination.
3. In the context of services as referred to in paragraph (1), Standard Operating Procedures for Services shall be prepared.

Article 8

1. Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination as referred to in Article 7 include:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid services;
8-
d. repatriation services;
e. rehabilitation and social reintegration services; and
f. education services for children who are victims of acts of violence and discrimination.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. women's empowerment and child protection; and
e. mental and spiritual.
3. Further provisions regarding procedures for handling services for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 9

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence and discrimination are the joint responsibility of:

a. Regional Government;
b. Village Government;
c. Community; and
d. Family.

Article 10

1. Obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 10 letter a, include:
a. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
b. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity;
9-
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
g. providing recovery and social reintegration services;
h. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
i. providing Human Resources in the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in the Regional Action Plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
4. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

Article 11

Obligations and responsibilities of the Village Government as referred to in Article 10 letter b, include:

a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination established by the government;
b. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
d. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination in accordance with village financial capacity;
e. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination; and
f. encouraging and increasing community participation.

Article 12

1. The community participates in the protection of women and children victims of violence and discrimination, both individually and in groups.
10-
2. The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, women and child protection institutions, social welfare institutions, community organizations, educational institutions, mass media, and the business sector.

3. The role of the community in the implementation of protection of women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by:
a. providing information through socialization and education regarding the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
b. providing input in the formulation of policies related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
c. reporting to the competent authorities if violations of acts of violence and discrimination against women and children occur;
d. playing an active role in the rehabilitation and social reintegration process for women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination;
e. conducting monitoring and supervision of the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
f. providing facilities and infrastructure in order to support the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination;
g. playing an active role in eliminating negative labeling of women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination; and
h. providing space for women and children to participate and express their opinions.

Article 13

The obligation of the family as referred to in Article 10 letter d has full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and discrimination and to protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VII

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 14

1. In the context of services for women and children victims of violence and discrimination as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government shall establish an Institution named the Integrated Service Center for Women Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) or a similar institution that has the same function and role as a service center in the protection of women and children from violence and discrimination.
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as:
a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and
c. an empowerment center for women and children.
3. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be located in the Region and Sub-district.
4. In the context of protection services for women and children from violence at the village level, an Integrated Service Center shall be established.
5. Further provisions regarding the organizational structure and working procedures of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 15

In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 14, in order to support the implementation of the provision of protection for women and children from violence and discrimination, the Regent shall establish:

a. a task force on the criminal offense of trafficking in persons; and
b. a regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 16

1. The task force as referred to in Article 15 letter a, shall consist of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
2. The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinative body tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of the criminal offense of trafficking in persons.
3. Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation.
12-

Article 17

1. The committee as referred to in Article 15 letter b, shall consist of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
2. Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One

Cooperation

Article 18

1. In order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children from violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government shall cooperate with:
a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. Other Regency/City Governments;
d. the Village Government;
e. the Community; and
f. the Mass Media.
2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two

Partnership

Article 19

1. The Regional Government shall establish partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from violence and discrimination.
2. Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
13-
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who have been withdrawn from their education;
d. fostering and enhancing the economic independence of women victims of violence; and
e. elimination of the worst forms of child labor.
3. Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of an agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 20

1. The Regional Government is obligated to provide guidance on the implementation of protection for women and children from violence and discrimination.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. monitoring; and
d. evaluation.
3. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted in order to realize the objectives of protecting women and children from violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by Regional Apparatus that administer governmental affairs in the field of women empowerment and child protection.

Article 21

1. The Regional Government is obligated to supervise the implementation of protection for women and children from violence and discrimination.
2. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted with professional, transparent, and accountable principles.

Article 22

The community may supervise the implementation of protection for women and children from violence and discrimination organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or to the DPRD.
14-

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 23

Financing for the implementation of protection for women and children from violence and discrimination shall be sourced from:

a. the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. the Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
d. other lawful and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 24

1. The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection for women and children from violence and discrimination.
2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity, and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 25

Laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children from violence and discrimination shall remain in force insofar as they are not contrary to and/or have not been replaced based on this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 26

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Magelang Regency.
15- Enacted in Kota Mungkid on 21 January 2016

REGENT OF MAGELANG,

ZAENAL ARIFIN

Promulgated in the Regional Gazette of Magelang Regency Year 2016 Number 2 on 21 January 2016 Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MAGELANG REGENCY, sgd

AGUNG TRIJAYA
16-

ELUCIDATION

ON

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAGELANG REGENCY NUMBER 2 OF 2016

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN AGAINST VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION

I. GENERAL

Women and children have become a serious concern of the international community, considering their vulnerable position as victims of violence and discrimination from their families and environment. Various acts of violence against both women and children within the household and outside the household continue to increase from time to time. This condition, if without serious handling, will destroy the life of households, society, nation and state. Therefore, the Government of Magelang Regency is obliged to provide protection to women and children against acts of violence and discrimination which is an implementation of various laws and regulations, including Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 35 of 2014 Concerning Amendments to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.

Protection of women and children against acts of violence and discrimination is an obligation of the Regional Government in the context of regional autonomy, which is manifested in the form of Regional Regulations as stipulated in Article 236 paragraph (1), Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government.

On that basis, the Regional Government of Magelang Regency has taken steps as an effort to provide protection to women and children, including by issuing Regent Regulation Number 26 of 2010. The existence of these regulations is felt to be not yet capable of providing maximum and adequate protection against acts of violence and discrimination that occur in the social life of the community. In addition to the problem of these laws and regulations, the factor of low public understanding of the rights of women and children has implications for the low legal awareness -17- of the community to report acts of violence or utilize the facilities provided by the Law to resolve their problems.

Based on these considerations, a regulation is needed in the form of a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children against acts of violence and discrimination that is able to answer while providing legal certainty in the protection of women and children against acts of violence and discrimination that occur.

This Regional Regulation is intended to provide responsibility to the Regional Government starting from the prevention of acts of violence to the handling of victims of acts of violence. This regional regulation also regulates the rights of victims of violence, Handling of Victims of violence, Government Responsibility up to the Participation of the Government, Community and Family in the prevention and resolution of violence and discrimination against women and children.

In its implementation, the Regional Government is also allowed to establish cooperation with government agencies, other regional governments and the community. In addition, adequate funding arrangements sourced from the State Budget, Regional Budget, Village Budget as well as from the government, Regional Government and other Sources that are not binding are expected to guarantee the implementation of protection for women and children against victims of violence and discrimination.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Letter a The principle of respect for human rights becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination, constitutes respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila).

Letter b The principle of justice and gender equality, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women -18- to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, governmental activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.

Letter c The principle of non-discrimination, that in providing protection to women and children victims of acts of violence does not discriminate on the basis of age, sex, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.

Letter d The principle of victim protection, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities and Regional governments to fulfill the rights of women and victims of acts of violence as regulated in laws and regulations.

Letter e The Principle of Empowerment is that every effort to protect women and children victims of violence must be oriented towards efforts to strengthen victims both physically, psychologically, socially and economically.

Letter f The principle of integration means that a series of activities to provide protection to Women and children victims of violence will be carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unit of implementation.

Article 3

Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letter b What is meant by "exploitation" is an action with or without the consent of the victim which includes; prostitution, forced labor or services slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of sexual physical reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring/utilizing labor or transplanting organs and or body tissues or -19- utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Letter e Sufficiently clear.

Letter f Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by "Regional Action Plan" is the stages of programs and activities for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination including forms of the worst forms of child labour that must be carried out by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.

Article 6

Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letter b Sufficiently clear.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Letter d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard and read presented in various packages and -20- formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.

Letter e Sufficiently clear.

Letter f What is meant by "the right to social rehabilitation" includes: economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health insurance and education or skills.

Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Letter h Sufficiently clear.

Letter i What is meant by "the right to assistance" includes among others psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, clergy, advocates and family members.

Letter j Sufficiently clear.

Letter k What is meant by "the right to basic services" includes the right to obtain education and access to parents during the handling process.

Letter l What is meant by "the right to equal protection" is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, sex, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinion, ethnicity or social life, ownership, birth or other status.

Letter m Sufficiently clear.

Letter n What is meant by "the right to obtain freedom" is free to express their views on all matters, including those related to the legal process, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of further solutions.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.
21-

Article 8

Paragraph (1) Point a What is meant by “complaint service” is a series of actions carried out by the organizer of the integrated service institution to follow up reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community.

Point b Sufficiently clear.

Point c What is meant by “legal aid service” is legal aid that is judicial in nature in the defense of legal cases as a result of acts of violence that they face.

Point d What is meant by “repatriation service” is the return of the victim to their family.

Point e What is meant by “rehabilitation and social reintegration services” includes access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal aid to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship.

Point f Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Paragraph (1) Point a Sufficiently clear.
22- Point b What is meant by “establishing policies, programs and protection activities” includes:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. providing education on anti-violence values against women and children;
b. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violencec. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence.

Point c Sufficiently clear.

Point d What is meant by “facilities and infrastructure” includes the provision of safe houses (safe house) for women or children victims of violence, both carried out by utilizing facilities owned by the regional government and by establishing cooperation with the community with financing responsibility on the regional government.

Point e Sufficiently clear.

Point f Sufficiently clear.

Point g Sufficiently clear.

Point h Sufficiently clear.

Point i Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
23- Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Paragraph (1) Cooperation is carried out in forms including, among others, exchange and information, rehabilitation of victims and acts of violence, repatriation and social reintegration as well as cooperation in the field of prevention, handling and recovery of women and children victims of violence and discrimination

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.
24-

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAGELANG REGENCY NUMBER16
25-
