COPY

NUMBER 3/2016

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MALANG CITY

NUMBER 12 OF 2015

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF MALANG,

Considering:
a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c. that violence against women and children continues to increase, so protection efforts are needed;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 16 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large City Regions within the Province of East Java, Central Java, West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta as last amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);
5. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3835);
6. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3886);
7. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
8. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
13. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 5234);
14. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
15. Government Regulation Number 15 of 1987 concerning Change of the Territorial Boundaries of the Second Level Municipality of Malang and the Second Level Regency of Malang (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1987 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);
16. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 56);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence;
22. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MALANG CITY AND

MAYOR OF MALANG

HAVE DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Malang.

2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Malang.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child in the womb.
6. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
7. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties, whether temporary.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
10. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
11. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
12. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
16. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
17. Service is an activity and immediate action carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-empowerment of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence to their families, substitute families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
21. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with families, communities, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
23. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, Safe House, Child Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
24. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the prevention and protection of women and child victims of violence.
25. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of the victim.

Article 3

1. The purpose of implementing protection for women and child victims of violence is to:
a. prevent violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and child victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
2. The purpose of implementing protection for women and child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), includes aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER III

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

Forms of violence against women and children may include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 5

Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or cause death.

Article 6

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8

Neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 9

Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 10

Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

Article 11

Child victims of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 10, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 12

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 13

1. The Regional Government implements protection efforts for women and children victims of violence through:
a. implementing protection policies for women and children victims of violence applied by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. establishment of PPT;
d. ensuring the implementation of service facilities for victims;
e. seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as the basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection for women and children victims of violence.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
4. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 14

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.
2. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. forming family partners at the kelurahan level;
b. forming women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.
4. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 15

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 12 letters c and d, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Establishment of PPT

Article 16

1. In order to provide services and protection to women and children from violence, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for women and children victims of violence.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements from the Health Office, Youth Education and Sports Office, Social Office, Cooperatives Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women's Empowerment and Family Planning Agency, Community Empowerment Agency, Civil Service Police Unit, Regional General Hospital, City Police Resort, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Universities.
3. PPT as referred to in paragraph (2), is established by Mayor's decree.
4. The implementation of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
5. PPT as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.
6. PPT provides services and temporary protection in the form of safe houses.
7. In the event that PPT does not yet have a safe house, then victims of violence are referred to PPT that has a safe house.
8. PPT consists of several counseling fields.
9. Counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (8) consist of at least:
a. legal field;
b. health field;
c. spiritual field; and
d. psychology field.
10. Further provisions regarding the organizational structure of PPT are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention and Services by PPT

Article 17

Forms of prevention of violence against women and children carried out by PPT, can be implemented through:
a. Socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community related to the protection of women's and children's rights; and
b. Training of PPT members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing violence against women and children.

Article 18

1. PPT in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with District PPT, and competent parties in making efforts to prevent violence against women and children.
2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 19

Forms of services to victims organized by PPT include:
a. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services are forms of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. Psychosocial services are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence, in resolving their problems;
d. Legal services to assist victims in undergoing legal processes, and;
e. Economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

Article 20

1. In carrying out the task of providing services to women and children victims of violence, PPT coordinates with District PPT.
2. The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures which are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Three

Prevention by Regional Apparatus

Article 21

1. To prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, the government carries out empowerment and awareness-raising for families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the government undertakes efforts as follows:a. increasing the quantity and quality of education, both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement, and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women; d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women and children from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; dan g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from violence.

Article 22

1. Prevention of the occurrence of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 21, is implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection; f. mental and spiritual; dan g. peace and order.
2. Prevention of violence by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Part Four

Assistance Mechanism by Persons and/or Institutions Cooperating with PPT

Article 23

1. Assistance is implemented by persons and/or institutions cooperating with PPT.
2. The assistance mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Five

Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 24

The implementation of service and assistance to victims, is carried out with the principle:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. a guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; dan d. free of charge.

Part Six

Services

Article 25

1. Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence, are as follows:a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation/returning (to home/origin);
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal; f. identification services; dan g. psychological services.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection;  dan d. mental and spiritual.
3. In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other district/city governments, the community, families and parents.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures for services, and handling of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 26

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; dane. evaluation (3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out with the principles:a. professional;
b. transparent; dan c. accountable.

Article 27

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), are carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

REPORTING

Article 28

1. PPT reports the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence to the Mayor.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, covering:a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; dan d. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is implemented at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER IX

SOURCES OF FUNDS

Article 29

Funds for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; dan b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 30

1. The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women and children victims of violence.
2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER X

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 31

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation are established no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Malang City.

Enacted in Malang on 25 November 2015

MAYOR OF MALANG,

ttd.

MOCH. ANTON

Promulgated in Malang on 19 April 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MALANG CITY,

ttd.

CIPTO WIYONO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MALANG CITY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 3

Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,

TABRANI, SH. M.Hum

PEMBINA

NIP. 19650302 199003 1 019

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF MALANG CITY EAST JAVA PROVINCE:  NUMBER: 400 – 12/2015

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MALANG CITY

NUMBER 12 OF 2015

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Violence against women and children constitutes a violation of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination. The fate of women and children victims of violence must be given attention by the regional government. The high number of cases of violence against women and children is often caused by factors that develop in society, for example low economic levels, education, and environments located in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of violence such as this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights.

For the empowerment of victims of violence, the regional government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) which is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A), Safe House, Children's Social Protection House (RPSA), Trauma Center Protection House (RPTC), Women's Social Protection House (RPSW), Shelter House, etc.

Which specifically has the main duties and functions for the empowerment of women and children victims of violence. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement protection efforts for women and children victims of violence through: implementing protection policies for women and children victims of violence applied by the government, establishing policies, programs, and protection activities for women and children victims of violence, establishing PPT, ensuring the implementation of service facilities for victims, seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process, and seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear

Article 2

Letter a What is meant by "respect for the rights of victims" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and ensure the fulfillment of the rights of victims.

Letter b What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a process to be fair to men and women and equal conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, national defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Letter a What is meant by the "prevention" aspect is a protection strategy effort through:

a. Primary prevention, all people, families, society and the state in efforts to increase knowledge capacity, understanding and ensure that violence against women and children does not occur, including policy socialization, adequate services, supportive workplace policies, and life skill training for women and children.

What is meant by life skill training includes conflict resolution without violence, stress management skills, resource management, making effective decisions, effective interpersonal communication, guidance on psychosocial development of women and children.

b. Secondary prevention, aimed at community groups with high risk in efforts to increase skills, including training and victim services to ensure that violence against women and children does not occur in the next generation. Activities carried out here include home visits for parents who have just had children to conduct self-assessment of whether they are at risk of committing violence against children in the future.

c. Tertiary prevention, intended to increase parenting capacity that ensures that violence against women and children is not repeated, what is done here is integrated services for women and children who are victims of violence, through counseling and stress management training.

Letter b What is meant by the "service and assistance" aspect is immediate activities and actions carried out by professionals and assistants in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Letter c What is meant by the "reunification" aspect is an effort to restore and recover the physical and mental condition of victims which then reunites them with the victim's family and community.

Letter d What is meant by the "empowerment" aspect is a process of increasing the role of the community to participate in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence which aims to obtain access and participation in the process of protection of women and children broadly.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Letter a What is meant by "receiving protection" is receiving protection from individuals, groups and institutions both governmental and non-governmental.

Letter b What is meant by "receiving information" is access and information about the existence of complaint centers, PPT, and all matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and involvement in the decision-making process related to assistance and case developments.

Letter c What is meant by "optimal service" is service that includes medical, medico-legal, psychosocial and legal services.

Letter d What is meant by "continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage" is handling that does not stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume life in society including the restoration of their good name.

Letter e What is meant by "confidential handling" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Letter f What is meant by "receiving psychological assistance" is assistance provided by psychologists to victims suffering from trauma/other mental problems to restore the victim's mental condition. Meanwhile, legal assistance is assistance provided by individuals and/or legal aid institutions to victims at every level of examination and throughout the legal process.

Letter g What is meant by "guarantee of rights related to victim status" is an effort to provide certainty and protection for victims as family members and members of society.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Point a What is meant by "prompt" is immediate action taken without complications or simplified procedures. What is meant by "safe" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, undisturbed, and served in a friendly manner, with respect and appreciation.

What is meant by "empathy" is an act of appreciating, respecting, caring, being friendly, and bringing happiness aimed at pleasing and comforting the victim's heart. Point b What is meant by "guarantee of confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Point c What is meant by "easily accessible" is the provision of services and assistance for all people regardless of their social status, so that such services are affordable for the underprivileged or relatively sufficient for the privileged.

Point d What is meant by "free of charge" is that the service and assistance activities carried out by PPT are not charged to the victim.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MALANG CITY NUMBER 23
