Considering Recalling

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY NUMBER 3 OF 2023

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI,
a. that every woman has the right to protection of her person, family, honor, dignity, and property under her control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which is a basic right;
b. that to provide one guideline or reference for local governments and related stakeholders regarding the improvement of women's quality of life and protection of women, especially for women victims of violence;
c. that to provide direction, foundation and legal certainty to all parties involved in the empowerment of women and children, it is necessary to regulate the establishment of an Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a through c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women;
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

2-

2. Law Number 47 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Nunukan Regency, Malinau Regency, West Kutai Regency, East Kutai Regency and Bontang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3896) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 3 of 2022 concerning the State Capital (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6766);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 Concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
5. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children.

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY and

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

HAS DECIDED...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

3-

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is East Kutai Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region of East Kutai Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Kutai.
4. Agency is the Agency for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of East Kutai Regency.
5. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
6. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman.
7. Protection . . .

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

4-

7. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
8. Service is all efforts and actions to fulfill the rights of victims which include complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
9. Violence Against Women is any act that violates, obstructs, eliminates enjoyment, and neglects the human rights of women.
10. Women Victims of Violence are women who experience acts of violence and discrimination whose rights are not fulfilled.
11. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of Women Victims of violence from the health disorders they suffer.
12. Social Rehabilitation is all efforts to restore and develop the abilities of Women Victims of Violence so that they can carry out their social roles and functions both in family life and/or society.
13. Repatriation is an effort to return Women Victims of Violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
14. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Women Victims of Violence with the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
15. Legal Assistance ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

5-

15. Legal Assistance is legal services provided by legal companions and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or Women Victims of Violence.
16. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for Women Victims of Violence.
17. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to provide Services to Women Victims of Violence and children comprehensively including complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
18. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for UPTD PPA services in providing complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for Women Victims of Violence and children.
19. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to Women Victims of Violence in accordance with predetermined standards.

Article 2 This Regional Regulation is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of women.

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

6-

Article 3 This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so that they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. prevent all forms of Violence against Women;
c. provide protection and a sense of security for women victims of violence and discrimination;
d. ensure the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women by the region in a systematic, comprehensive, sustainable, and integrated manner;
e. increase the commitment of the Regional Government in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women; and
f. encourage institutions that handle the duties and functions of women's empowerment in the Regional Government and community institutions in the region to improve performance in efforts to protect women.

Article 4 The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. the rights of women victims of violence;
b. the authority of the Regional Government;
c. planning;
d. Implementation ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

7-
d. implementation;
e. monitoring and evaluation;
f. reporting;
g. guidance and supervision;
h. community participation; and
i. funding.

CHAPTER II

RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5 Every woman victim of violence has the right:
a. to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. to obtain protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
c. to recovery of physical, psychological and sexual health in accordance with the suffering experienced by Women Victims of Violence;
d. to special handling related to the confidentiality of Women Victims of Violence;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to make her own decisions.

CHAPTER III ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

8-

CHAPTER III

AUTHORITY OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 6 (1) The Regional Government has authority in the Protection of Women. (2) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. prevention of violence against women involving parties within the Regional scope;
h. provision of services for women Victims of violence requiring Regional level coordination; and
c. strengthening and development of institutions providing women's protection services.

CHAPTER IV

PLANNING

Article 7

The Regent is obliged to integrate policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women into Regional development planning.

Article 8 (1) The integration of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the Region is set forth in planning and budget documents which include:
a. Regional Long-Term Development Plan;
h. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan;
c. Strategic Plan ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

9-
c. Strategic Plan of Regional Work Units;
d. Regional Government Work Plan; and
e. Work Plan and Budget of Regional Work Units.
2. The preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be harmonized between levels and structures of government.
3. The Service (Dinas) facilitates the integration of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women into the preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (1).
4. In carrying out the facilitation as referred to in paragraph (3), the Service (Dinas) coordinates with the Regional Development Planning Agency of East Kutai Regency.

CHAPTER V

IMPLEMENTATION

Part One

General

Article 9 (1) The Regent is obliged to implement policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women, to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the region.

2. The implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the Vice Regent.
3. The implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the region as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by establishing, developing, strengthening, or utilizing institutions in the Region.

Part Two ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
10-

Part Two

Prevention

Article 10

Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in article 6 paragraph (2) letter a, the Regional Government carries out the following efforts:
a. conducting counseling and socialization regarding matters relating to violence against women;
b. conducting socialization on women's rights;
c. seeking to improve education for women;
d. opening skills courses for women to support the family's economic needs;
e. creating employment opportunities for women;
f. providing counseling to immediately report to local authorities if violence against women occurs;
g. empowering social community organizations and women's organizations to increase women's knowledge and insight;
h. establishing Women's Protection Complaint Posts; and
i. forming networks in efforts to prevent violence.

Part Three

Protection Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 11

1. Provision of Services for women victims of violence includes, among others, covering:
a. providing ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
11-
a. providing Services and handling as quickly as possible to Women Victims of Violence;
b. providing convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for Women Victims of Violence;
c. maintaining the confidentiality of Women Victims of Violence; and
d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for Women Victims of Violence.

Part Four

Institutions

Paragraph 1

Article 12

1. In supporting the implementation of Women's Protection, the Regent establishes PPT.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. UPTD PPA;
b. hospital-based PPT;
c. sub-district PPT; and
d. Village/kelurahan PPT.
3. Further provisions regarding the procedures for establishing PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 13 ( 1) PPT Services include:
a. providing Services and handling as quickly as possible to Women Victims of Violence;
b. providing ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
12-
b. providing convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for Women Victims of Violence;
c. maintaining the confidentiality of Women Victims of Violence; and
d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for Women Victims of Violence.
2. Further provisions regarding the procedures for PPT Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14 The operation of PPT requires:
a. adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure;
b. implementing officers; and
c. functional officers.

Article 15

1. The procedures and mechanisms of integrated Services include:
a. complaint services;
b. Health Rehabilitation;
c. Social Rehabilitation;
d. Return;
e. Social Reintegration; and
f. Legal Aid.
2. The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with SPM.

Part Five ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
13-

Part Five

Article 16

1. SPM in the field of integrated services for women and children victims of violence aims to ensure that Women Victims of violence receive the minimum services needed.
2. SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of violence includes services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of Victims of Violence Against Women;
b. health services for women Victims of violence;
c. social rehabilitation for women Victims of violence;
d. law enforcement and Legal Aid for women Victims of violence;
e. Return and Social Reintegration for women Victims of violence; and
f. in the event that a Woman Victim of Violence experiences trauma or illness that endangers herself as a result of acts of violence requiring immediate assistance, the Regional Government is obliged to provide first aid no later than 7 (seven) days after the complaint is filed.

Article 17 (1) SPM as referred to in Article 16 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated Service units;
b. coverage ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
14-
b. coverage of Women Victims of violence who receive services by trained personnel at community health centers and hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Victims of violence within integrated Service units;
d. coverage of guidance services provided by trained guidance officers for Women Victims of Violence within integrated Service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of Violence Against Women;
f. coverage of Women Victims of Violence who receive Legal Aid services;
g. coverage of Return services for Women Victims of Violence; and
h. coverage of Social Reintegration services for Women Victims of Violence.
2. The determination of performance indicators for SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes minimum targets that must be achieved by integrated service units in stages.

Part Six

Social Shelter Houses Article 18 (1) The Regional Government is obligated to establish social shelter houses and/or Safe Houses or other designations.

2. Social shelter houses and/or Safe Houses as referred to in paragraph (1) guarantee the implementation of Health Rehabilitation Services, Social Rehabilitation, Return, and Social Reintegration.
3. For ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
15- (3) For the implementation of Services as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may utilize social shelter houses and/or Safe Houses owned by the community or other social Service institutions.

CHAPTER VI

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 19

1. The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women.
2. Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the Region.

Article 20 (1) Monitoring is conducted through coordination and direct monitoring of related Regional apparatus on a regular basis.

2. Monitoring is conducted from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the current year.

Article 21 (1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women is conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.

2. Results ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
16- (2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women are used as input for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the following year.

3. Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 22 (1) The Regent is responsible for preparing reports on the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for women and submitting them to the Governor with copies submitted to the Minister who administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection and the Minister who administers government affairs in home affairs.

2. Reporting on implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted annually.
3. Further provisions regarding the procedures and form of reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 23 (1) The Regent conducts guidance on the development of PPT. (2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
17-
a. provision of implementation instructions;
b. guidance;
c. supervision; and
d. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of services for women victims of violence, both apparatus and community.

Article 24 The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence in the Region.

CHAPTER IX

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 25 (1) In organizing the Protection of Women, the community may:
a. form family partners at the sub-district/village level;
b. form women's protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct socialization of Women's rights independently;
d. provide first aid to Women Victims of Violence;
e. report to the competent authorities if violence against Women occurs in their environment.
f. prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women.
g. provide information and/or report acts of violence against women to the competent authorities; and
h. forms ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
18-
h. forms and roles of the community are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Individuals;
b. social community institutions;
c. non-governmental organizations;
d. educational institutions;
e. religious institutions;
f. private sector; and g. mass media.

CHAPTER X

FUNDING

Article 26 Funding in the organization of the protection of women is sourced from: a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI

SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 27 (1) Appointed officials who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 13 shall be subject to administrative actions and/or sanctions.

2. Actions ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
19- (2) Administrative actions and/or sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

3. UPTD PPA managers who carry out service duties that violate service principles as referred to in Article 16 shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the norms and provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 28 This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation. So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Kutai Regency.

Enacted in Sangatta on the date of 22 May 2023

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI,

/

RIZALI HADI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 3 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY, EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (64.08/1/30/2/2023)

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE

20-

ELUCIDATION

ELUCIDATIONATAS

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY

NUMBER 3 OF 2023

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

1. GENERAL

Protection of women is important because women are a vulnerable or subordinated group, particularly in connection with the many cases of violence against women who become victims.

Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence against Women of 1999, it is stated that women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by God Almighty, so they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-esteem must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

Although efforts have been made to protect women and there are also government policies through laws and regulations that have firmly formulated efforts for the protection of women, including efforts to protect women victims of violence, in reality the intensity or number of violence against women in East Kutai Regency is still high while services and protection for women in East Kutai Regency have not been carried out optimally. Empirically in East Kutai Regency, an important factor that influences the process of prevention and protection of women so far is because in existing laws and regulations, procedures and mechanisms for prevention and protection are not firmly regulated.

As well as ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN - 21- As well as taking into account the conditions of the development and growth of society along with its legal problems and with encouragement from various regulations that provide umbrella protection for women, especially for women victims of violence.

ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Letter a what is meant by "respect for human rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of basic Human Rights.

Letter b what is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Letter c what is meant by "non-discrimination" is attitudes and treatment towards women by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d what is meant by "the best interests of women" is all the best actions concerning women carried out by local government and society, then the best interests of women must be the primary consideration.

Article 3 Sufficiently clear.

Article 4 ...

Article 4 Sufficiently clear.

Article 5 Sufficiently clear Article 6 Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear Article 8 Sufficiently clear Article 9 Sufficiently clear Article 10 Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Sufficiently clear Article 12 Sufficiently clear Article 13 Sufficiently clear Article 14 Letter a

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN

22- What ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN

23- What is meant by "adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure" is adjusted to the minimum service standards and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration that apply.

Letter b What is meant by "implementing officers or functional officers" includes health workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers provided by relevant agencies or institutions.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Article 15 Sufficiently clear.

Article 16 Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19 Sufficiently clear.

Article 20 Sufficiently clear.

Article 21 Sufficiently clear.

Article 22 Sufficiently clear.

Article 23 ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI

PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN

24- Article 23 Sufficiently clear.

Article 24 Sufficiently clear Article 25 Sufficiently clear Article 26 Sufficiently clear Article 27 Sufficiently clear Article 28 Sufficiently clear
