COPY I

REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS

PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN

REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY NUMBER 1 OF 2021

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS,

Considering

a. that every citizen has the right to survival, growth, and development in a proper manner and to obtain a sense of security that is consistent and systematic as a form of Protection for Women and Children as mandated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that the Regional Government, families, groups, social organizations and/or other community organizations have responsibility for the implementation of fulfillment, protection, respect, promotion and enforcement of rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. that to provide direction, legal basis and legal certainty in the Protection of Women and Children, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to stipulate a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children;

Bearing in mind - 2 -

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 5 of 2002 concerning the Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and East Barito Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 18 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 52 of 2009 concerning Population Development and Family Development (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 161, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5080);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 59 of 2019 concerning the Implementation of Child Protection Coordination (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 160, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6382);
9. Regional Regulation of Gunung Mas Regency Number 8 of 2018 concerning Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency of 2018 Number 257, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency Number 257);
10. Regional Regulation of Gunung Mas Regency Number 9 of 2018 concerning Prevention of Marriage at Child Age (Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency of 2018 Number 258, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency Number 258.a);

Stipulating - 3 -

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY

REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Gunung Mas Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Gunung Mas.

4 - 4 . Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.

5. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
6. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from Violence and discrimination.
7. Woman is a person who is female.
8. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.

9. Community is an individual, community group, including parents and family.

10. Prevention is all efforts to eliminate all risks and adverse impacts of violence against Women and Children.
11. Violence is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
12. Forum for Handling Victims of Violence Against Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as FPK2PA, is a coordination forum for handling victims of Violence against Women and Children which is organized in tiers at the regency and sub-district levels.
13. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service center in efforts to empower Women in various fields of development, as well as protection of Women and Children from various types of discrimination, and acts of Violence, including trafficking in persons established by the government or community-based.
14. Child-Friendly Village/Sub-District, hereinafter abbreviated as K/DRA, is the development of a village/sub-district area that unites the commitment and resources of the village/sub-district government involving the Community and the business world located in the village/sub-district in order to promote, protect, - 5 - fulfill and respect children's rights, which are planned consciously and sustainably.

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children is organized based on the principles of:
a. respect, fulfillment, protection, promotion, and enforcement of rights; and
b. legal certainty.

Article 3

Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. responsive to rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. maintaining confidentiality;
d. empowerment; and
e. participation.

Article 4

The objectives of Protection of Women and Children include:

a. ensuring the fulfillment of rights;
b. providing justice and equality of rights;
c. providing protection and a sense of security; and
d. conducting empowerment.

Article 5

The scope of Protection of Women and Children includes:

a. Protection of Women;
b. Child Protection;
c. coordination and cooperation;
d. responsibility of the Regional Government;
e. community participation;
f. guidance and supervision;
g. evaluation;
h. reporting; and
i. funding.

6 -

CHAPTER II

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One

General

Article 6

Protection of Women includes:

a. services;
b. empowerment;
c. prevention; and
d. monitoring.

Part Two

Services

Article 7

1. The form of Women's Protection services as referred to in Article 6 letter a includes:
a. legal aid;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
e. social reintegration services; and
f. pre-marital guidance services.
2. Pre-marital guidance services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f, shall be carried out for every Woman who will enter into marriage.
3. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted to provide understanding and knowledge regarding family resilience, health, psychology, religion, social and culture.
4. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be implemented by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Child Protection.
5. In implementing guidance as referred to in paragraph (4) the Regional Apparatus may involve:
a. related agencies;
b. religious leaders; and
c. customary leaders.
6. Further provisions regarding the procedures for Women's Protection services shall be regulated by a Regent Regulation.

8 -

CHAPTER III

CHILD PROTECTION

Part One

General

Article 11

Child Protection includes:
a. services;
b. fulfillment of Children's rights;

c. prevention; and
d. monitoring.

Part Two

Services

Article 12

(1) The form of Child Protection services as referred to in Article 11 letter a includes:
a. legal aid;
b. social rehabilitation services; and
c. social reintegration services.
2. Further provisions regarding Child Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 13

(1) Fulfillment of Children's rights as referred to in Article 11 letter b includes:
a. guarantee of civil rights and freedoms;
b. guarantee of family environment and alternative care;
c. guarantee of basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time, culture and recreation; and
e. special protection.
2. Special protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e, shall be conducted against:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/ or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;

9 -
g. children with HIV/ AIDS;

h. children victims of kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking;
i. children victims of physical and/ or psychological Violence;
j. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorism networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
3. Regulation regarding the fulfillment of Children's rights shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Four

Prevention

Article 14

1. Prevention of violations of Children's rights shall be implemented by the Regional Government and the Community.
2. Prevention of violations of Children's rights implemented by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:
a. establishing a work network;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of Prevention based on partnership patterns with the Community, private sector, non-governmental organizations; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to Child Protection.
3. Prevention of violations of Children's rights implemented by the Community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:
a. increasing Children's productivity;

b. developing Children's self-potential;
c. preventing pregnancy at a young age;
d. reducing maternal and infant mortality rates; and
e. preventing the occurrence of domestic Violence.
4. Establishment of a work network as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a, includes the Regional Government's work partners in the implementation of Prevention of rights violations in the form of family partners.
5. Further provisions regarding Prevention of violations of Children's rights as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.
-----------I - 10 -

Part Five

Monitoring

Article 15

Provisions regarding monitoring as referred to in Article 10 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the implementation of monitoring of the fulfillment of Children's rights and special protection of Children.

CHAPTER IV

COORDINATION AND COOPERATION

Article 16

1. Implementation of coordination and cooperation on Women's and Children's Protection aims to:
a. improve efforts to fulfill Women's and Children's rights;

b. improve synergistic and harmonious working relationships; and
c. obtain data and information in the implementation of Women's and Children's Protection.

2. In order to achieve the objectives as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. other Regional Governments;

b. related agencies;
c. non-governmental institutions;

d. universities; and
e. non-governmental organizations.
3. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. socialization or legal counseling lectures;
c. rehabilitation of victims of Violence; and
d. repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER V

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Part One

General

Article 17

1. The Regional Government is responsible for the protection of Women's and Children's rights.
2. Responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
11 -
a. education;
b. health;
c. politics;
d. law;
e. economy;
f. culture; and
g. social.
3. The Regional Government's responsibility for the protection of Women's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted by:
a. formulation of gender-responsive Regional policies;
b. institutionalization of gender mainstreaming within the Regional Government;
c. empowerment of Women in the political, legal, economic, cultural and social fields in community organizations at the regency level;
d. strengthening and development of Women's empowerment service provider institutions at the regency level;
e. implementing efforts to Prevent the occurrence of Violence against Women.
4. The Regional Government's responsibility for the protection of Children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted by:
a. formulation of policies, programs, and Regional development activities with a child rights perspective that are set forth in Regional development planning documents;
b. formulation of norms, standard procedures and assessment criteria for the fulfillment and protection of Children's rights that refer to norms, standards, procedures and criteria established by the government;
c. implementation of child-friendly regency shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
d. facilitation of the implementation of Regional Children's forum;
e. increasing Community participation in the implementation and protection of Children's rights;
f. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Children's fulfillment and Protection programs;
g. guidance of Child Protection institutions;
h. providing special protection for Children; and
i. implementing efforts to Prevent the occurrence of Violence against Children.

Article 18

1. Regional Government in implementing the responsibility for gender mainstreaming institutionalization as referred to - 12 - in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter b regarding Protection of Women and Children shall organize a data information system for Women and Children.
2. The Women's data Information System as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes an inseparable part of the Children's data information system.
3. The Women's and Children's information system as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
4. Gender mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 19 (1) In order to ensure effectiveness of the implementation of Protection of Women and Children, Regional Government must conduct cross-sectoral coordination with related institutions.

2. In organizing the coordination of Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regent shall establish a coordination team for Protection of Women and Children.
3. In the coordination forum activities as referred to in paragraph (2) the coordination team for Protection of Women and Children shall have the duties to: a. prepare necessary materials related to the implementation of Protection of Women and Children; and b. deliver results, obstacles, and solutions undertaken to overcome obstacles in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
4. The coordination forum as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted periodically, at least 2 (two) times in 1 (one) year.

Part Two

Prevention of Violence Against Women and Children

Article 20

1. Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement Prevention efforts against the occurrence of Violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (3) letter e and paragraph (4) letter i conducted in the form of: a. collecting data and organizing an information system for Protection of Women and Children victims of Violence;
b. conducting education on anti-Violence values against Women and Children; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to women's empowerment and Protection of Children victims of Violence.
2. Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide and organize services for victims in the form of: a. establishing and organizing technical service institutions for victims by involving Community elements; and b. encouraging Community awareness of the importance of protection for victims of Violence.

Part Three

Institutions

Article 21

1. Technical Service institutions as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter a shall be implemented by P2TP2A and FPK2PA.
2. In organizing Protection of Women and Children the Regional Government shall establish a regional technical implementing unit for Protection of Women and Children.
3. The establishment of regional technical implementing unit as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation after obtaining written approval from the Governor.
4. In the case of implementation of technical services as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regional Government may establish a task force. (5) The task force as referred to in paragraph (4) may also conduct institutional strengthening through cooperation and coordination with: a. KLA task force;
b. KRA task force;
c. K/DRA task force;
d. schools and/or educational institutions;
e. Children's forum;
f. children's center;
g. community organizations;
h. women's organizations; and i. other institutions concerned with the fulfillment of rights and Protection of Children.
6. The task force as referred to in paragraph (4) constitutes a coordinative institution at regency and sub-district level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize sub-districts, child-friendly villages/wards.
7. Further provisions regarding technical services as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

14 -

Paragraph 1

P2TP2A

Article 22 (1) The implementation of services to victims shall be conducted in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.

2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in the form of functional relationship patterns among components directed to achieve common goals.

Article 23

1. P2TP2A provides services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house.
2. In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a safe house, then victims of Violence shall be referred to other integrated service centers that have a safe house.

Article 24

1. P2TP2A consists of several counseling fields.
2. The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:  a. law;

b. health;
c. spiritual; and d. psychology.
3. The implementation of counseling shall be conducted by counselors and may be implemented by involving related parties.

Article 25 Forms of services to victims organized by P2TP2A include:

a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial services;
d. legal services;
e. social reintegration services; and f. economic independence services.

15 -

Article 26

Provisions regarding the implementation of services by P2TP2A as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) shall be regulated in Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 2

FPK2PA

Article 27

1. In order to protect and guarantee the rights of Women and Children from acts of Violence, FPK2PA shall be established.
2. FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:  a. Regional FPK2PA;
b. sub-district FPK2PA; and c. village/ward FPK2PA.
3. The establishment of Regional FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a shall be stipulated by the Regent.
4. The establishment of sub-district FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b shall be stipulated by the sub-district head.
5. The establishment of Village/ward FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be stipulated by the village/ward head. (6) Further provisions regarding FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Part One

Obligations and Responsibilities of Parents and/or Family

Article 28

Parents have the obligation and responsibility to:

a. nurture, care for, educate, manage, and take care of the family;
b. develop family members in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. Prevention of marriage at Child age.

Article 29 Protecting family members in accordance with Increasing the role of families in Protection of Women and Children shall be conducted through:

a. Prevention of marriage at Child age;
b. bringing Women closer to health services; and c. increasing family resilience.

16 -

Part Two

Community Involvement Article 30 (1) The Community is involved in the Protection of Women and Children.  (2) Community involvement as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of participation through Prevention, services, empowerment, monitoring, supervision and fulfillment of the rights of Women and/or Children.

3. The role of the Community in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by: a . providing communication and information through socialization and education regarding the rights of Women and Children;
b. providing suggestions and input in the formulation of policies related to the Protection of Women and Children;
c. reporting to the competent authorities if violations of the rights of Women and Children occur;
d. playing an active role in the rehabilitation and social reintegration process for Women and Children;
e. forming family partners at the neighborhood association/community association or sub-district/village level by the Community;
f. forming Women and Children Protection units within community organizations and educational institutions;
g. establishment and management of orphanages;

h . establishment of Child rehabilitation centers;
i. provision of shelter houses and/or social homes;
j. job skills training; and k. providing first aid when violations of the rights of Women and Children occur.
4. Further provisions regarding the participation of the Community shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 31

1. The Regent is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the Protection of Women and Children.
2. The implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Children's Protection.

(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training;
d. monitoring and evaluation;
e. reporting.
4. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is to realize the objectives of the Protection of Women and Children in accordance with the norms, standards, procedures and criteria implemented by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Children's Protection.
5. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with professional and transparent principles.
6. In implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Children's Protection must report periodically to the Regent.
7. In the case of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Children's Protection may cooperate and coordinate with other Regional Apparatus, the Community, agencies and/or related organizational institutions.

CHAPTER VIII

EVALUATION

Article 32

1. Evaluation of the Protection of Women and Children is conducted based on documents of service implementation, empowerment, Prevention, fulfillment and monitoring results of the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children.
2. The implementation of evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's empowerment and Children's Protection.
3. Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes process, impact and results evaluation.
4. The results of the evaluation as referred to in paragraph (3) constitute material for the Regional Apparatus to prepare a report which is subsequently submitted to the Regent.
5. Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be carried out at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year.

(6) Further provisions regarding evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX

REPORTING

Article 33

1. Reporting of evaluation results as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (5) serves as material for the Regent's consideration in making policy decisions on the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children.
2. Reports on the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year and at any time if necessary.

CHAPTER X

FUNDING

Article 34 Funding for the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 35 The establishment of a regional technical implementing unit that administers the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in Article 21 paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region.

Article 36

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.  In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Gunung Mas Regency.

Enacted in Kuala Kurun on the date, 28 January 2021

REGENT OF GUNUNG MAS,

JAYA SAMAYA MONONG

Promulgated in Kuala Kurun on the date, 28 January 2021

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY,

YANSITERSON

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER 285

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY  CENTRAL KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: 01,05/2021 Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

E..-ayaTO, SH

NIP. 19700617 200501 1 007

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY

NUMBER 1 OF 2021

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

Children are the future of the nation and the next generation of the nation's aspirations, so that every Child has the right to survival, to grow and develop, to participate and has the right to protection from acts of Violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.

Likewise, Women who play a role as mothers who give birth to children who are healthy, strong, resilient, of noble character, potential and quality. Through the role of Women in the family, Society and the state, resilient generations will be born who will continue the nation's aspirations.

The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, particularly Article 27 paragraph (1) which states that "All citizens have equal status in law and government and are obliged to uphold the law and government without exception". Although the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia has guaranteed equal status for every citizen, until now Women and Children still experience various obstacles in obtaining their rights in almost all fields.

On the other hand, Women have special needs compared to men, so that in accordance with their nature, in certain conditions the Regional Government must be able to guarantee that their rights are fulfilled in accordance with those needs. Whereas children, they are a trust and gift from God Almighty, in whom is inherent dignity and worth as a complete human being. Considering the position and expectations of children as the potential and future of the nation, children deserve attention from all parties so that children can grow and develop normally and avoid wrong treatment and actions, Violence, discrimination that will damage the development of children both physically, mentally and socially. For this reason, children need to be given the widest possible opportunity to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally, socially and with noble character.

21 - Based on this, a regulation is needed that serves as a guideline for all parties, especially the Regional Government in ensuring the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children in Gunung Mas Regency in accordance with the authority possessed as stated in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, as well as other laws and regulations governing the Protection of Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Letter a What is meant by "advancement" is the process, manner or act of making better in the protection of Women and Children.

Letter b Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letter b What is meant by "non-discrimination" is that the implementation of the Protection of Women and Children is given to every Woman and/or a Child and is not differentiated based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Letter e Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Paragraph (1) - 22 - Letter a Legal aid is legal services provided by legal aid providers free of charge to legal aid recipients.

Letter b Health services are any efforts organized individually or jointly in an organization to maintain health, prevent and cure diseases and restore the health of individuals, families, or the Community.

Letter c Social rehabilitation services are a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out social functions normally in Community life.

Letter d Sufficiently Clear.

Letter e Social reintegration services are a process of preparing children in conflict with the law, child victims, and/or child witnesses to be able to return to the Family and Community environment.

Letter f

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.

Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (3) What is meant by family resilience is the ability of the family to manage resources and problems faced by prosperous families, namely the fulfillment of the needs of all family members.

Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (6) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 8

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

23 - Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "network" is the working partner of the Regional Government in the implementation of Prevention of violations of Women's rights in the form of family partners, among others, family groups and dasawisma.

Letter b Sufficiently clear.

Letter c What is meant by "socialization" is the dissemination of information on laws and regulations carried out through mass media, electronic media, and/or direct counseling to the Community.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letter b Social Rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out social functions normally in Community life.

Letter c Social Reintegration is a process of preparing children in conflict with the law, child victims, and/or child witnesses to be able to return to the Family and Community environment.

24 - Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 13

Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently Clear.

Letter b Sufficiently Clear.

Letter c Sufficiently Clear.

Letter d Sufficiently Clear.

Letter e What is meant by "special protection" is that Children who need special protection are children in emergency situations such as children who become refugees, victims of riots, victims of natural disasters and children in situations of armed conflict; children in conflict with the law; children from minority and isolated groups; children who are exploited economically and/or sexually; children who are trafficked; children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse; children who are victims of pornography; children with HIV/AIDS; children who are victims of kidnapping and trafficking; children who are victims of Violence both physical and/or mental and sexual; children who are victims of terrorism networks; children with disabilities; children who are victims of abuse and neglect; children with deviant social behavior; children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 14

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (2) - 25 - Letter a Sufficiently Clear.

Letter b "Coordination and integration, synchronization of Prevention" is carried out based on a partnership pattern with the Community, private sector, and non-governmental organizations.

Letter c Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear.

Paragraph (4) What is meant by "family partners" include, among others, family groups and dasawisma.

Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 17

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of education is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children to obtain access to education, both formal and informal education.

Point b What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of health is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children to obtain access and facilities in the field of health.

Point c What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women in the field of Politics is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating the improvement of Women's knowledge - 26 - in the field of politics through socialization to increase awareness of Women's rights and Women's participation in the field of politics, encouraging increased involvement of Women in community organizations and decision-making activities within the Regional Government, encouraging the establishment of Women's organizations/forums.

Point d What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of law is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating the improvement of legal knowledge and awareness for Women and Children, encouraging the establishment of organizations that provide free legal services for Women and Children.

Point e What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and Children in the field of economy is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children in obtaining access and facilities in the field of economy, facilitating Women in efforts to improve the family economy, providing capital assistance or training for Women.

Point f Sufficiently clear.

Point g What is meant by the responsibility for the protection of the rights of Women and children in the social field is that the Regional Government is responsible for facilitating Women and Children in obtaining access and facilities in the social field.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20 - 27 - Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (5) Point a What is meant by the Regency KLA task force is a coordinating institution at the regency level that coordinates policy efforts, programs, and activities to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.

Point b The KRA task force is a coordinating institution at the sub-district level that coordinates policy efforts, programs and activities to realize a child-friendly village/kelurahan.

Point c The K/DRA task force is a coordinating institution at the kelurahan/village level that coordinates policy efforts, programs, and activities to realize a child-friendly village/kelurahan.

Point d Sufficiently clear.

Point e Sufficiently clear.

Point f Sufficiently clear.

Point g Sufficiently clear.

Point h Sufficiently clear.

Point i - 28 - Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Point a Service for a person with a specific diagnosis.

Point b Media is a service received in connection with the prevention and treatment of health disorders. Medicolegal service is a standard of medical service and standard of operational service in the field of medicine.

Point c Psychosocial service is a service to restore individuals or families or groups after certain events (natural disasters or social disasters) so that they become strong individually or collectively.

Point d Sufficiently clear.

Point e Sufficiently clear.

Point f Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

29 -

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

Article 34

Sufficiently clear.

Article 35

Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF GUNUNG MAS REGENCY NUMBER J..<b;'. t:
