COPY

REGENT OF BELITUNG

PROVINCE OF BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BELITUNG REGENCY

NUMBER 2 OF 2018

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF BELITUNG,

Considering:
a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against humanity, and are not in accordance with Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children and to improve the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that is the duty, authority, and responsibility of the Regional Government;
c. that violence against women and children in Belitung Regency tends to increase and spread, so that integrated protection efforts are required;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Belitung Regency concerning the Protection of Women's and Children's Rights from Acts of Violence;

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law....

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 1

2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions and Municipalities in South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 27 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of the Province of Bangka Belitung Islands (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 217, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4033);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143), as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
7. Regulation….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 2

7. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);

With the Joint Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BELITUNG REGENCY and

REGENT OF BELITUNG

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Belitung Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Belitung.
4. Regional Apparatus Organization hereinafter abbreviated as OPD is the Regional Apparatus of Belitung Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of Belitung Regency.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.
7. Woman….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 3

7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, psychological to the victim.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and/or for and on behalf of another party who is their dependent.
10. Protection is all prevention, service and empowerment actions to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
11. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
12. Service is action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is, or has occurred.
13. Empowerment is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to engage in business/enterprise and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
14. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
15. Accompaniment is activities and actions carried out by companions to women and children.
16. Counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert/trained person in such a way that the psychological understanding and ability of the victim and/or perpetrator increases in solving the problems faced.
17. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
18. Forum….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 4

18. Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK is a coordination forum for the prevention, handling and empowerment of victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner and is established at the regency, sub-district and village/kelurahan levels.
19. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is the standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
20. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children.
21. Household is family members and relatives including grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and non-relatives including maids and drivers who live and eat from 1 (one) kitchen and reside in 1 (one) house.

CHAPTER II

SCOPE

Article 2

The scope of protection of women and children from acts of violence, is as follows:

a. principles and objectives;
b. forms of violence;
c. rights of women and children victims of violence;
d. obligations and responsibilities;
e. prevention of acts of violence;
f. special protection of children;
g. services and empowerment of victims of acts of violence; h. institutions;
i. cooperation and partnerships;
j. reporting;
k. guidance….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 5
k. guidance and supervision; andl. financing.

CHAPTER III

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 3

Protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination shall be conducted based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. empowerment; and
f. integration.

Article 4

The objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination are:
a. to prevent acts of violence and discrimination against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. to eliminate all forms of violence, discrimination, and exploitation against women and children;
c. to protect women and children from acts of violence and discrimination in obtaining their legitimate rights constitutionally;
d. to protect and provide security for women and children;
e. to provide services and protection to women and children victims of acts of violence and discrimination, reporters, and witnesses; and
f. to facilitate and conduct mediation on domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

CHAPTER….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 6

HEAD OF DPPAS KAB. BELITUNG

CHAPTER IV

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5

Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. coercion/deprivation of liberty;
f. exploitation;
g. threat of certain actions; and/or
h. other violence.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 6

Women and children victims of acts of violence shall receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. the right to recovery of health and psychological well-being from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process; and
j. the right to assistance.

Article 7

Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 6, shall also receive the following special rights:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth, and development;
b. the right….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 7
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 8

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. society;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 9

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 8 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for OPD and

UKPD….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 8 UKPD in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the strategic plan of OPD.
4. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 10

1. The obligations and responsibilities of society as referred to in Article 8 letter b, shall be conducted in the form of community participation.
2. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 11

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 8 letters c and d include having full legal responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect women and children as family members.

Article 12

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence against women and children shall make efforts in accordance with their capacity to:
a. prevent and stop the continuation of acts of violence;
b. provide protection to victims;
d. provide….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 9
d. provide emergency assistance; and/or
e. assist in the process of filing an application for protection order.

CHAPTER VII

PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 13

1. To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance, and/or counseling.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. increasing the number and quality of educational units both formal and non-formal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement, and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern for the prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities, and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 14

1. Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 13, shall be implemented….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 10 implemented by OPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. youth and sports;
g. population and civil registration;
h. mental and spiritual; and
i. peace and order.
2. Prevention of acts of violence by OPD and UKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.
3. In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. society;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social community institutions; and
f. business world and other institutions.

CHAPTER VIII

SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN

Article 15

1. Special protection of children is provided to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. children….
i. children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
j. children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
k. children who are victims of sexual crimes;
l. children who are victims of terrorist networks;
m. children with disabilities;
n. children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect;
o. children with deviant social behavior; and
p. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
2. The Regional Government in implementing the handling of special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

Service Principles

Article 16

The provision of services to victims is implemented with the principles of:
a. fast;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Part Two

Forms of Services

Article 17

1. Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal….
legal assistance;
d. social rehabilitation and reintegration;
e. repatriation;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms within the police force;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/or
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
3. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by related Regional Apparatus Organizations whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
4. In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, non-governmental organizations, and social institutions.
5. Further provisions regarding the procedures for handling services for women and children from violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 18

The Regional Government is obliged to provide complaint services for the protection of women and children from violence.

Article 19

The Regional Government and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses.

Article 20

Further provisions regarding Complaint Services and Social Services as referred to in Article 17 and Article 18, shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 21

1. Empowerment of women victims of violence may be carried out by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and/or
c. capital assistance.
2. Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus Organizations that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, and governmental affairs in the field of Social Affairs in accordance with their duties and functions.

CHAPTER X

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 22

1. In order to provide protection services to women and children from violence, the Regional Government shall establish PPT as an integrated service center for the protection of women and children from violence including victims of violence.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from violence.
3. Further provisions regarding the Organization and Working Procedures of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 23

In addition to establishing PPT for the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in Article 22, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from violence, the following shall be established:
a. Task force on trafficking in persons;
b. Regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor;
c. Task force for the protection of women and children at the sub-district level;
d. Domestic violence prevention groups at the urban village/village level; and
e. Other task forms that support the Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children.

Article 24

1. The task force as referred to in Article 23 letter a, shall consist of members, among others:
a. representatives from the Regional Government;
b. law enforcement;
c. community organizations;
d. non-governmental organizations;
e. professional organizations; and
f. researchers/academics.
2. The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinative institution tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of trafficking in persons.
3. Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 25

1. The Regional Action Committee as referred to in Article 23 letter b, shall consist of members, among others:
a. representatives from the regional government;
b. law enforcement;
c. community….
community organizations;
d. non-governmental organizations;
e. professional organizations; and
f. researchers/academics.
2. Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 26

1. The task force for the protection of women and children at the sub-district level as referred to in Article 23 letter c, is a functional work unit that provides integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against women and children at the sub-district level.
2. The membership of the task force for the protection of women and children at the sub-district level as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of sub-district apparatus elements, district/agency elements at the sub-district level, police sector (Polsek) elements, military rayon command (Koramil) elements, community/religious leaders, and youth elements.
3. Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Sub-district Head Decree.

Article 27

1. The domestic violence prevention group at the urban village/village level as referred to in Article 23 letter d, is a functional work unit that provides integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against women and children at the urban village/village level.
2. The domestic violence prevention group at the urban village/village level as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of urban village/village apparatus elements, babinsa and babinkamtibmas elements, community/religious leaders, and youth elements.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by urban village head/village head decree.

CHAPTER XI

COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One

Cooperation

Article 28

1. In order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. other Regency/City Governments; and
d. non-governmental institutions.
2. The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. provision of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses;
3. The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29

1. The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who are withdrawn/neglected from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
3. The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII

REPORTING

Article 30

1. PPT is obligated to report the implementation of the provision of protection for women and children from acts of violence to the Regent.
2. The reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. services; and
c. performance.
3. The submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XIII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 31

1. The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the provision of protection for women and children from acts of violence.
2. The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
3. Guidance….

Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is in order to realize the objectives of protecting the rights of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by relevant OPD/agencies and the community.

Article 32

1. The Regional Government is obligated to conduct supervision of the provision of protection for the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
2. The supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted with professional, transparent, and accountable principles.

Article 33

The community may conduct supervision of the provision of protection for women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or DPRD.

CHAPTER XIV

FINANCING

Article 34

The financing of the provision of protection for the rights of women and children from acts of violence is sourced from:

a. the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. the Provincial Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD);
d. the Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
e. Other lawful and non-binding financial sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XV

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 35

The PPT and Task Force institutions that have already been formed must adjust to the provisions of this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XVI....

CHAPTER XVI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 36

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency.

Enacted in Tanjungpandan on the date of August 6, 2018

REGENT OF BELITUNG,

signed.

SAHANI SALEH

Promulgated in Tanjungpandan on the date of August 6, 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF BELITUNG REGENCY,

signed.

KARYADI SAHMINAN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BELITUNG REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 2

Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,

signed.

IMAM FADLLI, SH

NIP. 197109152001121002

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BELITUNG REGENCY, BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE: (3.2/2018)

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BELITUNG REGENCY

NUMBER 2 YEAR 2018

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Women and children are a serious concern, considering their position as vulnerable to becoming victims of violence both from family and their environment. Various acts of violence against women and children both inside and outside the household will destroy the life of families, communities, government, nation, and State, therefore the Government of Belitung Regency is obligated to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence which is an implementation of several laws and regulations, including Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection.

Protection for women and children from acts of violence is one of the obligations of the Regional Government as regulated in Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government. On that basis, the Government of Belitung Regency has made various efforts to protect the rights of women and children from acts of violence, but has not been able to provide protection to women and children from various acts of violence, among others caused by the still low understanding of the community regarding the rights of women and children, handling that has not been well coordinated, implementation that has not been sustainable, and so forth.

Therefore....

Therefore, a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of the Rights of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is needed to provide legal certainty in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

The Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of the Rights of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, gives responsibility to the Regional Government starting from the prevention of acts of violence to the handling of victims of acts of violence. In its implementation, the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments and the community. In addition, adequate funding support both from the Government, Regional Government and the participation of the business sector and community, it is hoped that violence against women and children can be eliminated. Through this Regional Regulation it is expected to better implement the rights of children and women and their protection, so that it can be implemented more comprehensively, integrated and continuously by government elements, families and communities as well as other institutions related to child and women protection efforts.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Point a The principle of humanity becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence, which is respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila).

Point b The principle of justice and gender equality, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role....

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 22 play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, governmental activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.

Point c The principle of non-discrimination that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence does not discriminate on the basis of age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.

Point d Principle of Victim Protection The principle of protection is a principle that functions to provide protection to women and children in order to provide peace in family and community life.

Point e Principle of Empowerment The principle of best interests for women and children, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities and Regional Governments to fulfill the rights of women and children as regulated in laws and regulations.

Point f Principle of Integration

Article 4

Point a What is meant by trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, falsification of documents or identity, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control or the other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

Point… D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 23 Point b What is meant by exploitation is an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical sexual reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring/utilizing labor or transplanting organs and or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.

Point c Sufficiently clear.

Point d Sufficiently clear.

Point e What is meant by witness is a person who sees, hears and experiences events of violence and human rights violations.

Point f Mediation is carried out for cases of domestic violence that fall into the category of complaint offenses as regulated in Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence.

Article 5

Point a Physical violence is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Point b Psychological violence is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Point c Sexual violence is caused by:

1. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
2. coercion....

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 24

2. forced sexual intercourse;
3. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
4. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Point d Neglect is caused by:

1. acts that result in the unfulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
2. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as appropriate, carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
3. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they must provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
4. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Point e Coercion/Deprivation of Freedom is a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will and restricts their freedom as a human being who has the right to determine choices.

Point f Exploitation is caused by:

1. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
2. acts….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 25

2. acts with or without the consent of the victim including prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
3. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

Point g Threat of certain actions is a form of intimidation to do or not do what is requested by the perpetrator with consequences that are not good for the victim.

Point h Other violence is caused among others by any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear.

Article 6

Point a What is meant by the right to have one's dignity respected is upholding human rights.

Point b Sufficiently clear.

Point c Sufficiently clear.

Point d What is meant by the right to information is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas and signs that contain value, meaning and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard and read, presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 26 communication electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.

Point e Sufficiently clear.

Point f What is meant by the right to compensation includes economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health and education or skills guarantees.

Point g What is meant by the victim's right to rehabilitation includes access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance for the restoration of civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship.

Point h What is meant by the right to complaint handling is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.

Point i Sufficiently clear.

Point j What is meant by the right to assistance includes, among others, psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, clergy, advocates and family members.

What is meant by assistance is individuals who work as volunteers to provide protection and support to women and children who are victims of violence during the judicial process, these assistants can come from family members, friends and independent organizations that pay attention to witnesses and victims or advocates.

Article 7

Point a Sufficiently clear.

Point b The basic rights referred to include the right to education and access to parents during the handling process.

Point….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 27 Point c What is meant by the right to equal protection is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinions, ethnicity or social life, ownership, disability, birth or other status.

Point d Sufficiently clear.

Point e What is meant by the right to obtain freedom is freedom to express their views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by the Regional Action Plan is the stages of programs and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children from acts of violence including the worst forms of work for children that must be carried out by OPD and UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 28

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Paragraph (1) Point a What is meant by complaint services is a series of actions taken by the organizers of integrated service institutions to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community.

Point b What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.

Point c What is meant by legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.

Point d What is meant by social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.

What is meant by social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.

Point….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 29 Point e What is meant by repatriation is returning women and child victims of violence from Belitung Regency or from the receiving area to the area of origin.

Point f What is meant by identification services is services to determine the background of problems and identification of victims.

Point g What is meant by psychological services is services to restore the mental and psychological condition of victims to return to normal.

Paragraph 2 Sufficiently Clear Paragraph 3 What is meant by minimum service standards (SPM) is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of violence.

Paragraph 4 Sufficiently Clear

Article 18

Sufficiently Clear

Article 19

Sufficiently Clear

Article 20

Sufficiently Clear

Article 21

Sufficiently Clear

Article 22

Sufficiently Clear

Article 23

Point a Sufficiently clear.

Point….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 30 Point b What is meant by the worst forms of work for children, among others:

a. children who are prostituted
b. children who work in the construction sector
c. children who work as scavengers
d. children who carry out activities on the street
e. children who work as domestic workers
f. children who work in home industries
g. children who work as beggars
h. children who work as vehicle washers
i. children who carry out activities as street vendors, newspaper sellers, shoe shiners and street buskers
j. children who work in the industrial sector and types of activities that use hazardous chemicals
k. children who work in jermal (traditional fishing platform)
l. children who work in the entertainment sector.

Point c Sufficiently Clear Point d Sufficiently Clear Point e Sufficiently Clear

Article 24

Sufficiently Clear

Article 25

Sufficiently Clear

Article 26

Sufficiently Clear

Article 27

Sufficiently Clear

Article 28

Sufficiently Clear

Article 29

Sufficiently Clear

Article 30

Sufficiently Clear objective….

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 31

Article 31

Paragraph (1) What is meant by guidance on the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community to realize the achievement of the objectives of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence.

What is meant by supervision of the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is a process of activities aimed at ensuring that efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community run efficiently and effectively in accordance with plans and provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently Clear

Article 33

Sufficiently Clear

Article 34

Sufficiently clear.

Article 35

Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BELITUNG REGENCY NUMBER 46

D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 32
