COPY

TANGGAMUS REGENCY

LAMPUNG PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY

NUMBER 2 OF 2024

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF TANGGAMUS,

Considering:
a. that in order to protect the constitutional rights of women and children in accordance with the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, the Regional Government is obliged to be responsible for the implementation of protection for women and children against acts of violence;
b. that to meet the indicators for the Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency, concerning protection services, prevention of violence against women and children, regulations are needed to regulate the various roles of regional apparatus institutions and other institutions;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;

In view of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019), as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 16 of 2019 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 186, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6401);
4. Law Number 2 of 1997 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regional Regency of Tulang Bawang and Level II Regional Regency of Tanggamus (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1997, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3667);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Amendment to Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
6. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4279), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 5882);
7. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4301);
8. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
9. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635), as has been amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
10. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (SPPA) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
13. Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
14. Law Number 12 of 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
15. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
16. Government Regulation Number 09 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses/Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (TPPO) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
17. Government Regulation Number 70 of 2020 Concerning Procedures for Implementation of Chemical Castration Actions, Installation of Electronic Detection Devices, Rehabilitation, and Announcement of the Identity of Perpetrators of Sexual Violence Against Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 269, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6585);
18. Government Regulation Number 78 of 2021 concerning Special Protection for Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2021 Number 174, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6704);
19. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2018 Number 532);

20. Regional Regulation of Tanggamus Regency Number 8 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Tanggamus Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency of 2016 Number 142, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency Number 47) as has been amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation of Tanggamus Regency Number 9 of 2022 (Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency of 2022 Number 212, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency Number 102);

21. Regional Regulation of Tanggamus Regency Number 02 of 2017 concerning Standards for Child Care in Child Social Welfare Institutions (LKSA) (Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency of 2017 Number 147);
22. Regional Regulation of Tanggamus Regency Number 1 of 2019 concerning Implementation of Education (Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency of 2019 Number 165, Supplement to the Regional Gazette Number 67);
23. Regional Regulation of Tanggamus Regency Number 8 of 2022 concerning Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency of 2022 Number 211, Supplement to the Regional Gazette Number 101);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

TANGGAMUS REGENCY

REGENT OF TANGGAMUS

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs and the interests of the local community on its own initiative based on community aspirations within the system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the regional government and DPRD according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
3. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of the regional government administration of Tanggamus Regency.
4. Regent is the Regent of Tanggamus.
5. Regional Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Council of Tanggamus Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus abbreviated as PD is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional People's Representative Council of Tanggamus Regency in the administration of Government Affairs which are the authority of the Tanggamus Regency Region.
7. Regional Planning, Development, Research and Innovation Agency hereinafter abbreviated as Bapperida is the Regional Planning, Development, Research and Innovation Agency in Tanggamus Regency.
8. Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection, Population Control and Family Planning hereinafter abbreviated as DPPPA DALDUK and KB is the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection, Population Control and Family Planning of Tanggamus Regency.
9. Sub-district is the working area of the sub-district head as a regional apparatus of Tanggamus regency.
10. Village or called Pekon, hereinafter referred to as village/pekon, is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage the interests of the local community, based on origins and customs that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
11. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
12. Child's rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, community, government, and the State.
13. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
14. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
15. Guardian is a parent or body that in fact exercises custody as a parent over a child.
16. Woman is a human being who can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth and breastfeed.
17. Child Marriage is a marriage conducted through civil, religious or customary law with or without registration or official consent where one or both partners are children under the age of 18 years.
18. Children in Need of Special Protection hereinafter abbreviated as AMPK are Children in need of special protection.
19. Worst Forms of Child Labor hereinafter referred to as BPTA is the worst forms of child labor.
20. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social.
21. Street child is a child whose life is irregular by spending most of his/her time outside the home to earn a living on the streets or in public places.
22. Child with disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with his/her growth and development normally.
23. Gifted child is a child who has extraordinary intelligence or has special potential and/or talent not limited to intellectual ability, but also in other fields.
24. Child in conflict with the law is a child in conflict with the law, a child who is a victim of a criminal act, and a child who is a witness to a criminal act.
25. Adopted Child is a Child whose rights are transferred from the environment of the authority of the Family of Parents, legal Guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education and raising of the Child into the environment of the Family of adoptive Parents based on a court decision or determination.
26. Foster Child is a Child who is cared for by a person or institution to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health because the Parents or one of the Parents is unable to guarantee the normal growth and development of the Child.
27. Economically exploited child is an act with or without the consent of the child who is a victim which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, physical, sexual exploitation, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a child by another party to obtain material benefits.
28. Sexually exploited child is any form of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of a child to obtain benefits, including but limited to all activities of prostitution and sexual abuse.
29. Child labor is children both boys and girls who are involved in economic activities that interfere with or hinder the growth and development process and are dangerous to the physical and mental health of children.
30. Custody is the power of Parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect and develop the Child in accordance with the religion professed and in accordance with the ability, talent, and interest.
31. Child's Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by Parents, Family, community, state, government and regional government.
32. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
33. Human trafficking is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring, or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
34. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
35. Protection of women is all efforts made to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
36. Implementation of Child Protection is a series of activities carried out by the Regional Government, community, and parents, aimed at preventing, reducing risks, and handling victims of acts of violence, exploitation, abuse and neglect of children.
37. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, be healthy, intelligent, grow and develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from neglect, violence and discrimination.
38. Violence Against Women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic, social exploitation including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
39. Violence Against Children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, and psychologically.
40. Violence Against Women and Children in the Household is any act against a woman and child that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, economically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of liberty unlawfully within the household sphere.
41. Exploitation of Children is any act involving children in activities that can harm welfare and growth and development or endanger the safety of children with the aim of enabling others to obtain economic, sexual, social, or political benefits, including if there is a restriction or elimination of opportunities for children to obtain their rights.
42. Child Abuse is any action against a child, including placing the child in a situation that can cause adverse effects on the welfare, safety, dignity and development of the child.
43. Assistance is a social worker who has professional competence in his/her field.
44. Child Neglect is any act of neglecting the fulfillment of basic needs, care, and maintenance so as to interfere with or hinder the growth and development of children, including leaving children in dangerous situations.
45. Prevention is the effort of the Regional Government and community in creating conditions that can prevent the occurrence of violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect of children.
46. Risk Reduction is early action towards children and their families who are in vulnerable situations or at risk of experiencing various forms of violence, abuse, exploitation, and neglect.
47. Handling is action that includes identification, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of children who are victims of violence, abuse, exploitation, and or neglect.
48. Care Environment is care by parents and care outside parental care. Care outside parental care consists of care by foster parents or adoptive parents as well as care in institutions such as orphanages or social care institutions for children or other similar names.
49. PATBM is a movement of networks or citizen groups at the community level working in a coordinated manner to achieve child protection goals.
50. Regional Long-Term Development Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RPJPD is a regional development planning document for a period of 20 (twenty) years.
51. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan hereinafter referred to as RPJMD is a regional development planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
52. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
53. Child Participation Forum / Regional child forum is an organization that accommodates the aspirations of children and/or groups of children in Tanggamus Regency.
54. Repatriation is an Effort to return Women and Child Victims of Violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point or receiving area to the area of origin.
55. Social reintegration is an Effort to reunite witnesses and/or victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for witnesses and/or victims.
56. Women's Protection Service Provider Institution is a government-owned institution or legal community institution that makes efforts to Protect Women from violence, both in the implementation of policies, activities, and administration in service delivery.
57. Child Social Welfare Institution is a social organization or social association that implements Child Social Welfare Administration formed by the community, whether legally incorporated or not legally incorporated.
58. Alternative care is child care carried out by Child Social Welfare Institutions.
59. Child participation is the involvement of children in the decision-making process and enjoying changes related to their lives either directly or indirectly carried out with the consent and will of the child based on awareness and understanding.
60. Child Data Information System is the collection, management, and utilization of child data which is one of the requirements in the Implementation of Child Protection.
61. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Human Trafficking Crimes hereinafter referred to as Task Force is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts of human trafficking crimes in Tanggamus Regency.
62. Child-Friendly Regency/City (KLA) is a Regency/City that has a Child Rights-based Development system through the Integration of Government Commitment and Resources, Community and Business World that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and Activities to ensure the fulfillment of Child Rights, up to the sub-district and pekon level.
63. Parahita Ekapraya Award (APE) is an award given by the central government to Ministries or Institutions, Provincial and Regency/City Regional Governments for their commitment in efforts to realize gender equality, women's empowerment and child protection.
64. Gender mainstreaming working group hereinafter referred to as Pokja PUG is a consultation forum for implementers and movers of gender mainstreaming from various agencies/institutions in the region.
65. Technical Implementation Unit of the Office, hereinafter referred to as UPTD is an organization that carries out operational technical activities and/or certain supporting technical activities at the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection, Population Control and Family Planning of Tanggamus Regency.
66. Technical Implementation Unit of the Office of Integrated Service Center for Women and Child Protection hereinafter referred to as UPTD PPA is the Technical Implementation Unit of the Office of Integrated Service Center for Women and Child Protection.
67. Private sector is Non-Governmental Institutions, Business World and Mass Media.
68. Child-Friendly Health Center is a health center that provides services to children completely and integrated while paying attention to children's needs.
69. Child-Friendly School (SRA) is a formal, non-formal, and informal education unit that seeks to guarantee, fulfill, and respect rights, provide protection, and support child participation.
70. Child-friendly Islamic boarding school is an effort to create Islamic boarding schools and their surrounding environment so that children can be comfortable, clean, feel at home, worship devotedly, enjoy learning, playing and interacting.
71. Child-friendly place of worship is a place of worship that provides a comfortable, safe environment, and is appropriate to the needs of children.
72. Women-Friendly and Child-Caring Village (DRPPA) is a village that integrates gender perspective and child rights in the governance of village government administration, village development, as well as community guidance and empowerment, which is carried out in a planned, comprehensive, sustainable manner, in accordance with Indonesia's development vision.
73. Integrated Service and Referral System hereinafter abbreviated as SLRT is a service system that helps identify the needs of the poor and vulnerable based on profiles in the List of Beneficiaries and connects them with social protection and poverty alleviation programs carried out by the central, provincial and regency/city governments according to their needs.
74. Team for Violence against Women and Children or abbreviated as (Tim KtP/A) on Sexual Violence Crimes (TPKS) is the health sector that plays an important role in efforts to fulfill the right to health services for victims of Violence Against Women and Children (KtP/A), especially in recognizing or identifying cases of KtP/A, providing comprehensive services to victims of KtP/A, including making medical, social, and legal referrals.

CHAPTER II

PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 2

The purpose and objectives of the protection of women and children from acts of violence are:
a. To prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. To provide protection and services to women and children victims of gender-based violence;
c. To provide a sense of security to women and children victims of violence;
d. To restore the physical, psychological and economic condition of women and children victims of violence;
e. The best interests of women and children victims of violence occurring in the domestic and/or public sphere; and
f. To take action against perpetrators of violence against women and children.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 3

The Scope of this Regional Regulation is as follows:
a. Forms of Violence against Women and children
b. Rights of Victims of Acts of Violence Against Women and Children
c. Obligations and Responsibilities
d. Protection of Women and Children
e. Cooperation, Partnership and Empowerment
f. Guidance and Supervision
g. Child-Friendly Regency (KLA) and Parahita Ekapraya Award (APE)

CHAPTER IV

FORMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 4

Forms of violence against women and children, include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Neglect;
e. Exploitation;
f. Other violence, namely:
1. Victims of pornography;
2. Victims of disaster and conflict;
3. Victims of narcotics;
4. Victims infected with HIV/AIDS;
5. Victims of terrorism;
6. Victims of Stigmatization;
7. Worst Forms of Child Labor (BPTA);
8. Street children and deviant behavior;
9. Persons with disabilities and/or;
10. Other children in need of special protection.

Article 5

Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a constitutes an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death of women and/or children.

Article 6

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b constitutes an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or psychological suffering to women and/or children.

Article 7

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes:
a. Acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. Forced sexual intercourse;
c. Forced unnatural sexual intercourse; and/or
d. Forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 8

Neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d includes:
a. Acts of deliberately neglecting women within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood and care to such women.
b. Acts that result in the improper fulfillment of children's needs, whether physical, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care.
c. Acts of deliberately neglecting to care for or look after children as they should be, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care.

Article 9

Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e includes:
a. Acts of economic or sexual exploitation with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. Acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.

Article 10

1. Other violence as referred to in Article 4 letter f constitutes threats of violence and coercion.
2. Threats of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, with or without the use of means that create fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
3. Coercion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes a situation where a person/victim is made to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 11

Women and children victims of acts of violence receive the following rights:
a. The right to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. The right to recovery;
c. The right to determine their own decisions;
d. The right to obtain information;
e. The right to confidentiality;
f. The right to social rehabilitation and social reintegration;
g. The right to appropriate, comfortable, and needs-based complaint handling;
h. The right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
i. The right to assistance; and
j. To receive continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 12

Child victims of acts of violence in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 11, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. The right to survival, growth, and development;
b. The right to basic population services;
c. The right to equal protection;
d. The right to be free from various stigma; and
e. The right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 13

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection and Empowerment for women and children, include:
a. Regional Government;
b. Private Sector and Community Institutions;
c. Community;
d. Family and/or parents;
e. Business World; and
f. Mass Media.

Part One

Regional Government

Article 14

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 13 letter a, include:
a. Establishing policies for the protection and empowerment of women and children;
b. Implementing policies, protection, and empowerment of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. Conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection and empowerment of women and children;
d. Providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women and children;
e. Allocating budget for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women and children;
f. Guiding and supervising the implementation of protection and empowerment of women and children; and
g. Realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent together with the DPRD shall establish programs and activities for the protection and empowerment of women and children in the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
3. The RPJMD as referred to in paragraph (2) shall also contain the Regional Action Plan (RAD) on the protection of women and children.
4. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two

Private Sector and Community Institutions

Article 15

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the private sector and community as referred to in Article 13 letter b and letter c, shall be implemented in the form of participation of the private sector and community.
2. Forms of participation of the private sector and community as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. Preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. Providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. Participating in the handling of victims of violence.
3. Forms of participation of the private sector and community as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Three

Family and/or Parents

Article 16

The obligations of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 13 letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect women and children as family members.

Part Four

Business Sector

Article 17

Obligations and Responsibilities of the Business Sector, as referred to in Article 13 letter e include:

(1) Company policies with a Child and women perspective in order to provide protection;

2) Products intended for Children must be safe for Children and/or comply with Indonesian National Standards;

3) Contributing to the fulfillment of Children's Rights through corporate social responsibility.

Part Five

Mass Media

Article 18

The obligations of Mass Media as referred to in Article 13 letter f, are carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials that are beneficial from social, cultural, educational, religious, and health aspects of Children by taking into account the best interests of women and Children.

CHAPTER VII

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One

Prevention of violence against women and children

Article 19

1. To prevent acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents, children and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling, training and realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government makes efforts as follows:

a. Providing material on the prevention of acts of violence against women and children in formal, non-formal, and informal education;
b. Provision of accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. Creating a friendly and safe work environment atmosphere for women;
d. Building community participation and concern for the prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. Building and providing an easily accessible information system;
f. Building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children.

Article 20

1. Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 19 is implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:

a. Regional planning and innovation;
b. Social affairs;
c. Health;
d. Education;
e. Manpower;
f. Ministry of Religion;
g. Religious Court;
h. Population and civil registration;
i. Ministry of Law and Human Rights;
j. Women's empowerment and child protection;
k. Family planning;
l. Public Works and Public Housing;
m. Tourism;
n. Cooperatives and micro enterprises;
o. Environment;
p. Village community empowerment;
q. Regional disaster management;
r. Police;
s. Civil service police.

2. Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on RPJPD and RPJMD.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Services for Violence Against Women and Children

Article 21

1. In the context of providing protection services to women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government establishes a Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children (UPTD PPA), Integrated Referral Service System (SLRT), Violence Against Women/Children Team (Tim KTP/A) at community health centers, Hospitals, schools, Islamic Boarding Schools, Women-Friendly and Child-Caring Villages (DRPPA).
2. The Regional Government through UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1), functions to implement services:

a. Public complaints;
b. Victim outreach;
c. Case management;
d. Temporary shelter;
e. Mediation;
f. Victim assistance; and
g. Victim repatriation.

3. Further provisions regarding the organization and working procedures of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are stipulated by Regent Regulation.
4. To assist in the protection of women and children, the Regional Government establishes:

a. Task Force for the Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking;
b. Task Force for the Prevention of Child Marriage;
c. Task Force for Child-Friendly Regency;
d. Regional Action Committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor or Worst Forms of Child Labor (BPTA);
e. Regional Children's Forum (FAD);
f. Community-Based Integrated Child Protection (PATBM) PENA BISMA;
g. Domestic Violence Forum (KDRT);
h. Task Force for the Protection of Women and Children (Satgas PPA);
i. Women-Friendly and Child-Caring Village (DRPPA);
j. TIM KTP/A at Hospitals, Community Health Centers, schools, Islamic Boarding Schools.

5. Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (4) are stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 22

1. Forms of Regional Government services to victims implemented by UPTD PPA and others as referred to in Article 21 include:

a. Medical services;
b. Medicolegal services (visum);
c. Psychosocial services;
d. Legal services;
e. Economic independence services;
f. Psychological services; and
g. Psychiatric services.

2. Further provisions regarding service mechanisms according to standard operating procedures are regulated in the Regent's Decree.

Article 23

1. Implementation of Assistance as referred to in Article 21 includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims, carried out by health workers, educators/education personnel, police, prosecutors, courts, advocates, social workers, assistance volunteers and spiritual counselors.
2. Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Three

Service Principles

Article 24

The provision of services to victims is carried out with principles, including free of charge, fast, safe, empathetic, non-discriminatory, easily accessible and confidential.

CHAPTER VIII

COOPERATION, PARTNERSHIP AND EMPOWERMENT

Part One

Cooperation

Article 25

1. In order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children, cooperation can be carried out with:

a. Central Government;
b. Provincial Government;
c. Other Regency/City Governments;
d. Non-Governmental Institutions;
e. Community;
f. Universities;
g. Business Sector;
h. Mass Media;

2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:

a. Exchange of data and information;
b. Recovery of victims of acts of violence;
c. Repatriation and social reintegration;
d. Provision of evidence and witnesses; and
e. Followed up in accordance with applicable law.

3. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is set forth in the form of a Cooperation Agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two

Partnership

Article 26

1. The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector and mass media in the protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
2. Partnership with the business sector as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:

a. Notification of information on employment opportunities for women and children victims of acts of violence;
b. Education and training for women and children victims of acts of violence.

3. Partnership with mass media as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials that are beneficial from social, cultural, educational, religious, and health aspects of women and children by taking into account the best interests of women and children victims of violence.

Part Three

Empowerment

Article 27

Strengthening and development of Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions shall be implemented through:
a. capacity building of Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions;
b. capacity building of human resources managing Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions;
c. assistance in the implementation of Women's Empowerment services;
d. strengthening networks among Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions at the regency level;
e. facilitation of efforts to fulfill the standards of Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions; and
f. development of communication, information, and education regarding Women's Empowerment services

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 28

1. The regional government implements Guidance and Supervision by means of: a. Coordination b. Guidance c. Education and Training d. Monitoring and Evaluation
2. Implementation of coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a shall be conducted among stakeholders in a cross-sectoral manner with Regional Apparatus, and community institutions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
3. Implementation of Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b towards women and children who are victims through guidance on religious values and social values, Counseling, Social Rehabilitation, and Social Assistance by the Regional Apparatus in charge together with other related Agencies.
4. Implementation of education and training as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c shall be provided to women and children who are victims as an effort to improve the physical and mental condition of women and children in fulfilling their rights and life needs by the Regional Apparatus in charge, Vocational Training Centers and other related Agencies.
5. Implementation of guidance and supervision towards women and children who are victims as referred to in paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) shall be conducted through monitoring and evaluation of the targets to be achieved.

CHAPTER X

CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY (KLA)

AND PARAHITA EKAPRAYA AWARD (APE)

Article 29

1. To realize a Child-Friendly Regency (KLA) and Parahita Ekapraya Award (APE), the Regional Government, Private Sector and Community Institutions shall pay attention to the rights of children and women related to the rights to life, growth and development, protection and participation.
2. The Regional Government, Private Sector and Community Institutions in realizing a Child-Friendly Regency are incorporated in the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force and PUG Working Group.
3. The Child-Friendly Regency Task Force as referred to in paragraph (3) is responsible for the fulfillment of children's rights related to: a. Civil rights and freedoms;
b. Family environment and alternative care;
c. Basic health and welfare;
d. Education, leisure time utilization and cultural arts activities; e. Special protection of children;
f. As well as Institutions;
5. The PUG Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2), is responsible for the fulfillment of women's rights with a gender perspective.
6. Provisions related to Child-Friendly Regency (KLA) and PUG shall be regulated in Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XI

FUNDING

Article 30

Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); andb. Other lawful and non-binding sources.

Article 31

1. Funding for protection of women and children victims of violence includes:a. Medical services, which include doctor's examination, treatment costs, hospital costs, medication costs and medical support costs; b. Medicolegal services, which include examination for Visum et Repertum and et Psikiatrikum;
c. Psychosocial services, which consist of counseling and psychological therapy as well as safe houses (shelter);
d. Legal services;
e. Economic strengthening, in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access.
2. Funding management shall be conducted through technical institutions appointed by the Regional Government which is carried out transparently and can be legally accounted for.

CHAPTER XII

SANCTIONS

Article 32

In the event of violence against Women and Children, sanctions shall be imposed in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XIII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 33

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 2 (two) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 34

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tanggamus Regency.

Stipulated in Kota Agung on the date of April 25, 2024 Acting REGENT OF TANGGAMUS,

MULYADI IRSAN

Promulgated in Kota Agung on the date of April 26, 2024

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY,

HAMID HERIANSYAH LUBIS

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY YEAR 2024 NUMBER 221

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY,  LAMPUNG PROVINCE: 03/1490/TGS/2024

ELUCIDATION

ON

REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY

NUMBER 2 YEAR 2024

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN I. GENERAL.

Acts of violence against women and children have experienced an increasingly rising trend. Triggering factors such as economic, social, cultural and social environment are becoming more complex along with the influence of technological development. Concrete steps are needed to provide protection by all elements of Citizens as a unity of society, as well as the role of the Regional Government as protector of its citizens with various programs to prevent acts of violence against women and children. One of the efforts to prevent violence against women is carried out through women's empowerment and optimization of previously possessed potential, so that it is expected to be able to improve and develop themselves to play a role and be protected from potential acts of violence. This condition will strengthen the form of appreciation and respect for women and maintain their role and nature as a woman to play a role in educating and supporting the welfare and happiness of their family.

Efforts to prevent violence against children are a shared obligation of parents, families, communities and the private sector in a holistic and inseparable manner from one another. Community service is the front line when there is potential for violence against children. The mechanism for preventing violence and protecting child victims of violence involves multiple sectors coordinated by the Regional Government. Such efforts are carried out with the direction of providing social rehabilitation for child victims of violence, reuniting child victims of violence with their families and/or environment, and increasing the empowerment of child victims of violence.

In connection with this matter, to realize the provision of protection efforts for women and children victims of violence as well as for legal certainty in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence in the regional area, it is necessary to regulate it in a Regional Regulation.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear

Article 2

Sufficiently Clear

Article 3

Sufficiently Clear

Article 4

Sufficiently Clear

Article 5

Sufficiently Clear

Article 6

Sufficiently Clear

Article 7

Sufficiently Clear

Article 8

Sufficiently Clear

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear

Article 10

Sufficiently Clear

Article 11

Sufficiently Clear

Article 12

Sufficiently Clear

Article 13

Sufficiently Clear

Article 14

Sufficiently Clear

Article 15

Sufficiently Clear

Article 16

Sufficiently Clear

Article 17

Sufficiently Clear

Article 18

Sufficiently Clear

Article 19

Sufficiently Clear

Article 20

Sufficiently Clear

Article 21

Sufficiently Clear

Article 22

Sufficiently Clear

Article 23

Sufficiently Clear

Article 24

Sufficiently Clear

Article 25

Sufficiently Clear

Article 26

Sufficiently Clear

Article 27

Sufficiently Clear

Article 28

Sufficiently Clear

Article 29

Sufficiently Clear

Article 30

Sufficiently Clear

Article 31

Sufficiently Clear

Article 32

Sufficiently Clear

Article 33

Sufficiently Clear

Article 34

Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANGGAMUS REGENCY NUMBER 107
