REGENT OF NORTH BUTON

PROVINSISULAWESITENGGARA

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY  NUMBER S YEAR 2022

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE  BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF NORTH BUTON,

Considering  In view of
a. that one of the State's objectives to be achieved is to protect all Indonesian people and the entire Indonesian homeland so that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that violence against women and children in North Buton Regency shows quite high numbers and continues to increase, so protection efforts are needed;
c. that to provide a legal foundation and certainty for the protection of women and children victims of violence, it needs to be stipulated by Regional Regulation;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to stipulate a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection [State Gazette of the Repu blik Indonesia - -- ~-------------------------------- -2- Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
4. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 13 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Repu blik Indonesia Number 4602);
5. Law Number J 4 Year 2007 ten tang Establishment of North Buton Regency in Southeast Sulawesi Province [State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 16, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4690);
6. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Repu blik Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 11 Year 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims -3- of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
11. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036) as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);

With Mutual Approval REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY and

REGENT OF NORTH BUTON

DECIDES:

To Stipulate REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING

PROTECTION

OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:  1. Region is North Buton Regency.

2. Regional Government is the Government of North Buton Regency.  3. Regent is the Regent of North Buton.
4-

4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of North Buton Regency.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Woman is a person who has female genitalia, can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and includes persons who are legally recognized as Women.
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children in the womb who become victims of violence as well as children in conflict with the law.
8. Violence is any act against a person that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
9. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
10. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
11. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, serious injury or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
12. Psychological Violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness or severe psychological suffering to a person.
13. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of forced sexual intercourse, sexual abuse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural and/or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
5-

14. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.
15. Victim is a woman and child who experiences physical suffering, psychological suffering, sexual suffering, either directly or indirectly resulting from acts of violence.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
18. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
19. Services are immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the empowerment of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence to the family or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
22. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions in order to carry out their role again properly both in the family and in society.
23. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
24. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
6-

25. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, Safe House, Child Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
26. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, Social Rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal aid, as well as Repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.
27. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of violence.
28. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 2

Forms of violence against Women and Children are:
a. Physical Violence;
b. Psychological Violence;
c. Sexual Violence;
d. Neglect; ande. Exploitation.

Article 3

Physical Violence as referred to in Article 2 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, serious injury or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death.
7-

Article 4

Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 2 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 5

Sexual Violence as referred to in Article 2 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner;  and/ord. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 6

Neglect as referred to in Article 2 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of the child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after the child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 7

Exploitation as referred to in Article 2 letter e is caused by: -8-
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits whether material or immaterial; and/or
c. any form of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS AND CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH THE LAW

Article 8

1. Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection from individuals, groups and institutions both governmental and non-governmental;
b. access and information about the location of complaint centers, PPT, and all matters related to the fulfillment of rights and involvement in the decision-making process related to assistance and case development;
c. services that include medical, extensive medicolegal, psychosocial and legal;
d. handling that does not stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume life in society including the restoration of their good name;
e. confidential handling which includes guarantees of certainty for the victim that their identity will not be disseminated, medical care and legal handling;
f. assistance provided by psychologists to victims suffering from trauma/other mental problems to restore the victim's mental condition;
9-
g. legal aid assistance provided by persons and/or legal aid institutions to victims at every level of examination and throughout the legal process; and

h. guarantees of rights related to the victim's status.

2. Every child in conflict with the law has the right to obtain:
a. the right to have their identity kept confidential and not disclosed;
b. the right to obtain Legal Aid at every stage of examination, from investigation to the sentencing stage; and
c. the right to obtain an assistant at every stage of examination, from investigation to the sentencing stage.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 9

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of Protection for Women and Children victims of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. society; and
c. family and parents.

Article 10

(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children victims of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
e. establishing PPT;
10-
f. allocating budget in the implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
g. fostering, supervising and evaluating the implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

Article 11

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of society as referred to in Article 9 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing acts of Violence against victims;
b. establishing complaint posts at the sub-district/village level;
c. establishing Women and Children Protection units within community organizations;
d. conducting independent socialization of Women's rights and Children's rights;
e. providing first aid to victims; and
f. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, customary institutions, the private sector, and mass media.
4. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12

The obligations of the family and Parents as referred to in Article 9 letter c, are that they legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and to protect Women and Children as part of the family members.
11-

CHAPTER V

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Institutions

Article 13

1. In order to provide services and protection to Women and Children from violence, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for Women and Children victims of violence.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements from the Health Office, Education Office, Youth and Sports Office, Social Office, Cooperatives, SMEs and Manpower Office, Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Office, Community and Village Empowerment Office, Civil Service Police Unit, Regional General Hospital, Police Resort, Kulisusu Palace Customary Institution, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Higher Education Institutions.
3. Further provisions regarding PPT are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14

1. In providing Protection to Women and Children Victims of Violence, PPT is obliged to:
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to Victims;
b. organize Protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to Medical Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for Victims;
d. network with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of Victims and cooperate with witness and Victim protection institutions, social Protection homes or trauma centers owned by the government, community, or other institutions for the recovery of Victims' health;
e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for Victims;
f. maintain confidentiality of Victims;
g. provide economic empowerment;
h. provide fulfillment of legal assistance for Victims; and
2. In the event that integrated service delivery is carried out in a networked manner, PPT remains responsible for the entire referral process of services needed by Victims.
3. The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with SPM.

Part Two

Minimum Service Standards

Article 15

SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children, includes services:

a. handling complaints/reports of Victims of Violence against Women and Children;
b. health services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
c. law enforcement and legal assistance for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
d. repatriation for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
f. psychological services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

Article 16

SPM as referred to in Article 15 has performance indicators including:

a. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive health services by trained health personnel at Puskesmas and Hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of Violence against Women and Children;
f. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive legal assistance services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
h. coverage of social reintegration services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
1. coverage of legal assistance services from the Investigation level to Court decisions for children in conflict with the law.

Part Three

Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention

Article 17

Forms of prevention of violence against women and children carried out by PPT, can be implemented through:

a. Socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community related to the protection of the rights of Women and Children; and
b. Training of PPT members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing violence against Women and Children.

Article 18

(1) PPT in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with Sub-district PPT, and competent parties in making efforts to prevent violence against Women and Children.

2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four

Forms and Mechanisms of Services

Article 19

(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence, are as follows:

a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal assistance;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. psychological services; and
g. economic empowerment.

2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:

a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.

3. In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other district/city governments, community, family and parents.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures for services, and handling of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20

1. In carrying out service duties to Women and Children victims of violence, PPT coordinates with Sub-district PPT.
2. The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures which are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five

Assistance

Article 21

1. Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions that cooperate with PPT.
2. The mechanism for assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Six

Principles of Services and Assistance

Article 22

The provision of services and assistance to victims, is carried out with the principles of:

a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

CHAPTER VI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 23

(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for Women and Children victims of violence.

2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:

a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.

3. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out with the principles:

a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 24

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), shall be carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for Women and Children victims of violence in accordance with SPM established by the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 25

1. PPT reports the implementation of protection for Women and Children victims of violence to the Regent.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, including:

a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER VIII

FUNDING

Article 26

Funding for the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of violence, is sourced from:

a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 27

(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, customary institutions or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women and children victims of violence.

2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER IX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 28

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered with its placement in the Regional Gazette of North Buton Regency.

Enacted in Buranga on date .22.-2.-2022 MUH. RIDW AN ZAKARlAH Promulgated in Buranga on date 22. ... 2.- 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY,

MUH. HARDHY MUSLIM

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER ~

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE: (3/31/2022) -18-

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY

NUMBER YEAR 2022

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

GENERAL

Women and children are groups vulnerable to experiencing violence. All forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity, thus requiring legal protection to protect their honor and dignity and to guarantee their right to life in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.

This view is based on Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which states that "Every person has the right to protection of his/her personal self, family, honor, dignity, and property under his/her control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not to do something which is a human right." The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to protect women and children victims of violence through implementing protection policies for women and children victims of violence applied by the government, establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence, establishing PPT, ensuring the implementation of ease of service to victims, seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process, and seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in North Buton Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, it is necessary to provide protection for Women and Children Victims of violence in the form of regional regulations.

The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of respect for human rights, -19- justice, non-discrimination and victim protection. The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to a) prevent violence against women and children; b) eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children; c) protect and provide a sense of security for women and children; d) provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and e) facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of services, assistance, guidance, supervision, reporting and funding for women and children victims of violence in North Buton Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear

Article 2

Sufficiently clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

Sufficiently clear

Article 5

Sufficiently clear

Article 6

Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Sufficiently clear

Article 10

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) -20- Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Sufficiently clear

Article 13

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 14

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 15

Sufficiently clear

Article 16

Sufficiently clear

Article 17

Sufficiently clear

Article 18

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) -21- Sufficiently clear

Article 19

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 20

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 22

Point a What is meant by "quick" is immediate action taken without complications or simplified procedures. What is meant by "safe" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, undisturbed, and served in a friendly manner, with respect and appreciation.

What is meant by "empathy" is action that respects, honors, cares for, befriends, and brings happiness aimed at pleasing and comforting the victim's heart.

Point b What is meant by "guarantee of confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.
-22- Point c What is meant by "easily accessible" is the provision of services and assistance for all people regardless of their social status, so that such services are affordable for the underprivileged or relatively sufficient for the privileged.

Point d What is meant by "not charged" is that service and assistance activities carried out by PPT are not charged to victims.

Article 23

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 24

Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 26

Sufficiently clear

Article 27

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 28

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH BUTON REGENCY NUMBER
-- --~---
