SUBULUSSALAM CITY
QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY NUMBER 20 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
BISMILLAHIRRAHMANIRRAHIM
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MOST GRACIOUS THE MOST MERCIFUL
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY ALLAH
THE MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM,

Considering: a. that women have a strategic role in development so that the improvement of women's quality of life needs to receive recognition in accordance with local wisdom and the guidance of Islamic Sharia;
b. that based on the mandate of Qanun Number 6 Year 2009 concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection Articles 4 and 5 which regulate the scope of empowerment and protection, the protection of women becomes the authority of the District/City Government;
c. that in reality, the quality of women's lives is still low and vulnerable to threats of violence, abuse, torture, domestic violence, trafficking in women, exploitation and discrimination against women which need to be immediately stopped by providing protection in accordance with human dignity;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, c, it is necessary to establish a Qanun of Subulussalam City concerning Women's Empowerment;

Bearing in mind: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 23 Year 2002 Concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
3. Law Number 11 Year 2006 concerning Aceh Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 62, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4633);
4. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 927).

With Joint Approval of
THE PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY
And
THE MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Qanun what is meant by:
1. City is Subulussalam City.
2. City Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Subulussalam.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRK in administering Government Affairs which are the authority of the Region.
5. Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Subulussalam City hereinafter referred to as the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget abbreviated as APBK is the annual financial plan of the City Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Mayor and DPRK and established by Qanun.
6. Medium-Term Development Plan of the City hereinafter abbreviated as RPJMK is a planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
7. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
8. Woman with disability is someone who has not been able to accommodate with the surrounding environment because of having disorders, activity limitations resulting in participation restrictions.
9. Women's rights are all rights possessed by every woman which are human rights.
10. Empowerment is an effort to increase women's ability to obtain access and control over all resources in all aspects of life.
11. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and guarantee of women's rights in all aspects of life.
12. Victim is a woman who experiences threats of violence and or violence inside and or outside the household and or becomes an object of trafficking/exploitation, and or discrimination in all forms and aspects.
13. Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully, whether inside or outside the household.
14. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or other fields by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
15. Society is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
16. Community Participation is community involvement in the process of identifying problems and potentials in the community, selection and decision-making about alternative solutions to address problems, implementation of efforts to overcome problems, involvement in the process of evaluating changes that occur.
17. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and sideways up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is the dependent of a woman and/or child.
18. Public sphere is in the area or region of society or women who play a role outside the home.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for strengthening victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
22. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, Safe House, Social Protection House for Children, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
23. UPTD PPA is a technical and integrated service unit in handling women and children victims of violence.

Article 2

Women's empowerment is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for the values of Islamic sharia and Acehnese customs;
b. legal certainty;
c. public interest;
d. orderly administration of government;
e. respect for human rights;
f. justice and gender equality and inclusion;
g. professionalism, accountability and transparency;
h. non-discrimination; and
i. protection and fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 3

Women's empowerment has the objectives of:
a. recognizing equal rights legally so as to increase women's participation in development stages;
b. improving the quality of women's lives so they are able to play a balanced role with men in various relevant aspects of life;
c. providing guarantees to women to be able to fulfill their rights as human beings in all aspects of life;
d. providing a sense of security to women in all aspects of life; and
e. serving as a guideline for the Subulussalam City Government in carrying out empowerment and protection of women.

Article 4

(1) Women's empowerment and protection activities are carried out and coordinated by the Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented together with agencies, offices, educational institutions, the business world and community organizations related to women's empowerment and protection.

Article 5

(1) For the implementation of women's empowerment and protection, planning and supervision, a budget is provided in the Subulussalam City Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBK).
(2) All budgets for women's empowerment and protection are coordinated by the Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of women's empowerment and protection.

Article 6

Women's empowerment is based on two pillars consisting of:
a. Protection
b. Empowerment

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Article 7

(1) Every woman has basic rights as a human being which must be protected, advanced, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Matters related to reproduction and nature do not prevent women from obtaining their rights in women's empowerment and protection.

Article 8

Women's rights as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) include:
a. Women obtain equal rights and obligations to life in marriage and family, both as parents to their children, and as husband and wife partners and there must be no coercion in marriage.
b. Women obtain the right to education and teaching at all types, levels, and paths of education, without any obstacles and pressure in order to improve their skills and quality of life.
c. Women obtain the right to work and positions in all institutions both government and non-government institutions and at all levels for the purpose of increasing income and family welfare.
d. Women obtain the right to special protection in carrying out their work or profession both in the public and domestic spheres against things that threaten their safety and/or health with regard to reproductive functions.
e. Women get access to optimal and quality health information and services.

Article 9

(1) Women have the right to hold political positions, both in the executive and legislative environments proportionally.
(2) Women have the right to carry out various political activities in accordance with laws and regulations.
(3) Women have the right to be actively involved in social, cultural and customary organizations for the development of themselves and their intellectual abilities.
(4) Women have the right to be nominated as legislative members by national political parties or local political parties in accordance with their abilities.

Article 10

(1) Women have the right to participate fully in every process of planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation in development stages.
(2) To fulfill the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), women have the right to receive capacity building.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION

Section 1
Purpose and Objectives

Article 11

(1) Protection is intended as all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in fulfilling their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing guarantees in fulfilling basic rights and improving access and quality of various services needed by women in the form of:
a. Providing complaint/report handling services for victims of violence against women;
b. Providing special services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
c. Providing health services for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters from basic level to advanced referral;
d. Providing social rehabilitation for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
e. Carrying out law enforcement and legal assistance for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
f. Carrying out repatriation and social reintegration by building social safety networks starting from the gampong, sub-district and city levels;
g. Providing fulfillment of basic needs and specific needs of women;
h. Opening information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women, including the use of information technology, social media;
i. Providing protection in carrying out their work or profession against things that can threaten their safety and or health with regard to women's reproductive functions;
j. Providing protection for women to carry out their religious sharia and rights that bind in the implementation of sharia; and
k. In carrying out religious sharia activities as referred to in paragraph k is for women who embrace Islam and other religions.

Section 2
Responsibilities of City Government

Article 12

(1) The City Government is obliged to provide support for the development of service institutions for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters, both provided by the government and private sector.
(2) The City Government is obliged to:
a. Establish Integrated Crisis Centers (PKT) and/or Integrated Service Centers (PPT) at Regional General Hospitals, Police Hospitals, Private Hospitals to provide services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence and women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
b. Establish an Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection or UPTD PPA as a Technical Implementation Unit under the City Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning; and
c. Establish a Protection House and Trauma Center (RPTC) as a facility to provide protection and assist women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters in psychosocial and traumatic recovery.

Article 13

The City Government is obliged to prepare guidelines in implementing protection for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters not limited to:
a. Preparation of service guidelines at Hospitals and other service units;
b. Preparation of referral guidelines for both government and private sector;
c. Preparation of prevention and handling guidelines at the basic service level; and
d. Preparation of Guidelines for Development of Health Centers Capable of Managing cases of violence against women

Article 14

(1) Every service provider institution is required to conduct disaggregated data collection on women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are handled in accordance with the documentation format that has been established.
(2) Case handling mechanisms can be through non-litigation and litigation channels
(3) Non-litigation channel as referred to in paragraph (2) is an effort to resolve cases of violence against women outside the court.
(4) Litigation channel as referred to in paragraph (2) is an effort to resolve cases of violence against women using the court channel.

Article 15

(1) Non-litigation channels in handling cases of violence against women can be carried out through restorative justice mechanisms and customary justice mechanisms.
(2) Gampong apparatus and other government apparatus are obliged to involve women in the process of resolving cases of violence non-litigiously.

Article 16

(1) The city government is obliged to provide information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women.
(2) Forms of protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of fulfillment of basic rights, security, consultation and legal assistance, psychosocial assistance, social reintegration and other actions needed.
(3) The City Government is obliged to provide free legal assistance to women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are unable and facing legal problems.
(4) Legal assistance as referred to in paragraph (3) must be carried out in accordance with human dignity.

Article 17

(1) The City Government is responsible for providing guarantees to accompanying officers to get access to information and assistance to women victims for the legal process they undergo.
(2) Guarantees as referred to in paragraph (1) are given through a Mayor's Decree on Accompanying Personnel for Women Victims.

CHAPTER IV
EMPOWERMENT

Section 1
Purpose and Objectives

Article 18

(1) Empowerment of women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is intended to create conditions that enable women's potential to develop and strive both economically, politically, socially and culturally and have a strategic role in decision-making.
(2) Empowerment of women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is adjusted to capacity building programs through:
a. Strengthening independence, namely efforts to increase knowledge, skills and work skills to make it easier to get jobs;
b. The City Government conducts guidance for small industries and home industries managed by women;
c. Productive Economic Business, namely efforts to foster entrepreneurial spirit and skills;
d. Opening access to capital, marketing, networking and maintaining local production results both at national and international levels;
e. The government guarantees and protects local product licenses as referred to in paragraph (d) from piracy, imitation and other actions that harm local products in accordance with laws and regulations; and
f. Increasing knowledge and leadership skills so that women have the opportunity to be actively involved in strategic positions at the village, sub-district and city levels.

Article 19

(1) In order to improve the quality of women's lives, the City Government is responsible for:
a. Respecting and guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with human dignity;
b. Implementing gender mainstreaming
c. Forming a gender mainstreaming working group;
d. Increasing women's empowerment in roles, quality and capacity in the fields of:
1. Religion;
2. politics;
3. law;
4. social; and
5. economy
e. Strengthening and developing women's empowerment service provider institutions in the region.
(2) The City Government's responsibility in efforts to improve the quality of women's lives as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regional Government which administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Section 2
Government Obligations Towards Women

Article 20

(1) The City Government is obliged to improve the quality of women's lives starting from the village, sub-district and city levels.
(2) The City Government is obliged to provide equal opportunities to women and men in improving their quality of life proportionally.
(3) The city government is obliged to seek special educational and training institutions or productive skills institutions for women as preparation for entering the job market or creating independent businesses.
(4) The city government is obliged to realize the level of social welfare for women.
(5) The city government is obliged to provide facilities and infrastructure to accelerate the improvement of social welfare for women.
(6) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) is the fulfillment of clothing, food, shelter, education, health, employment and environmental peace/tranquility needs.

Article 21

(1) The city government provides adequate employment based on the level of education and skills possessed by women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
(2) The city government coordinates with agencies/institutions/business entities and employment providers to ensure partiality to women in employment opportunities.
(3) Job information and job seeker selection are carried out in an accountable, fair, transparent and inclusive manner.
(4) The City Government can take temporary special measures by prioritizing women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
(5) Women as referred to in paragraph (4) in obtaining work according to their knowledge or skills by developing policy mechanisms to private companies and government as well as SOEs.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONS AND COORDINATION

Article 22

(1) The Mayor conducts control, guidance, supervision of the implementation of women's rights fulfillment programs.
(2) control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by SKPK which oversees women's affairs.

Article 23

(1) The Mayor forms a city-level Coordination Team in implementing women's rights fulfillment and women's empowerment programs.
(2) The coordination team as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by Mayor's Decree.

Article 24

The City Government organizes and facilitates capacity building activities for human resources regarding guidance, supervision of the implementation of women's rights fulfillment and women's empowerment programs for all SKPK, Community Institutions, Business World, Women's Forums and Media on a regular, tiered basis according to needs.

CHAPTER VI
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 25

(1) The Mayor conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out at each SKPK and in a tiered manner between government structures.
(4) Monitoring and evaluation are carried out before the preparation of programs or activities for the following year.
(5) Implementation of monitoring and evaluation is carried out in cooperation with sub-district and village governments as well as civil society organizations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 26

(1) The Mayor is responsible for making annual reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Reporting on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is carried out in a tiered manner starting from the village level.
(3) The Keuchik submits reports periodically to the Camat every three months.
(4) The Camat submits reports periodically to the Mayor through the head of Bappeda every six months.
(5) The Head of City Bappeda submits reports to the Mayor periodically every six months including reporting on the City PUG Working Group.
(6) City BAPPEDA also conducts general evaluations of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection based on RPJMK and SKPK Renja.
(7) The Mayor submits reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection periodically to the Governor of Aceh every year.
(8) Reports are submitted to the Governor of Aceh with a copy to DPRK
(9) Reports as referred to in paragraph (1) are also copied to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.

Article 27

(1) The Mayor can form a special team to conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Formation of the monitoring and evaluation team referred to in paragraph (1) can be done through cooperation with Universities, Women's/Gender Study Centers or Non-Governmental Organizations.
(3) The Monitoring and Evaluation Team will be under the coordination or led by City BAPPEDA with members consisting of the Head of the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning as vice chairman, one representative from each sub-district and civil society groups.
(4) The Monitoring and Evaluation Team in carrying out its duties and responsibilities will be supported by City Bappeda.

Article 28

The Monitoring and Evaluation Team as established in Article 27 has the following tasks:
a. carry out monitoring and evaluation of the process and results of annual planning;
b. provide input to SKPK in all matters related to Gender Mainstreaming;
c. provide input and suggestions regarding gender-responsive work programs;
d. ensure the involvement of at least 30% of women in every development process starting from planning, implementation and reporting;
e. support the integration of Musrembang proposals related to women's empowerment and protection into SKPK Work Plans;
f. evaluate SKPK programs based on gender;
g. ensure women benefit from development implementation;
h. make annual reports to the Mayor/Deputy Mayor; and
i. provide recommendations for planning, budgeting and implementation of gender-perspective development at the next stage.

Article 29

(1) The City Government provides a public complaint mechanism (channel) regarding the achievements of women's empowerment and protection as well as the level of public service satisfaction.
(2) Facilities and infrastructure as well as public complaint mechanisms are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 30

(1) Every member of society has the right to obtain opportunities to participate in women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Every member of society has the right to obtain or provide information on violations of women's rights.
(3) The community has the right to submit suggestions and opinions in efforts to empower and protect women.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING

Article 31

(1) Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City comes from the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(2) Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City can also come from the Aceh Revenue and Expenditure Budget, the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(3) Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City can come from religious funds collected through Baitul Mal and other legitimate sources.
(4) The use of religious funds as referred to in paragraph (3) is further regulated through mayor regulations.

Article 32

(1) In preparing the APBK and APBG, costs must be allocated for the purpose of improving women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Special autonomy funds that are part of the City must be partially allocated to finance activities as referred to in this qanun.

CHAPTER IX
OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 33

To accelerate efforts to empower and protect women, the Subulussalam City Government is obliged to implement special policies.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 34

Matters not yet regulated in this qanun will be further regulated by Mayor Regulation, after obtaining consideration from the Ulama Consultative Council (MPU).

Article 35

This Qanun comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order for everyone to know it, orders the promulgation of this qanun by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Subulussalam.

Established in Subulussalam
On the date of November 20, 2023 AD
6 Jumadil Awal 1445 H

MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM

AFFAN ALFIAN

Promulgated in Subulussalam
On the date of November 21, 2023 AD
7 Jumadil Awal 1445 H

Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY,

SAIRUN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 20.
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY ACEH PROVINCE: