REGENT OF TABANAN
PROVINCE OF BALI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TABANAN REGENCY
NUMBER 11 YEAR 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF TABANAN,

Considering: a. that acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature without discrimination;

b. that to prevent and overcome violence against women and children, legal protection needs to be provided for women and children victims of violence;

c. that in the context of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence in Tabanan Regency, there is no regulatory basis yet;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 69 Year 1958 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions within the Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);

3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165; Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

7. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

8. Law Number 16 Year 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 104, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5246);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;

11. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;

12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;

14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 02 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;

16. Regional Regulation of Bali Province Number 6 Year 2014 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Bali Province Year 2014 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bali Province Number 6);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF TABANAN REGENCY
and
REGENT OF TABANAN

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Tabanan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Tabanan.
4. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Council of Tabanan Regency.
5. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
6. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person recognized by law as a woman.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child in the womb.
8. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
9. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child committed by parties who should be responsible for the child or those who have power over the child.
10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences acts of violence.
12. Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of violations of human rights (HAM), or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
13. Complaint service is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.
14. Health rehabilitation is the recovery of victims of trafficking in persons from health disorders they suffer.
15. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction to be able to perform social functions normally.
16. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of trafficking in persons from the regency area to their area of origin.
17. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
18. Legal Aid is legal services provided by companions, law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.
19. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
20. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including complaint services, health rehabilitation; social rehabilitation; repatriation; social reintegration, and legal aid.
21. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter referred to as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal aid, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.

22. Desa Pakraman is a customary law community unit in Bali Province that has a unified tradition and code of conduct for the social life of Hindu communities passed down through generations in the bond of kahyangan tiga or kahyangan desa that has a certain territory and its own assets and has the right to manage its own household.
23. Social Protection House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
24. Desa is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. justice and gender equality;
b. non-discrimination; and
c. legal certainty.

Article 3

The objectives of protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. to protect women and children victims of violence;
b. to provide services to women and children victims of violence; and
c. empowerment of women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4

The rights of victims include:
a. protection from the family;
b. protection from the police;
c. protection from the prosecutor's office;
d. protection from the court;
e. protection from advocates,
f. protection from social institutions, or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
g. health services in accordance with medical needs;
h. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
i. accompaniment by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
j. spiritual guidance services; and
k. victims have the right to determine their own decisions regarding which option will be implemented.

CHAPTER IV
AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY

Article 5

(1) The Regional Government has the authority and responsibility for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. service activities for women and children victims of violence;
b. monitoring, strengthening of victims of violence;
c. capacity building of apparatus and other stakeholders.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONS

Article 6

(1) The Regent establishes PPT;
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. P2TP2A;
b. hospital-based PPT;
c. sub-district PPT; and
d. Village PPT.
(3) The procedure for establishing PPT is stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 7

(1) PPT services include:
a. providing services and handling as quickly as possible to victims;
b. providing convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for victims;
c. maintaining victim confidentiality; and
d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for victims.
(2) The procedure for PPT services as referred to in paragraph (1) is regulated by Regent Regulation;

Article 8

The implementation of PPT requires:
a. adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure;
b. implementing officers; and
c. functional officers.

Article 9

(1) The procedures and mechanisms for integrated services include:
a. complaint services;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. repatriation;
e. social reintegration, and
f. legal aid.
(2) The implementation of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with minimum service standards.

CHAPTER VI
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS

Article 10

(1) SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to ensure that women and children victims of violence receive the minimum services needed.
(2) SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence includes services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against women and children;
b. health services for women and children victims of violence;
c. social rehabilitation for women and children victims of violence;
d. law enforcement and legal aid for women and children victims of violence;
e. repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence; and
f. in the event that victims experience trauma or illness that endangers themselves as a result of acts of violence so that they require immediate assistance, the regional government is obliged to provide first aid no later than 7 (seven) days after the complaint is filed.

Article 11

(1) SPM as referred to in Article 10 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at Puskesmas and Hospitals;
c. coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children;
f. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal aid services;
g. coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.
(2) The determination of SPM performance indicators for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is a minimum target that must be achieved by integrated service units in stages.

CHAPTER VII
SOCIAL PROTECTION HOUSE

Article 12

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to establish a Social Protection House and/or Safe House or other designation.
(2) The Social Protection House and/or Safe House as referred to in paragraph (1) guarantees the implementation of health rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, and social reintegration.
(3) For the implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government may utilize social protection houses and/or safe houses owned by the community or other social service institutions.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 13

(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence in the region.

Article 14

(1) Monitoring is carried out through coordination and direct monitoring of related SKPD on a regular basis.
(2) Monitoring is carried out from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence for the current year.

Article 15

(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children is carried out at the end of each fiscal year or if necessary according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children are used as input for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING

Article 16

(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports on the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence and submitting them to the Governor with copies submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out annually.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures and forms of reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 17

(1) The Regent conducts guidance on the development of PPT.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing implementation instructions;
b. guidance;
c. supervision;
d. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of services for women and children victims of violence, apparatus and the community.

Article 18

The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the region.

CHAPTER XI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 19

(1) In implementing protection for women and children victims of violence, the community can:
a. form family partners at the kelurahan/village level in coordination with Desa Pakraman;
b. form women and child protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
d. provide first aid to victims; and
e. report to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, Desa Pakraman, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XII
FUNDING

Article 20

The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other lawful sources.

CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 21

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tabanan Regency.

Enacted in Tabanan
on 9 September 2016

REGENT OF TABANAN,
NI PUTU EKA WIRYASTUTI

Promulgated in Tabanan
on 9 September 2016
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TABANAN REGENCY,

I NYOMAN WIRNA ARIWANGSA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TABANAN REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 11 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TABANAN REGENCY, BALI PROVINCE: (11,63/2016)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TABANAN REGENCY
NUMBER 11 YEAR 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Violence against women and children is one form of act that violates human rights. As is known, the human rights of women and children have been guaranteed and regulated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and the Law on Human Rights. Therefore, the protection of women's and children's rights from violence should be respected, enforced and human dignity enhanced without discrimination, welfare and justice for women and children.

Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child. The existence of women and children victims of violence has not received adequate services so that minimum services are needed for victims of violence.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Tabanan Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for women and children victims of violence, especially in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and children victims of violence in Tabanan Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Sufficiently clear.
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Letter a
What is meant by adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure is adjusted to the applicable minimum service standards and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration.
Letter b
What is meant by implementing officers or functional officers includes health workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers provided by relevant agencies or institutions.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Sufficiently clear.
Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
Article 16
Sufficiently clear
Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.
Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20
Sufficiently clear
Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TABANAN REGENCY NUMBER 11