REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY
NUMBER 3 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF SOUTH TANGERANG,

Considering: a. that women and children biologically and philosophically are vulnerable groups and easily become victims of violence, both violence occurring within the household and that committed outside the household;

b. that violence against women and children is a violation of human rights and a crime against human dignity as well as a form of discrimination that must be eliminated;

c. that protection of women and children victims of violence is one aspect of the duties and responsibilities of regional government in providing protection and services to the community;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is deemed necessary to establish Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence through a Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City;

- 2 -

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

5. Law Number 3 Year 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 3, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

6. Law Number 5 year 1998 Concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture And Other Cruel, Inhuman Or Degrading Treatment Or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);

- 3 -

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2000 concerning Formation of Banten Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 182, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4010);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

11. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);

12. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

- 4 -

13. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as amended by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

14. Law Number 23 Year 2006 concerning Population Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 124, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4674);

15. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

16. Law Number 44 Year 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);

17. Law Number 51 Year 2008 concerning Formation of South Tangerang City in Banten Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 188, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4935);

- 5 -

18. Law Number 14 Year 2009 concerning Ratification of Protocol To Prevent, Suppress And Punish Trafficking In Persons, Especially Women And Children, Supplementing The United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4990);

19. Law Number 35 Year 2009 concerning Narcotics (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 143, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5062);

20. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

21. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

22. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 1975 concerning Implementation of Law Number 1 Year 1974 Concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1975 Number 12, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3050);

- 6 -

23. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

24. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between Provincial Regional Government And Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

25. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 182 Year 1998 concerning National Commission on Violence Against Women;

26. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 12 Year 2001 concerning National Action Committee for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor;

27. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 87 Year 2002 concerning National Action Plan for Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children;

28. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 88 Year 2002 Concerning National Action Plan for Elimination of Trafficking of Women and Children;

29. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 02 Year 2009 Concerning Policy on Child-Friendly Regency/City;

30. Decree of the Minister of Home Affairs and Regional Autonomy Number 5 Year 2001 concerning Handling of Child Labor;

- 7 -

31. Regional Regulation of Banten Province Number 10 Year 2005 concerning Gender Mainstreaming in Regional Development (Regional Gazette of Banten Province Year 2005 Number 45 Series E);

32. Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City Number 6 Year 2010 concerning Regional Apparatus Organization of South Tangerang City (Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Year 2010 Number 6, Supplement to Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Number 0610);

33. Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City Number 8 Year 2011 concerning Regional Government Affairs of South Tangerang City (Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Year 2011 Number 8, Supplement to Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Number 0811);

With Mutual Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY
And
MAYOR OF SOUTH TANGERANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this regional regulation, what is meant by:

1. Regional Government is the Mayor, and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration of South Tangerang City.

- 8 -

2. Mayor is the Mayor of South Tangerang.

3. Implementation is the form of execution of protection of women and children victims of violence.

4. Woman is a person who has female genitalia, can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and includes persons who have obtained legal status as a Woman.

5. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including those in the womb.

6. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.

7. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.

8. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.

9. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

10. Economic violence is any act that neglects family members in the form of not providing livelihood, care or maintenance properly.

11. Psychological violence is any act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.

- 9 -

13. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.

14. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.

15. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an institution that provides services and protection for women and children especially those who have problems due to acts of violence, discrimination, trafficking in persons and other social problems in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social, public facility services and legal protection and assistance.

16. Social Community Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and or other Community Organizations.

17. Resident is a Citizen of South Tangerang and foreigners who enter legally and reside in the area of South Tangerang City.

18. Service is an action that must be immediately taken to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is or has occurred.

19. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy to provide strengthening and self-recovery for victims of violence as stipulated in a decision of an authorized official.

20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance for self-strengthening of victims of violence especially victims of domestic violence to resolve the problems they face.

- 10 -

21. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence, which is based on hospitals, Community Health Centers, P2TP2A and other similar institutions that are managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on respect and recognition of equal human rights and dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of the rights of women and children and the best interests of victims.

Article 3

The Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to provide prevention, protection, and services to women and children against gender-based violence and the best interests of children that occur in the household or public.

Article 4

The prevention activities of violence as referred to in Article 3, include:

a. Socialization;
b. Dissemination; and
c. Training.

Article 5

The protection and service activities for victims as referred to in Article 3, include:

a. Health services;
b. Victim assistance;
c. Counseling;

- 11 -

d. Spiritual guidance;
e. Resocialization; and
f. Empowerment.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 6

Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to:

a. Protection;
b. Obtain information;
c. Optimal service;
d. Continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. Confidential handling;
f. Psychological and legal assistance;
g. Guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 7

(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent and overcome violence against women and children.

(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in the form of:

a. Collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. Conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. Socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. Training for PPT members;
e. Conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

- 12 -

(3) To anticipate acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government is obliged to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:

a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving relevant community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.

Article 8

In carrying out its obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 9

(1) In the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence which includes prevention and handling activities, an Integrated Service Center (PPT) is formed.

(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements of the Regional Government and elements from related institutions outside the Regional Government.

(3) Further provisions regarding PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), will be further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

- 13 -

(4) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), in implementing Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence may coordinate with institutions and or organizations in South Tangerang City and other regions.

(5) In the Implementation of Protection for Women and children victims of violence which includes prevention and handling activities, Integrated Service Posts may be formed at the sub-district and village levels.

CHAPTER VI
HANDLING AND MECHANISMS

Article 10

(1) The Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner in medical handling, legal protection, medicolegal, psychological and economic which can be implemented through partnerships with social community institutions engaged in the protection of women and children.

(2) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), must pay attention to religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

(3) Service and Assistance Principles:

a. Fast, safe and empathetic;
b. Guarantee of confidentiality;
c. Easily accessible;
d. Free of charge.

(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1), is stipulated by Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION

Article 11

(1) Forms of violence against Women and Children include physical, sexual, economic and psychological.

(2) Forms of physical violence are any acts that cause pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or cause death.

- 14 -

(3) Forms of sexual violence are sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

(4) Forms of economic violence are neglecting family members in the form of not providing livelihood, care or maintenance properly.

(5) Forms of psychological violence are acts that cause fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 12

(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.

(2) Protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out for residents of South Tangerang City both committed in South Tangerang City and outside South Tangerang City.

(3) Protection for women and children victims of violence as an initial action is also carried out for non-residents of South Tangerang City whose incident was committed in the area of South Tangerang City, followed by coordination with the region of origin of the resident.

Article 13

(1) Forms of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence are in the form of medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), economic and psychological protection.

(2) Forms of medical protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are in the form of care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.

- 15 -

(3) Forms of legal protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.

(4) Forms of medicolegal protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are in the form of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field.

(5) Forms of psychological protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are in the form of assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including providing safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and providing psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in problem solving.

(6) Forms of economic protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are in the form of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 14

(1) The Regional Government in implementing protection for Women and Children Victims of violence, may involve community participation.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.

Article 15

(1) Social community organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (2), are given guidance by the Regional Government through Regional Work Units related to the task of protection and empowerment of women and children.

- 16 -

(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING SOURCES AND REPORTING

Article 16

(1) Funding sources for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence carried out by regional apparatus of South Tangerang City are from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of South Tangerang City.

(2) Funding sources as referred to in paragraph (1), may also come from other legal and non-binding sources.

(3) Funding sources for implementation from other legal sources as referred to in paragraph (2), are supervised in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(4) PPT is obliged to report the implementation of protection activities for women and children victims of violence periodically to the Mayor in accordance with applicable regulations.

CHAPTER X
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 17

(1) Institutions or bodies established by the Mayor to carry out service tasks that violate service principles as contained in Article 10 paragraph (3), may be subject to administrative sanctions.

(2) Perpetrators of acts of violence are subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with applicable Laws.

(3) Every person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children resulting in violence, allows violence to occur, does not report and does not provide protection to victims, is subject to sanctions as regulated in applicable laws and regulations.

- 17 -

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING

Article 18

This Regional Regulation comes into force from the date of enactment.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City.

Enacted in South Tangerang
on the date of

MAYOR
OF SOUTH TANGERANG,

AIRIN RACHMI DIANY

Promulgated in South Tangerang
on the date of

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY,

DUDUNG E. DIREDJA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER

- 18 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER YEAR
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The State views that all forms of violence, especially domestic violence, are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination.

The State's view is based on Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, along with its amendments. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from the threat of fear to do or not do something that is a basic right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to receive facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits to achieve equality and justice".

Current developments show that acts of physical, psychological, sexual violence, and domestic neglect in reality occur so that adequate legal instruments are needed to eliminate violence especially in the household. Legal reform that sides with vulnerable or subordinated groups, especially women and children, becomes very necessary in connection with the many cases of violence, especially domestic violence, this also occurs in South Tangerang City, in 2010 cases of violence reported to Tangerang Police amounted to 143 cases, at South Jakarta Metro Police recorded 56 cases, Tigaraksa Police of Tangerang Regency 23 cases and in 2011 recorded 70 cases at South Jakarta Metro Police and 28 cases at Tigaraksa Police of Tangerang Regency, this has not yet reflected the actual conditions in society, because cases of violence especially those occurring in the household are still considered disgraceful in the community's view and also the courage of the community to report incidents still needs to be increased, therefore regional regulations on Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence need to be owned by South Tangerang City.

- 19 -

The emergence of cases of violence against children and women is often caused by factors that develop in society, such as low economic level, education, social environment and others. Therefore, victims of such violence need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights.

From the above framework, the Regional Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to suppress, prevent, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against children and women.

In conducting guidance, development and protection of women and children, the role of society is needed, whether through women and child protection institutions, religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations, social organizations, business world, mass media, or educational institutions.

This Regional Regulation on Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence is closely related to several other laws and regulations that are already in force, among others, Law Number 1 Year 1946 concerning the Criminal Code and its Amendments, Law Number 8 Year 1981 concerning the Criminal Procedure Code, Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage, Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights and most importantly Law number 23 year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence and Law number 23 year 2002 concerning Child Protection.

- 20 -

This Regional Regulation, in addition to regulating matters of prevention and protection as well as recovery for victims of violence also regulates matters of obligations for law enforcement officers, health workers, social workers, volunteer assistants, or spiritual counselors to protect victims so they are more sensitive and responsive. To prevent violence, Agencies or Offices that have duties and responsibilities related to the field of women's empowerment and child protection implement prevention actions, among others, organizing communication, information, and education about violence prevention, protection of women and children.

Based on these thoughts, it is time to form a Regional Regulation in South Tangerang City concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence especially Domestic Violence that is regulated comprehensively, clearly, and firmly to protect and side with victims, as well as simultaneously provide education and awareness to the community and apparatus that all acts of violence are crimes against human dignity.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Rights in this provision are intended to guarantee their lives in accordance with human dignity, increase self-confidence, and ability to participate in community, national, and state life. What is meant by discriminatory treatment, for example, treatment that differentiates ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status, birth order of children, and physical and/or mental conditions.

What is meant by "gender equality" is a situation where women and men enjoy equal status and have the same conditions to fully realize human rights and their potential for the integrity and continuity of life proportionally.

Article 3
What is meant by prevention is all activities carried out to prevent, reduce and even eliminate acts of violence among others by organizing communication, information and education. What is meant by services and protection for women and children victims of violence that are gender-based is that in all service and protection actions pay attention to gender equality. What is meant by the best interests of the child is that in all actions concerning children carried out by government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.

Article 4

Letter a
What is meant by socialization is a process of instilling or transferring habits or values and rules from one generation to another in a group or society about prevention of violence.

Letter b
What is meant by dissemination is an activity aimed at target groups or individuals so that they obtain information, awareness arises, accept, and finally utilize that information.

Letter c
What is meant by Training is a series of activities designed to improve the skills, knowledge, experience, or attitude changes of an individual. Training relates to the acquisition of certain skills or knowledge. Socialization, dissemination and training activities on violence prevention can be carried out by related Regional Work Units, related Agencies, individuals, groups or Social Community Organizations.

- 22 -

Article 5

Letter a
What is meant by health services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.

Letter b
What is meant by receiving psychological assistance is assistance provided by psychologists to victims suffering from trauma/other mental problems to restore the mental condition of victims. Meanwhile, legal assistance is assistance provided by persons and/legal aid institutions to victims at every level of examination and during the legal process.

Letter c
What is meant by counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert or trained person in such a way that the understanding and psychological ability of the victim increases in solving the problems faced.

Letter d
what is meant by spiritual guidance is counseling provided by clergy.

Letter e
What is meant by resocialization is that victims can live again in society including in restoring their good name.

Letter f
What is meant by empowerment is making something empowered or having power or having strength.

- 23 -

Article 6

Letter a
What is meant by Protection is that victims receive protection from family, police, prosecutor's office, courts, advocates, social institutions or other parties, either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court.

Letter b
What is meant by obtaining information is the right of victims to obtain information related to prevention, complaints, medical services and protection.

Letter c
What is meant by Optimal service is service that can be provided to victims according to the capabilities of those serving.

Letter d
What is meant by Continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage is handling provided up to the recovery of victims in society.

Letter e
What is meant by confidential handling is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical care and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Letter f
What is meant by Psychological and legal assistance is the right of victims to receive psychological and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Letter g
What is meant by Guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

- 24 -

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Paragraph (1)
What is meant by Integrated Service Center (PPT) is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence, which is based on hospitals, Community Health Centers, P2TP2A and other similar institutions that are managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services such as Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A), Integrated Crisis Center, Trauma Center Shelter, Child Social Shelter, BP4, Women Crisis Center and other similar institutions.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Paragraph (1)
What is meant by medicolegal protection handling is legal proof through medical means.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

- 25 -

Paragraph (3)
Empathy is the ability with various different definitions that encompasses a wide spectrum, ranging from others that creates a desire to help, experiencing emotions similar to the emotions of others, knowing what others feel and think, blurring the line between self and others.

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (4)
What is meant by Forms of economic violence in the form of neglecting family members in the form of not providing livelihood, care or maintenance properly includes all fields that support life starting from health, education, social and religion.

Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

- 26 -

Article 17

Paragraph (1)
What is meant by administrative sanctions is that the institution or body that implements protection services for women and children is no longer formed and or recognized by the Regional Government.

Paragraph (2)
Criminal sanctions for perpetrators of violence are regulated by Law number 23 year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence articles 44 through article 50; Law Number 23 year 2002 concerning Child Protection Articles 77 through article 90, and Law Number 1 Year 1946 concerning the Criminal Code and its Amendments, Law Number 8 Year 1981 concerning the Criminal Procedure Code

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY NUMBER 03