REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG
BENGKULU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG,

Considering: a. that in order to guarantee the rights of women and children so that they can participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence, discrimination and other violations of the rights of women and children, efforts need to be made to prevent and mitigate violence against women and children.

b. that in order for efforts to prevent and mitigate violence against women and children to obtain optimal results, and be implemented quickly, in a planned, integrated, comprehensive and organized manner by involving all relevant elements in the region, it is necessary to have regulations concerning the prevention and mitigation of violence against women and child victims of violence.

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Prevention and Mitigation of Violence Against Women and Children.

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 28 Year 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 55), Emergency Law Number 5 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 56) And Emergency Law Number 6 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 57) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Including Municipal Cities, Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra, As Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);

3. Law Number 9 Year 1967 concerning the Establishment of Bengkulu Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1967 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2828);

4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

5. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

6. Law Number 5 Year 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

12. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);

13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

14. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2016, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 58);

15. Government Regulation Number 20 Year 1968 Concerning the Enactment of Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9 Year 1967 and Implementation of Government in Bengkulu Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968 Number 34, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2854);

16. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation in Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

17. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

18. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses And/Or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

19. Presidential Decree Number 181 year 1998 concerning the National Commission on Violence Against Women;

20. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

21. Presidential Decree Number 59 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor;

22. Presidential Decree Number 87 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children;

23. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;

24. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

25. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);

26. Regional Regulation of Rejang Lebong Regency Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Apparatus of Rejang Lebong Regency as amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation Number 3 Year 2014 (Regional Gazette of Rejang Lebong Regency Year 2014 Number 94).

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Rejang Lebong Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the regional government and the Regional People's Representative Council according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regent is the Regent of Rejang Lebong.
5. Regional People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional People's Representative Council of Rejang Lebong Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of Rejang Lebong Regency.
7. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent in the administration of regional government consisting of the regional secretariat, DPRD secretariat, regional agencies, regional technical institutions, sub-districts, and urban villages.
8. Regional Population and Family Planning Agency, hereinafter abbreviated as BKKBD, is the Regional Population and Family Planning Agency of Rejang Lebong Regency.
9. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including a child still in the womb.
10. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
11. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
12. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
13. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and misery whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
14. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
15. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, disbelief or severe psychological suffering in a person.
16. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
17. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or abilities of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
18. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and or misery either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
19. Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
20. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
21. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
22. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
24. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
25. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
26. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that provide assistance.
27. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service unit established by the regional government to provide services in the context of empowerment of Women and Child victims of violence.
28. Regional Action Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RAD, is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the prevention and protection of women and child victims of violence.
29. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
30. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
31. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral lines up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
32. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
33. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD, is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and established by Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, INTENT AND OBJECTIVES

Part One
Principles

Article 2

The implementation of prevention and mitigation of violence against women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children;
d. the best interests of women and children; and
e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience violence or neglect.

Part Two
Intent

Article 3

The regulation of the implementation of prevention and mitigation of violence against women and children is intended to provide protection and services for women and child victims of violence.

Part Three
Objectives

Article 4

The objectives of implementing prevention and mitigation of violence against women and children include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing security for women and children;
d. providing services to women and child victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitating and mediating domestic disputes to realize intact, harmonious and prosperous households; and
f. seeking compensation/compensation for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE

Article 5

(1) Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

(2) Physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is caused by acts that cause pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or cause death.

(3) Psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is caused by acts that cause fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.

(4) Sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

(5) Neglect as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the non-fulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as they should, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

(6) Exploitation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or abilities of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

(7) Other violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f is caused by:
a. threats of violence include: any unlawful act in the form of words, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 6

(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical violence, exploitation or trafficking in persons has the right to receive protection and services.

(2) Protection and services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. complaints or requests for protection from the person concerned;
b. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose whereabouts are kept secret to avoid intimidation and threats;
c. medical services/health treatment in the form of care and recovery of injuries or physical conditions of victims by medical personnel and paramedics;
d. medicolegal services for evidence in the legal field;
e. protection by law enforcement officers;
f. provision of information about legal rights and obligations to victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;
g. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
h. psychological assistance to restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore the self-confidence of victims;
i. assistance support for legal processes and obtaining compensation or compensation rights;
j. guarantees of rights related to status as family members and community members (social reintegration); and
k. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

(3) In the case that the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), they also receive special rights including:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas;
e. the right to obtain freedom; and
f. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 7

Obligations and responsibilities in carrying out prevention and mitigation in the form of protection and services for women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 8

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 letter a, include:
a. implementing protection obligations for women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing shelters for women and child victims of violence;
f. allocating budgets for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) The implementation of obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) is technically carried out in an integrated manner by related SKPDs.

Article 9

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 letter b are carried out in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. forming family partners at the village/sub-district level by the community;
b. forming women and child protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.

(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

(4) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

Article 10

The obligations and responsibilities of families and parents toward children as referred to in Article 7 letters c and d are in the form of:
a. caring for, maintaining, educating and protecting children;
b. preventing early marriage;
c. ensuring the continuity of children's education according to their abilities, talents and interests; and
d. in the case that parents are absent or their whereabouts are unknown or for some reason cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family as the child's guardian, which is carried out in accordance with the provisions of applicable legislation.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONS

Part One
Organization

Article 11

(1) In order to carry out activities for the prevention and mitigation of violence against women and children, the regional government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center for women and child victims of violence.

(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is established on the joint initiative of the Regional Government, NGOs, Universities, professional organizations, organizations and the community.

(3) The institutional structure of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (2) is established by Regent's Decree.

(4) Further provisions regarding the organization of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Article 12

P2TP2A builds functional networks with:
a. police;
b. prosecutor's office;
c. courts;
d. hospitals/health centers;
e. psychiatrists; and
f. other institutions that have similar objectives.

Article 13

P2TP2A as an independent institution in the region must be in coordination with BKKBD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the fields of women's protection, children and gender mainstreaming.

Part Two
Financing of P2TP2A

Article 14

(1) The regional government assists P2TP2A operations by budgeting in the APBD according to the capacity and financial condition of the region.

(2) Budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) is through BKKBD.

(3) For orderly administration and use of P2TP2A finances, it is obliged to make work programs and accountability for the use of regional finances.

Article 15

(1) P2TP2A financing in addition to being obtained from APBD funds can be through receipt of assistance from individuals, bodies, or official institutions whose existence is legally recognized.

(2) P2TP2A is obliged to submit annual reports for performance and finances obtained from the APBD to the Regent through BKKBD.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT

Part One
General

Article 16

The Regional Government through P2TP2A carries out prevention and mitigation efforts for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of women and children up to empowering victims to be able to return to living their lives in accordance with the dignity they possess.

Part Two
Prevention and Mitigation of Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect of Women and Children

Article 17

(1) Forms of prevention as referred to in Article 16 are carried out through:
a. socialization activities of legislation related to the protection of women and children to the wider community in the region;
b. activities to disseminate the existence of P2TP2A to be known by everyone in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or bulletin boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the worst level;
c. training for members who are able to disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;
d. opening public complaint channels by the Regional Government or P2TP2A in each area through community networks;
e. strengthening coordination channels with sub-district, village/sub-district level governments;
f. immediate handling of community complaints throughout the region and securing subjects of violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons or neglect; and/or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of raising awareness of the wider community to the smallest community groups (families), especially parents to protect women and children.

(2) The Regional Government through P2TP2A conducts data collection on areas of violence based on incident rates and conducts research and studies on the level of vulnerability of areas to find solutions for reducing to stopping violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.

Part Three
Services for Women and Children Who Experience
Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 18

Forms of services provided to women and child victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons or neglect are carried out in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 6.

Article 19

Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A as referred to in Article 18 include:
a. medical services, in the form of care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of evidence in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services are lessons provided by assistants in order to recover the traumatic condition of victims, including providing space and houses for victims to protect victims from threats and intimidation for victims;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent; and
f. other services in accordance with the rights of women and child victims of violence.

Article 20

The Regional Government or P2TP2A is obliged to prepare operational standards for assistance services for victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect at every stage of fulfilling victims' rights.

Article 21

The implementation of assistance services for victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. fast, safe, and empathetic;
c. coordination between government agencies;
d. guarantee of confidentiality;
e. easily accessible; and
f. free of charge.

Article 22

Further provisions regarding procedures for handling services for the protection of women and child victims of violence and operational standards as referred to in Article 18 and Article 20 are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Four
Empowerment of Women and Child Victims of Violence

Article 23

(1) The Regional Government through P2TP2A is obliged to carry out economic empowerment for women and child victims of violence, exploitation and/or trafficking or neglect.

(2) Forms of empowerment of victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. seeking the needs required for entrepreneurship training for victims of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic businesses;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of victims of violence;
e. seeking the provision of capital for victims of violence; and
f. expanding information access and promoting the products of victims of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 24

(1) Cooperation is carried out to strengthen the role of P2TP2A in achieving the objectives of protecting women and children in the regional area.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with:
a. government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions; and
e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of legislation.

(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) is set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 25

(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business world to support the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area.

(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and child victims of violence who are withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of violence.

(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER IX
REGIONAL ACTION PLAN

Article 26

(1) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as the basis for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) RAD as referred to in paragraph (1) is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

(3) Further provisions regarding RAD as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 27

(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.

(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/UKPD and the community.

(5) The Regent may appoint BKKBD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the protection of women and children to conduct guidance and supervision.

Article 28

The community can supervise the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the regional government, with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent or DPRD.

CHAPTER XI
REPORTING

Article 29

(1) P2TP2A submits reports on the implementation of prevention and protection of women and child victims of violence to the Regent through the SKPD that handles women's and children's empowerment programs.

(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.

(3) Submission of reports referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in writing and implemented at least 1 (one) time in 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION

Article 30

(1) In addition to general investigating officers, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation can also be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with legislation.

(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) have the authority to:
a. receive reports or complaints from someone about the existence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take first action at that time at the scene and conduct examinations;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identity;
d. seize objects and/or letters;
e. take fingerprints and photograph a person;
f. summon people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in experts needed in connection with case examination;
h. stop the investigation after receiving instructions from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this to the public prosecutor, the suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.

(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (2) notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Investigating Officer of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 31

(1) Every person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children so as to cause acts of violence, allows violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, is subject to sanctions as regulated in Legislation.

(2) Officials appointed to implement protection who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities are subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

(3) P2TP2A managers who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence, violating service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal organizational mechanisms of P2TP2A.

CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS

Article 32

(1) Handling of legal cases in the investigation process by law enforcement officers must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.

(2) Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are:
a. in investigation cases for women or female child victims of violence, they must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in letter a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardians along with the advocacy and psychology team from P2TP2A who have the same gender;
c. in investigation cases for male child victims of violence, they may be conducted by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and carried out as referred to in letter b; and
d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 33

In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be present at the trial, except in very compelling circumstances while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in trial processes at different times.

Article 34

In the case that the perpetrator of a criminal act is a child, the following applies:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by viewing the child as still having hope for their future;
b. The investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases;
c. Investigation is carried out in a closed room and attended only by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardians;
d. in the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but is entrusted to their family with supervision and guarding;
e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court room; and
f. the child's sentencing process is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that can be accompanied by their parents.

Article 35

News media are not permitted to expose news coverage for cases concerning child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and their hope for life in the future unless the victim as a result of such violence loses their life.

CHAPTER XV
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 36

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Rejang Lebong Regency.

Enacted in Curup
On 21 December 2015

ACTING REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG,

signed

ANDI ROSLINSYAH

Promulgated in Curup
On 13 January 2016

ACTING REGIONAL SECRETARY
REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
ASSISTANT FOR GENERAL ADMINISTRATION,

signed

ZULKARNAIN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
YEAR 2016 NUMBER 103

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY, BENGKULU PROVINCE: (4/2015)

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL ADMINISTRATION SECTION
SECRETARIAT OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY,

PRANOTO, SH.M.Si
Pembina Tk.I / IV.b
NIP. 19651201 199603 1 004