REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION 
OF JAKARTA PROVINCE 
NUMBER 8 OF 2011 
CONCERNING 
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE 
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD 
THE GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE, 
Considering a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights, and crimes against humanity, and are not in accordance with the position of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia; 
In view of 
b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children and to improve the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that is the duty, authority, and responsibility of the Regional Government; 
c. that discrimination and violence against women and children in the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province continues to increase and spread, causing community members to be unsafe in carrying out their lives, thus requiring integrated protection efforts; 
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence; 
: 1. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1971 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3019); 
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3143); 
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 
of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277); 
4. Law Number 19 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 105 Concerning The Abolition of Forced Labour (ILO Convention concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 55, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3824); 
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3886); 
6. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning the Prohibition of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941) and U.N Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000; 
7. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4235); 
8. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4279); 
9. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4301); 
10. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419); 
11. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4844); 
12. Law Number 39 of 2004 concerning Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers Abroad (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 133, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4445); 
13. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4635); 
14. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720); 
15. Law Number 29 of 2007 concerning the Government of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 93, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4744); 
16. Law Number 14 of 2008 concerning Public Information Disclosure (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 61, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4846); 
17. Law Number 40 of 2008 concerning the Elimination of Racial and Ethnic Discrimination (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 170, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4919); 
18. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 11, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967); 
19. Law Number 25 of 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038); ' 
20. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health. (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063); 
21. Law Number 44 of 2009 concerning Hospitals (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5072); 
22. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234); 
23. Government 
Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604); 
24. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737); 
25. Government Regulation Number 50 of 2007 concerning Procedures for Implementation of Regional Cooperation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4761); 
26. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818); 
27. Government Regulation Number 83 of 2008 concerning Requirements and Procedures for Providing Free Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 214, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4955); 
28. Presidential Regulation Number 69 of 2008 concerning the Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Trafficking in Persons; 
29. Regulation of the Minister of Social Affairs Number 102 /HUK/2007 concerning Establishment and Operation of Shelters and Trauma Centers; 
30. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 02 
of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection; 
31. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 03 of 
2008 Concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection; 
32. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2009 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons; 
33. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence; 
34. Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2004 concerning Manpower (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2004 Number 60); 
35. Regional Regulation Number 8 of 2006 concerning the Education System (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2006 Number 8); 
36. Regional Regulation Number 8 of 2007 concerning Public Order (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2007 Number 8); 
37. Regional Regulation Number 10 of 2008 concerning Regional Apparatus Organization (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2008 Number 10); 
38. Regional Regulation Number 4 of 2009 concerning Regional Health System (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2009 Number 4); 
39. Regional Regulation Number 2 of 2010 concerning Formulation of Regional Regulations (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province of 2010 Number 2, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province Number 1). 
With Joint Approval 
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE 
and 
THE GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE 
HAS DECIDED : 
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN 
AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE. 
CHAPTER I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 1 
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by : 
1. Region is the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province, which 
hereinafter is referred to as DKI Jakarta Province. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Regional Government is the Governor and Regional Apparatus of DKI Jakarta Province as elements of the administration of the government of DKI Jakarta Province. 
The Regional People's Representative Council of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province, hereinafter referred to as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution as an element of 
regional government administration. 
The Governor is the Regional Head of DKI Jakarta Province who by virtue of his position also serves as the representative of the Government in the region of DKI Jakarta Province. 
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD 
is the Apparatus of DKI Jakarta Province. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of DKI Jakarta Province. 
Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, tribe, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life. 
Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. 
Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic or social exploitation, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. 
10. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, economic or social exploitation, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child. 
11. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in suffering or hardship physically, sexually, psychologically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion or unlawful deprivation of freedom within the scope of the household. 
or 
12. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, 
or receipt of a person by means of the threat or use of force, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of a person having control over another person, whether carried out within a country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited. 
13. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) 
years including a child still in the womb. 
14. Woman is a person (human being) who has a vagina, can 
menstruate, become pregnant, give birth to children, and breastfeed. 
15. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering either physically, mentally or emotionally, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals, including the victim's heirs. 
16. Protection is a series of fulfillment of the rights of women and children victims of violence and discrimination starting from prevention efforts, handling and empowerment. 
17. Prevention is a direct effort made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children. 
18. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including information services, legal assistance and accompaniment, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral. 
19. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts for criminal acts of trafficking in persons in DKI Jakarta Province. 
20. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother. 
21. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of women and/or children. 
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, and 
social organizations and/or community organizations. 
Protection 
CHAPTER II 
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES 
Article 2 
of women and children 
from acts 
of violence 
is organized based on the principles of: 
a. humanity; 
b. justice and gender equality; 
c. protection; 
d. best interests of women and children; and 
e. non-discrimination. 
Article 3 
The objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence, are to: 
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including 
trafficking in persons; 
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against 
women and children; 
c. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children; 
d. provide services to women and children victims of acts 
of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and 
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household. 
CHAPTER III 
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN 
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE 
Article 4 
Women and children victims of acts of violence receive the following rights: 
a. the right to have their dignity respected as human beings; 
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering 
experienced by victims; 
c. the right to determine their own decisions; 
d. the right to obtain information; 
e. the right to confidentiality; 
f. the right to compensation; 
g. the right to social rehabilitation; 
h. the right to complaint handling; 
the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and 
i. 
j. 
the right to accompaniment. 
Article 5 
Children victims of acts of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 4, also receive special rights, as follows: 
a. the right to respect and full use for 
survival, growth and development; 
b. the right to basic services; 
c. the right to equal protection; 
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and 
e. the right to obtain freedom; 
CHAPTER IV 
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
Article 6 
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of: 
a. Regional Government; 
b. Community; 
c. Family; and 
d. Parents. 
Article 7 
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as 
referred to in Article 6 letter a, include: 
a. implementing policies for protection of women and children from 
acts of violence established by the government; 
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection 
of women and children from acts of violence; 
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection 
of women and children from acts of violence; 
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation 
of protection of women and children from acts of violence; 
e. allocating budget for implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and 
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection 
of women and children from acts of violence. 
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Governor establishes programs and action activities for protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD and UKPD in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD). 
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to 
in paragraph (2), are regulated by Governor's Regulation. 
Article 8 
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation. 
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph 
(1), include: 
a. preventing acts of violence against women and 
children; 
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and 
c. participating in handling victims of acts of violence. 
Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations. 
Article 9 
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members. 
CHAPTER V 
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE 
Article 10 
(1) To prevent acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling. 
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government makes efforts as follows: a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and 
non-formal and informal; 
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services; 
c. opening employment opportunities for women; 
d. building community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
e. building and providing a complete information system 
that is easily accessible; 
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and 
g. opening complaint posts for protection of women and children 
from acts of violence. 
Article 11 
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 10, is implemented by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of: 
a. social affairs; 
b. health; 
c. education; 
d. manpower; 
e. women's empowerment and child protection; 
f. mental and spiritual; and 
g. peace and order. 
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD and UKPD as referred to 
in paragraph (1), is implemented 
(1), is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan. 
CHAPTER VI 
SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE 
Article 12 
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children 
victims of acts of violence, are as follows: 
a. complaint services; 
b. health services; 
c. legal aid; 
d. repatriation; 
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal; 
f. identification services; and 
g. psychological services. 
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented according to minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of: 
a. social affairs; 
b. health; 
c. women's empowerment and child protection; 
d. mental and spiritual; 
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, and the community. 
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for handling services for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), are regulated by Governor's Regulation. 
Article 13 
The Regional Government is obligated to provide complaint services for protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
Article 14 
The Regional Government and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses. 
Article 15 
Further provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in Article 13 and Article 14, are regulated by Governor's Regulation. 
CHAPTER VII 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
Article 16 
(1) In order to provide protection services to women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center for protection of women and children from acts of violence including victims of acts of violence. 
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence. 
(3) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Work Procedures of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), are stipulated by Governor's Regulation. 
Article 17 
In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 16, to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Governor establishes: 
a. a task force on trafficking in persons; 
b. a regional action committee for elimination of the worst forms of 
child labor. 
Article 18 
(1) The task force as referred to in Article 17 letter a, consists of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics. 
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling of trafficking in persons. 
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), are stipulated by Governor's Regulation. 
Article 19 
(1) The committee as referred to in Article 17 letter b, consists of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics. 
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), are stipulated by Governor's Decree. 
CHAPTER VIII 
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP 
Part One Cooperation 
Article 20 
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with: 
a. the Government; 
b. other Provinces; 
c. Regencies/Cities; and 
d. Non-governmental institutions. 
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: 
a. exchange of data and information; 
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence; 
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and 
d. provision of evidence and witnesses. 
e. followed up in accordance with applicable law 
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) 
is set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement. 
Part Two Partnership 
Article 21 
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business world in protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted through: 
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women 
victims of acts of violence; 
b. education and training for women victims of acts 
of violence; 
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts 
of violence who are withdrawn from their education; and 
d. fostering and increasing 
economic independence of women victims of acts of violence. 
(3) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), 
is set forth in the form of an agreement. 
CHAPTER IX 
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION 
Article 22 
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: 
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards; 
b. technical guidance and training; 
c. provision of facilities; 
d. monitoring; and 
e. evaluation. 
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), in order to realize the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence according to minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/UKPD and the community. 
Article 23 
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted 
with the principles of professional, transparent, and accountable. 
Article 24 
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Governor or to the DPRD. 
CHAPTER X 
FINANCING 
Article 25 
Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence is sourced from: 
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and 
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and 
regulations. 
Article 26 
(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence. 
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity, and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance. 
CHAPTER XI 
CLOSING PROVISIONS 
Article 27 
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation. 
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province. 
Stipulated in Jakarta 
on 14 November 2011 
GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE, 
FAUZI BOWO 
Promulgated in Jakarta 
on 15 November 2011 
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL 
REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE, 
FADJAR PANJAITAN 
NIP. 195508261978011001 
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE YEAR 2011 NUMBER 8 
ELUCIDATION 
OF 
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE 
NUMBER 8 OF 2011 
CONCERNING 
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE 
I. GENERAL 
The position of DKI Jakarta Province as the national capital as stipulated in Law Number 29 of 2007 concerning the Government of the Special Capital Region of Jakarta Province as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, makes the city of Jakarta an attraction for some community members from various regions, thus giving rise to various social problems, including acts of violence against women and children both within the household and outside the household, such as torture or treatment that can degrade human dignity and dignity. 
Various acts of violence both against women and children both within the household and outside the household will destroy family life, society, government, nation, and state, therefore the Provincial Government of DKI Jakarta is obligated to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence which is an implementation of several laws and regulations, including Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection. 
Protection for women and children from acts of violence is one of the obligations of the Regional Government as regulated in Article 22 letter a of Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government. On that basis, the Provincial Government of DKI Jakarta has made various efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence, but has not been able to provide protection to women and children from various acts of violence, among others due to the still low understanding of the community regarding the rights of women and children, handling has not been well coordinated, implementation has not been continuous, and so on. Therefore, a Regional Regulation on Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is needed to provide legal certainty in the protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
The Regional Regulation on Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, gives responsibility to the Regional Government starting from prevention of acts of violence to handling victims of acts of violence. In its implementation, the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, and the community. In addition, adequate funding support both from the Government, Regional Government, as well as participation of the business world and the community, it is hoped that violence against women and children can be eliminated. 
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE 
Article 1 
Article 2 
Article 3 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter a 
the principle of humanity becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence which is respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila) 
Letter b 
the principle of justice and gender equality, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, governmental activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development. 
Letter c 
protection is a principle that functions to provide protection to women and children in order to provide tranquility in family and community life 
Letter d 
the principle of best interests of women and children, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities, and the Regional Government are to fulfill the rights of women and children as regulated in laws and regulations. 
Letter e 
the principle of non-discrimination, that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence does not discriminate based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups. 
Letter a 
Article 4 
What is meant by trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, transfer, or receipt of a person by means of threat of force, use of force, abduction, confinement, forgery of documents or identity, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of the person holding control or another person, whether carried out within a country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited. 
Letter b 
What is meant by exploitation is an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical sexual reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring/utilizing labor or transplanting organs and or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial. 
Letter c 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter d 
What is meant by witness is a person who sees, hears and experiences events of violence and human rights violations 
Letter e 
Letter a 
Letter b 
Letter c 
Letter d 
Mediation is conducted for cases of domestic violence that fall into the category of complaint offenses as regulated in Law No. 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence. 
What is meant by the right to have one's dignity respected is upholding human rights. 
Sufficiently clear. 
Sufficiently clear. 
What is meant by the right to information is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, both data, facts and explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence. 
Letter e 
Letter f 
Letter g 
Letter h 
Letter i 
Letter j 
Article 5 
Sufficiently clear. 
What is meant by the right to compensation, includes economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health insurance, and education or skills 
What is meant by the victim's right to rehabilitation, includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship 
What is meant by the right to complaint handling, is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers 
Sufficiently clear 
What is meant by the right to accompaniment includes psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, clergy, advocates, and family members. 
What is meant by companion is an individual who works as a volunteer to provide protection and support to women and children who become victims of acts of violence during the judicial process, these companions can come from family members, friends or independent organizations that provide attention to witnesses and victims or advocates. 
Letter a 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter b 
basic rights referred to include the right to education and access to parents during the handling process. 
Letter c 
What is meant by the right to equal protection, is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinions, ethnicity or social life, ownership, disability, birth or other status. 
Letter d 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter e 
What is meant by the right to obtain freedom is freedom to express one's views on all matters, including those 
Article 6 
Article 7 
related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions. 
Sufficiently clear. 
Paragraph (1) 
Sufficiently clear. 
Paragraph (2) 
Article 8 
What is meant by the Regional Action Plan is the stages of programs and activities for protection of women and children from acts of violence including the worst forms of child labor that must be carried out by SKPD and UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years. 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 9 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 10 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 11 
Article 12 
Sufficiently clear 
Paragraph (1) 
Letter a 
What is meant by complaint services is a series of actions carried out by the organizer of the integrated service institution to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community 
Letter b 
What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative aspects 
Letter c 
What is meant by social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly. 
Letter d 
What is meant by spiritual guidance is religious guidance in accordance with one's beliefs. 
Article 15 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 16 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 17 
Article 18 
Letter a 
Sufficiently clear 
Letter b 
What is meant by the worst forms of child labor, include: 
a. children who are prostituted; 
b. children who work in the construction sector; 
c. children who work as scavengers; 
d. children who carry out activities on the streets; 
e. children who work as domestic workers; 
f. children who work in home industries; 
g. children who work as beggars; 
h. children who work as vehicle washers; 
i. children who carry out activities as street vendors, 
newspaper vendors, shoe shiners, and street buskers; 
j. children who work in the industrial sector and types of activities that 
use hazardous chemicals; 
k. children who work on fishing platforms; and 
1. children who work in the entertainment sector. 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 19 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 20 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 21 
Article 22 
Sufficiently clear. 
Paragraph (1) 
What is meant by guidance for implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community to realize the achievement of the objectives of prevention 
objectives of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence. 
What is meant by supervision of implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is a process 
of activities aimed at ensuring that efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community run efficiently and effectively in accordance with plans and provisions of laws and regulations. 
Paragraph (2) 
Sufficiently clear. 
Paragraph (3) 
Sufficiently clear 
Article 23 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 24 
Article 25 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter a 
The source of financing for implementation of protection of women and children from violence is sourced from the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBN), among others in the form of assistance tasks 
Letter b 
Sufficiently clear. 
Letter c 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 26 
Sufficiently clear. 
Article 27 
Sufficiently clear. 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION OF JAKARTA PROVINCE 
NUMBER 22