NERA TUNGGAL
REGENT OF POHUWATO
GORONTALO PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF POHUWATO REGENCY NUMBER 6 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF POHUWATO,

Considering : a. that to restore the dignity and honor of women and children victims of violence and to restore their social function, it is necessary to undertake efforts for protection, empowerment of women, and rehabilitation of children victims of violence;

b. that based on Article 12 of Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government, empowerment of women and protection of children constitute mandatory governmental affairs for regional governments;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

Observing : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 38 Year 2000 concerning Establishment of Gorontalo Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 258, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4060);

3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606) As amended by Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 17 Year 2016 Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

4. Law Number 6 Year 2003 concerning Establishment of Bone Bolango Regency and Pohuwato Regency in Gorontalo Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 26, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4269);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, (Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

8. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

With mutual approval,
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF POHUWATO REGENCY
and
REGENT OF POHUWATO

DECIDE:

To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regent Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Pohuwato Regency.

2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that become the authority of the autonomous region.

3. Regent is the Regent of Pohuwato.

4. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.

5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in administering governmental affairs that become the authority of the Region.

6. Regional Long-Term Development Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RPJPD is a regional planning document for a period of 20 (twenty) years.

7. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RPJMD is a regional planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.

8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.

9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and verbal that causes danger to life, body and/or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.

10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

11. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.

12. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion either directly or indirectly based on differentiation of humans on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.

13. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.

14. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.

15. Victim of violence is a woman and child who experiences suffering either physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experiences neglect, reduction or deprivation of basic rights.

16. Prevention is direct efforts carried out by the Regional Government and/or community to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.

17. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services and rehabilitation to women and children who become victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.

18. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking, hereinafter referred to as Task Force, is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts for criminal acts of human trafficking in Pohuwato Regency.

19. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.

20. Social reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, school environment, work environment and community environment that can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.

21. Victim recovery is services provided in the form of strengthening and developing the capabilities of a person who experiences acts of violence against women and children to be more empowered physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially.

22. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance, for self-strengthening of women and children from acts of violence to resolve problems faced.

23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward to the third degree.

24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.

25. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.

Article 2

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is organized based on the principles of:
a. Humanity;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Order and legal certainty;
e. Openness;
f. Protection.

Article 3

The purpose of protection of women and children from acts of violence is to:
a. Prevent acts of violence against women and children including human trafficking;
b. Eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. Protect, provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. Provide services to women and children from acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. Strengthen women and children victims of violence to be more empowered physically, psychologically, socially, and economically.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

Forms of violence include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Neglect;
e. Maltreatment;
f. Exploitation; and/or
g. Other violence.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5

Women and children victims of violence receive the following rights:
a. Right to be respected for dignity as human beings;
b. Right to recovery;
c. Right to determine their own decisions;
d. Right to obtain information;
e. Right to confidentiality;
f. Right to social rehabilitation;
g. Right to complaint handling that is fast, appropriate, comfortable and according to needs;
h. Right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
i. Right to assistance; and
j. Right to a sense of security.

Article 6

Children victims of violence in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Article 5, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. Right to survival, growth and development;
b. Right to basic population services;
c. Right to equal protection;
d. Right to be free from various stigma; and
e. Right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 7

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community.

Article 8

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 letter a, include:
a. establishing, implementing policies, programs, and conducting cooperation activities in organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence;
b. facilitating the establishment of institutional protection for women and children from acts of violence and providing support for facilities and infrastructure;
c. allocating budget for organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity;
d. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing protection services for women and children victims of violence;
f. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
g. appointing parents and/or substitute family caregivers as a protection measure for children who become victims of violence.

(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and action activities for protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 9

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to women and children from acts of violence;
c. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
d. participating in handling victims of violence.

(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 10

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence against women and children is obliged to make efforts according to their capacity to:
a. Prevent and stop the continuation of acts of violence;
b. Provide protection to victims;
c. Provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. Assist in the process of submitting applications for protection determination.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONS

Article 11

(1) The Regional Government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.

(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is established at the Regency and Sub-district levels.

(3) Membership of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Work Procedures of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 12

In addition to establishing PPT as referred to in Article 11, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regent establishes:
a. Task force for human trafficking;
b. Regional action committee for elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 13

(1) The task force as referred to in Article 12 letter a, consists of representatives from Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.

(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling of human trafficking.

(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14

(1) The committee as referred to in Article 12 letter b, consists of elements from Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.

(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
ORGANIZATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 15

(1) The Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.

(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), it is implemented by:
a. providing material on prevention of acts of violence against women and children in both formal and informal education;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services in accordance with applicable provisions;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, educational institutions, and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening an integrated service system for protection of women and children from acts of violence in every sub-district.

Article 16

(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 15, is carried out by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. population and civil registration;
f. law;
g. women's empowerment and child protection;
h. cooperatives and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;
i. mental and spiritual; and
j. peace and order.

(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Part Two
Legal Protection

Article 17

Legal protection includes:
a. Providing protection in safe houses (shelters);
b. Providing legal information to victims;
c. Providing assistance for victims as witnesses from the investigation process to the verdict;
d. Providing special legal protection for children victims of violence can be done by appointing guardianship in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Part Three
Recovery

Article 18

Recovery includes:
a. Providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. Providing medicolegal services;
c. Assisting victim repatriation;
d. Providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters);
e. Providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. Providing spiritual guidance services;
g. Conducting preparation of family, school, work and community environments, as well as economic empowerment.

Part Four
Coordination

Article 19

Coordination includes:
a. Conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated service institutions;
b. Conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated services between regions.

Part Five
Community Participation

Article 20

Community Participation is carried out by:
a. Fostering community awareness of cases of violence against women and children;
b. Encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting acts of violence against women and children;
c. Fostering local wisdom in handling cases of violence;
d. Organizing strengthening of community groups in handling acts of violence against women and children;
e. Disseminating information about laws and regulations related to acts of violence against women and children.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 21

(1) The Regional Government develops cooperation patterns in order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted between the Regional Government and:
a. Central Government;
b. Provincial Government;
c. Other Regency/City Governments;
d. Universities;
e. Social and religious institutions;
f. Non-Governmental Organizations; and/or
g. Media.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.

(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government may organize partnerships with the business world in protecting women and children from acts of violence;

(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who are withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of violence.

(3) Partnership as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 23

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. guidelines and standards for fulfillment;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. coordination;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.

Article 24

The community may conduct supervision of the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent or to the DPRD.

Article 25

Further provisions regarding procedures for implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in articles 23 and 24 are regulated in Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING

Article 26

Financing for organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence may be sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Non-binding community contributions;
d. Non-binding foreign assistance; and/or
e. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 27

(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence.

(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity, and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 28

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pohuwato Regency.

Promulgated in Marisa                                    Established in Marisa
on date, 19 JULY 2018                                   on date, 19 JULY 2018

REGENT OF POHUWATO,                          REGIONAL SECRETARY OF POHUWATO REGENCY,

SYARIF MBUINGA                                        DJONI NENTO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF POHUWATO REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 205

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF POHUWATO REGENCY GORONTALO PROVINCE NUMBER...6./23/2018