REGENT OF BUNGO
JAMBI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN IN BUNGO REGENCY
+
LEGAL DIVISION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF BUNGO REGENCY
YEAR 2022

Considering:

REGENT OF BUNGO
JAMBI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BUNGO,

a. that every citizen including women has equal rights to obtain a sense of security and freedom from the state to conduct activities in various aspects of life as guaranteed in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that there is still much gender-based violence against women and violence that treats women disproportionately in various aspects of life so that there needs to be concrete guarantees for women's rights from the government as state administrator through regional government supported by various parties;

c. that.....2

Considering:

2-

c. that the Bungo Regency Government as regional government administrator does not yet have regional legal products to guarantee women's rights in various aspects of life in Bungo Regency so that regulations regarding protection of women are needed as a legal basis;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Protection of Women;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 Year 1956 concerning Formation of Autonomous Regency Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 25) as amended by Law Number 7 Year 1965 concerning Formation of Level II Region Sarolangun Bangko and Level II Region Tanjung Jabung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 50, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2755);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3277);

4.Law.....3

-3-

4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82 Supplement.... Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 13 Year 2022 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 143, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6801);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

10. Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 5601);

11. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);

12. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

13. Regulation.....5

5-

13. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036) as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);

14. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Service Standards for Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 85);

15. Regional Regulation Number 5 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency Year 2016 Number 5), as amended by Regional Regulation Number 12 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation Number 5 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency Year 2019 Number 12);

With Mutual Approval of
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BUNGO REGENCY
and
REGENT OF BUNGO

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I.....6

-6-

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Region is Bungo Regency.

2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.

3. Regional Government is the Government of Bungo Regency.

4. Regent hereinafter referred to as Regent is the Regent of Bungo.

5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in administering government affairs that are regional authority.

6. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPAA is a Regional technical implementation unit formed by the Regional Government in providing services for women who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.

7. Protection is a series of fulfillment of the rights of women victims of violence and discrimination starting from prevention, handling and empowerment efforts.

8. Discrimination.....7

-7-

8. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that result in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.

9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.

10. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

11. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery.....8

8-

forgery, fraud and abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person who holds control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in exploitation of persons.

12. Prevention is an effort made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women.

13. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and sideways up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman.

14. Community is individuals, families, communities, religious leaders, community leaders, traditional leaders, business world and corporations, community organizations, social organizations, women's and gender study centers, mass media or similar others.

15. Private is Non-Governmental Institutions, Business World and Mass Media.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

(1) The Regional Government organizes Protection of Women from violence.

(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized based on the principles of:

a. humanity.....9

a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. protection;
e. respect for human rights; and
f. best interests of women.

Article 3

The objectives of Protection of Women by the Regional Government include:

a. Preventing all forms of violence against women

b. Providing protection and services to women victims of gender-based violence; and

c. Providing services for recovery of physical, psychological and economic conditions of women victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Part One
General

Article 4

Every Woman has the right to:

a. Right to life;
b. Right to have a family and offspring;
c. Right to develop oneself;
d. Right to obtain justice;
e. Right to personal freedom; and
f. Right to security.

Part.....10.

-10-

Part Two
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 5

Every woman victim of violence has:

a. Right to be respected for dignity as a human being;

b. Right to health and psychological recovery from suffering experienced by the victim;

c. Right to determine one's own decisions;

d. Right to obtain information;

e. Right to confidentiality;

f. Right to social rehabilitation;

g. Right to complaint handling;

h. Right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and

i. Right to assistance.

CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

Article 6

Violence as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1) in the form of:

a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Exploitation; and/or
e. Neglect.

Article 7......11

-11-

Article 7

(1) Physical violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death of women.

(2) Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feeling of helplessness and/or psychological suffering to women.

(3) Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c includes:

a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural sexual intercourse, and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

(4) Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter d includes:

a. acts of exploiting economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; and/or

b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting.....12

-12-

transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
General

Article 8

Obligations and responsibilities for protection of women in the Region are provided by:

a. Regional Government; and
b. Community.

Part Two
Obligations And Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 9

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government in providing Protection of Women as referred to in Article 8 letter a include:

a. establishing policies for protection of women;

b. implementing policies, protection, of women from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;

c. conducting cooperation in protection of women;

d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for protection of women;

e. allocating....13

-13-

e. allocating budget for organizing protection and empowerment of women according to the Region's financial capacity; and

f. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women.

(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and activities for protection of women in the Regional action plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing protection of women.

(3) The Regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2) is included in the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Obligations and responsibilities of the Community

Article 10

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 9 letter b are carried out in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:

a. preventing acts of violence against women;

b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women to law enforcement or authorized parties; and/or

c. participating.....14

14-

c. participating in handling victims of violence.

(3) Forms of participation as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 11

(1) Protection of Women provided by the Regional Government includes:

a. prevention;
b. services;
c. empowerment; and
d. coordination of Protection of Women.

(2) Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government through Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment.

(3) Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment in providing Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) forms UPTD PPA.

(4) Further provisions regarding UPTD PPAA as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part.....15

-15-

Part Two
Prevention

Article 12

(1) Prevention as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter a is carried out by:

a. forming a cooperation network in prevention efforts from acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, private sector, community and family;

b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of prevention of acts of violence based on partnership patterns that can involve the private sector, community and family;

c. conducting socialization about laws and regulations related to protection of women's rights from acts of violence;

d. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal;

e. opening accessibility to obtain increased education, training, funding, income and social services;

f. providing critical education about women's rights to the community;

g. opening employment opportunities for women;

h. building community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women from acts of violence;

i. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system; and

j. opening complaint posts for protection of women from acts of violence in every sub-district.

(2) Prevention.....16

-16-

(2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in coordination with related Regional Apparatus and/or authorized agencies.

Part Three
Services

Article 13

(1) Services as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter b are carried out quickly, safely, comfortably, with empathy, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, free of charge, and guaranteed confidentiality.

(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:

a. complaints, consultation, and counseling;
b. assistance;
c. health;
d. social rehabilitation;
e. legal and/or legal aid; and/or
f. repatriation and social reintegration.

Article 14

Complaints, consultation, and counseling as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter a include:

a. Initial identification or recording of victims; and
b. Consent to take action.

Article 15

(1) Assistance as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b includes:

a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;

b. accompanying victims during the medicolegal process;

c. accompanying.....17

- 17 -

c. accompanying victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and court;

d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;

e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;

f. coordinating with other assistants; and

g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is an activity and action carried out by assistants from individuals or representatives of institutions that have expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Article 16

Health as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter c includes:

a. First aid to victims;

b. Treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at recovery of the victim's physical condition carried out by medical and paramedical personnel; and

c. Referral to health service facilities.

Article 17

(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter d includes:

a. provision.....18

- 18 -

a. provision of spiritual guidance to victims; and

b. psychological recovery of victims.

(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is a service provided by assistants in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in solving their problems.

Article 18

Legal as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:

a. Providing legal consultation that includes information about victims' rights and the judicial process;

b. Accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and

c. Coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds properly.

Article 19

(1) Repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter f aims to return victims to their families and social environment.

(2) Repatriation.....19.

(2) Repatriation

-19-

and social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:

a. Regency/City Government within one provincial area or different provinces; and

b. related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Part Four
Empowerment

Article 20

Protection of Women through empowerment as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter c includes:

a. Job training;

b. Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and

c. Capital assistance.

Article 21

Job training as referred to in Article 20 letter a includes:

a. Skills training;
b. Field work practice; and
c. Apprenticeship.

Article 22

Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 20 letter b include:

a. Entrepreneurship skills training;
b. Facilitation of formation of joint business groups; and
c. Assistance in business implementation.

Article 23.....20

- 20-

Article 23

Capital assistance as referred to in Article 20 letter e includes:

a. Assistance for work facilities and infrastructure; and
b. Facilitation of working capital assistance.

Part Five
Coordination of Protection of Women

Article 24

(1) UPTD PPA as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (3) optimizes Protection of Women in the Region.

(2) Optimization as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:

a. coordinating and synchronizing Protection of Women;

b. maintaining and developing networks and referral systems; and

c. collecting, compiling and presenting reports on violence.

(3) Optimization of Protection of Women by UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in accordance with the UPTD PPA code of ethics.

(4) Further provisions regarding the code of ethics as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Regent regulation.

CHAPTER VII.....21

-21

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 25

(1) The Regional Government supports and facilitates UPTD PPA to conduct cooperation on Protection of Women.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with:

a. central government;
b. other regency/city governments; and/or
c. Community.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 26

(1) The Regional Government based on cooperation as referred to in Article 25 forms partnerships in providing Protection of Women.

(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:

a. providing information on employment opportunities for women victims of violence;

b. education and training for women victims of violence;

c. assistance.....22

-22-

c. educational assistance for women victims of violence; and

d. fostering and increasing economic independence for women victims of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Part One
General

Article 27

(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of Protection of Women in the Region.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:

a. information and reporting system; and
b. guidance and supervision team.

Part Two
Information And Reporting System

Article 28

(1) The Regional Government through UPTD PPA in conducting Protection of Women utilizes an information and reporting system.

(2) The information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) contains at least:

a. data on Protection of Women partners;
b. reporting of acts of violence against Women;
c. process of implementing Protection of Women; and
d. Protection of Women activities.

(3) Utilization.....23

23-

(3) Utilization of the information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Three
Guidance And Supervision Team

Article 29

(1) The guidance and supervision team as referred to in Article 27 paragraph (2) letter b is formed by the Regent.

(2) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) is led by the head of the Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment.

(3) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of at least:

a. Regional Apparatus that has the task of assisting the Regent in policy formulation and administrative coordination of the implementation of regional apparatus tasks and administrative services.

b. Regional apparatus that has the task of assisting the Regent in fostering and supervising the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the Region and Co-Administration Tasks;

c. Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the health field;

d. Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the social field;

e. Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs that are the authority of the Region in the field of public order;

f. Prosecutor's Office....24

-24-

f. Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Indonesia;
g. Police of the Republic of Indonesia; and
h. UPTD PPA.

Article 30

(1) The team as referred to in Article 29 paragraph (1) is assisted by a secretariat.

(2) The secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) is led by the head of UPTD PPA.

(3) The secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) is located at UPTD PPA.

(4) The guidance and supervision team as referred to in Article 29 paragraph (1) and the Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) are established in a Regent's decree.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING

Article 31

Funding for Protection of Women is sourced from:

a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
d. Other legitimate and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 32

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 33.....25

-25-

Article 33

Utilization of the information and reporting system as referred to in Article 30 paragraph (1) is implemented no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 34

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency.

Established in Muara Bungo
on 28 DECEMBER 2007
REGENT OF BUNGO,

H. MASHURI

Promulgated in Muara Bungo
on 20 December 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BUNGO REGENCY,

MURSIDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUNGO REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 7

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY JAMBI PROVINCE NUMBER 7-80/2022

HAS BEEN VERIFIED FOR ACCURACY, BY
KAGUBENG
KABAG
HAS BEEN VERIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PROVISIONS
SECRETARY OPAD
KASUBBAG H
KABAGH
DATE

NIP. 197902162002041003

TAUFIK HIDAYAT, SENN
117/08/0 20002 1005

DASM

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY
NUMBER YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

1. GENERAL

Every citizen including women has equal rights to obtain a sense of security and freedom from the state to conduct activities in various aspects of life as guaranteed in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. In reality, there is still much gender-based violence against women and violence that treats women disproportionately in various aspects of life so that there needs to be concrete guarantees for women's rights from the government as state administrator through regional government supported by various parties. Thus the Bungo Regency Government as regional government administrator does not yet have regional legal products to guarantee women's rights in various aspects of life in Bungo Regency so that regulations regarding protection of women need to be formed as a legal basis so that women's rights in Bungo Regency can be guaranteed in community and state life.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
Sufficiently Clear

Article 5
Sufficiently Clear

Article 6
Sufficiently Clear

Article 7
Sufficiently Clear

Article 8
Sufficiently Clear

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear

Article 10
Sufficiently Clear

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear

Article 13
Sufficiently Clear

Article 14
Sufficiently Clear

Article 15
Sufficiently Clear

Article 16
Sufficiently Clear

Article 17
Sufficiently Clear

Article 18
Sufficiently Clear

Article 19
Sufficiently Clear

Article 20
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Sufficiently Clear

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUNGO REGENCY NUMBER