MADIUN REGENCY GOVERNMENT

COPY
MADIUN REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
THE REGENT OF MADIUN,

Considering: a. that until now the number of violence against women and children remains high, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence which is stipulated by Madiun Regency Regional Regulation.

Recalling: 1. Law Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within East Java Province (State Gazette Year 1950 Number 19, Supplement to State Gazette Number 9);
2. Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3039);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3134);
4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3668);
5. Law Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette Year 1992 Number 100, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3495);
6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3835);

-2-
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (State Gazette Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4235);
10. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4389);
11. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4419);
12. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4437) as amended by Law Number 8 Year 2005 (State Gazette Year 2005 Number 108, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4548);
13. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance between Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4438);
14. Government Regulation Number 6 Year 1988 concerning Coordination of Vertical Agency Activities in the Regions (State Gazette Year 1988 Number 10, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3373);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Authority (State Gazette Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4737);
16. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
17. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
18. Presidential Decree Number 61 Year 2003 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights in Indonesia 1998-2003;
19. East Java Provincial Regulation Number 9 Year 2005 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette Year 2005 Number 4 Series E);
20. Madiun Regency Regional Regulation Number 1 Year 2006 concerning Medium-Term Regional Development Plan of Madiun Regency Year 2006 – 2009 (Regional Gazette Year 2006 Number 1 Series E).
21. Madiun Regency Regional Regulation Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Government Affairs Which Are the Authority of Madiun Regency (Regional Gazette Year 2008 Number 1 Series E);
- 3 -

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MADIUN REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF MADIUN

DECIDES

To Stipulate: MADIUN REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government administration.
2. Regent is the Regent of Madiun.
3. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age and has never been married, including those in the womb.
4. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
5. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, psychological, sexual, and economic to the victim.
6. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
7. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
8. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and certain purposes.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
10. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against the victim.
11. Companion is a person who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
12. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and general services.
13. Safe house is temporary housing used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children.
- 4 -

16. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (servants, drivers, and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
1. Respect for the rights of victims.
2. Justice and gender equality.
3. Non-discrimination.
4. Best interests of the victim.
5. Respect for the rights of women and children.

Article 3
The objective of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence that are gender-based and in the best interests of children occurring in households and/or public.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4
Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling both from individuals, groups or institutions whether Regency Government or non-government.

Article 5
In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain assistance both psychologically and legally and to obtain guarantees of their rights relating to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6
(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence and legislation;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. socializing legislation related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
- 5 -
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutional

Article 7
(1) Implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework;
(2) Provisions concerning PPT will be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Forms and Mechanisms of Service

Article 8
(1) Forms of services to victims organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to operational standard procedures which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Service Principles

Article 9
Implementation of services to victims is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discrimination, and with guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 10
PPT managers are obligated to organize services in accordance with service principles as referred to in Article 9.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE

Article 11
Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have the expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT.
- 6 -
CHAPTER VII
SANCTIONS

Article 12
(1) Any person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, and or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as regulated in applicable legislation;
(2) Officials appointed to implement protection who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities shall be subject to administrative action or sanctions;
(3) PPT managers who carry out service duties that violate service principles may be subject to sanctions in accordance with PPT internal mechanisms.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 13
Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation insofar as concerning its implementation will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Madiun Regency.

Validated in Madiun
on 11 April 2008
REGENT OF MADIUN

Signed

DJUNAEDI MAHENDRA, SH, M.Si

Promulgated in Madiun
on 9 June 2008
REGIONAL SECRETARY

Signed

Ir. SUKIMAN, M.Si
Main Young Supervisor
NIP 010 170 361

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 4/E

In accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

S O E N T O R O, SH.
Supervisor
NIP 010 212 869
ELUCIDATION
OF
MADIUN REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION

The state has an obligation to provide security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual or economic security, this is philosophically stated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution, that the first purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and all of Indonesia's territory.

Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it is obligated to comply with these provisions. Likewise in the 1945 Constitution fourth amendment chapter XA of the 1945 Constitution concerning Human Rights, it states that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the Government.

Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women Year 1999 it is stated that Women as Mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures of God Almighty and therefore must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect maintained properly and proportionally, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ELUCIDATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1: Sufficiently clear
Article 2: - Respect for the rights of victims is intended to guarantee the fulfillment of victims' rights.
- Gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women.
- Gender equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so they are able to play a role and participate in political, socio-cultural, defense and national security activities and equality in enjoying development results.
- Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
- Best interests of the victim means all actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, then the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.
- 2 -

Article 3: What is meant by gender-based violence is action based on gender relations that place women subordinate to men.

Article 4: What is meant by obtaining protection is obtaining protection from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government.

Obtaining information about the existence of complaint centers, PPT and matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and being involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and development of case handling.

What is meant by integrated services are services that include medical, medico-legal, psychosocial and legal.

What is meant by continuous handling is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume their life in society including restoration of their good name.

Article 5: What is meant by obtaining psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process.

Article: 6 Sufficiently clear
Article: 7 Sufficiently clear
Article: 8 Sufficiently clear
Article: 9 Sufficiently clear
Article: 10 Sufficiently clear
Article: 11 Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Paragraph (1): Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2): a. What is meant by officials appointed to implement protection are Heads of Agencies/Offices/Institutions in the Madiun Regency Government in accordance with their duties and functions who are incorporated in the PPT framework.
b. Their obligations and responsibilities are:
- Providing medical services
- Providing medicolegal services
- Providing psychosocial services
- Providing legal services

Article: 13 Sufficiently clear
Article: 14 Sufficiently clear