MAYOR OF SURAKARTA
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SURAKARTA CITY NUMBER 7 OF 2024
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD THE MAYOR OF SURAKARTA,
COPY
Considering: a. that women are citizens who have human rights that must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or deprived by anyone so they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;
b. that in order to realize the fulfillment of women's constitutional rights that are free from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination, and to improve the quality of life of women, they need to receive protection and empowerment from the Regional Government;
c. that the implementation of protection of women in the Region has not been able to be carried out optimally and is accompanied by the continued occurrence of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women so that comprehensive regulation is needed to provide direction, foundation, and legal certainty;
- 2 -
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 16 of 1950 concerning the Formation of Large City Regions Within the Province of East Java, Central Java, West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 45);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended several times by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Law Number 12 of 2022 concerning Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
5. Law Number 11 of 2023 concerning Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 58 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6867);
- 3 -
With Joint Approval
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SURAKARTA CITY and
THE MAYOR OF SURAKARTA
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part One
Definitions
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Surakarta City.
2. Mayor is the Mayor of Surakarta.
3. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and the Regional People's Representative Council in government affairs that are the authority of the region;
5. Women are persons of female sex from infants, adolescents, adults to the elderly, who have been recognized by law.
6. Protection is all efforts to fulfill rights and provide assistance to provide a sense of security to witnesses and/or victims that must be implemented by institutions in accordance with statutory regulations.
- 4 -
7. Protection of Women is all efforts made by the Regional Government, society, and/or other parties aimed at protecting women from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights.
8. Empowerment of Women is an effort to obtain access and control over economic, political, social, cultural resources so that women can manage themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept and be free from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination.
9. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, educational, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
10. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, physical, sexual, reproductive organ exploitation, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.
- 5 -
11. Violence is any action that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, mentally, psychologically, including intimidation, forced eviction, threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, neglect and obstructing the ability to enjoy all rights and freedoms.
12. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, socially economically and discrimination, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life. any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually and psychologically including certain actions of arbitrary deprivation of freedom whether occurring in the private or public sphere.
13. Gender-Based Online Violence hereinafter abbreviated as KBGO is violence that occurs through digital media or online platforms that targets women, including: comments or messages that are insulting, demeaning, or belittling of Women, messages or comments that threaten to commit physical or sexual violence against Women, disseminating the victim's personal information (such as address, telephone number, or other identity) without permission with the aim of intimidating or harming the victim, extortion involving threats to spread intimate images or videos of the victim unless the victim meets the perpetrator's demands, spreading private photos or videos that are intimate in nature without the consent of the women in the content, use of technology to stalk or monitor the victim continuously, often with the aim of frightening or controlling the victim, and digitally altering images or videos of women for the purpose of insulting, humiliating, or sexually exploiting.
- 6 -
14. Economic Violence is a form of violence in which the perpetrator controls, manipulates, or restricts the victim's access to economic resources with the aim of controlling and dominating the victim, including acts of: taking full control over the victim's income, including salary, savings, or other financial assistance received by the victim, restricting or prohibiting the victim from owning or using money, so that the victim is completely dependent on the perpetrator for financial needs, prohibiting or preventing the victim from working or continuing education with the aim of limiting the victim's financial independence, using the victim's assets or property for personal gain or damaging those assets as a form of punishment, and making all financial decisions without involving the victim, so that the victim has no control over household finances.
15. Physical Violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.
16. Psychological Violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.
17. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of rape, indecent acts, forced contraception, forced sterilization, sexual torture, sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, electronic-based sexual violence, acts violating decency that are contrary to the victim's will, forced prostitution, criminal acts of trafficking in persons aimed at sexual exploitation and other forms of sexual violence that are expressly stated as criminal acts of sexual violence as regulated in statutory provisions.
- 7 -
18. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and their children, or mother and their children, or blood relatives in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
19. Household is husband, wife, children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care, and representation of guardianship, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
20. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
21. Women's Rights is a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly committed by state apparatus or by the state or by regional government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by Almighty God.
22. Prevention is all efforts to prevent acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women and recurrence of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against victims.
- 8 -
23. Services are all efforts and actions to fulfill the rights of women victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women which include complaint services, health, social rehabilitation, legal assistance and enforcement, repatriation, social reintegration, and restitution.
24. Victim Recovery is all efforts and actions to strengthen the capacity of women victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination physically, psychologically, legally, socially, politically and economically so as to obtain a dignified and prosperous life.
25. Integrated Services are the implementation of integrated, multi-aspect, cross-functional and sectoral services for victims, victim families, and/or witnesses of criminal acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination.
26. Complaint is a series of reporting actions carried out by victims and/or companions to the Integrated Service Center organizers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against victims of violence.
27. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims of violence from health problems they suffer.
28. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring the psychological condition and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction to be able to carry out social functions normally.
29. Legal Assistance is legal services provided by companions, law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.
30. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the receiving area/where the violence occurred to the area of origin or family.
- 9 -
31. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims of violence with family, community, institutions or other social environments that can provide protection.
32. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a technical operational implementation unit in a work unit that organizes government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, which functions as an organizer of integrated services for women and children who experience violence, exploitation, discrimination, and other problems.
33. Temporary Shelter is a service function to provide or provide access to temporary protection places that prioritize security and safety, as well as clothing, food, and supporting facilities for beneficiary needs.
34. Standard Operating Procedures hereinafter abbreviated as SOP are standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
Part Two
Principles
Article 2
The implementation of Protection of Women is based on:
a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. gender justice and gender equality; and
d. benefit.
- 10 -
Part Three
Purpose, Objectives and Scope
Article 3
(1) The implementation of protection of women is intended to realize the protection of women from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination.
(2) The implementation of protection of women aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence, exploitation, and discrimination against women;
b. provide services and recovery for women victims;
c. fulfill the special needs of women; and
d. improve the quality of life of women.
(3) The scope of regulation of the implementation of protection of women includes:
a. women's rights;
b. efforts to protect women;
c. obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government;
d. institutions.
e. coordination and cooperation;
f. participation;
g. monitoring, evaluation and reporting;
h. awards; and
i. financing.
CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
Basic Rights of Women
Article 4
(1) Every woman has the right:
a. to life;
- 11 -
b. to have a family and continue offspring;
c. to develop themselves;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to a sense of security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.
(2) The right to life as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes:
a. the right to maintain life and improve their standard of living;
b. the right to obtain a sense of calm, security, peace, happiness, physical and spiritual welfare; and
c. the right to a good and healthy environment.
(3) The right to have a family and continue offspring as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, namely the right to form a family and continue offspring through legal marriage according to religion and statutory provisions.
(4) The right to develop themselves as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, includes:
a. the right to fulfill their basic needs to grow and develop properly;
b. the right to protection for personal development, to obtain education, educate themselves and improve quality of life to become faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human beings in accordance with human rights;
c. the right to develop and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture in accordance with human dignity for their personal welfare, nation, and humanity;
- 12 -
d. the right to communicate and obtain information needed to develop themselves and their social environment in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
e. the right to seek, obtain, own, store, process, and convey information using all types of available means in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
f. the right to fight for their development rights, both personally and collectively, to build society, nation, and state in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
g. the right to do social work in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
h. the right to participate in planning and implementing government policies in accordance with statutory provisions;
i. the right to organize and form organizations in accordance with statutory provisions; and
j. the right to organize education and teaching in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms.
(5) The right to obtain justice as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, includes:
a. the right to receive equal treatment without discrimination;
b. the right to obtain justice;
c. the right to submit applications, complaints, and lawsuits, both in criminal, civil, and administrative cases; and
d. the right to be tried through a free and impartial judicial process, in accordance with procedural law that guarantees objective examination by honest and fair judges to obtain a just and correct decision.
- 13 -
(6) The right to personal freedom as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e, includes:
a. the right not to be enslaved or subjugated, trafficked, and all acts with similar purposes;
b. the right to personal integrity, both spiritual and physical;
c. the right not to be the object of research without their consent; and
d. the right to freely express and convey opinions with due regard to religious values, decency, order, public interest, and national integrity.
(7) The right to a sense of security as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f, includes:
a. the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property rights;
b. the right to recognition before the law as a human person; and
c. the right to be free from threats to do or not do something that violates religious, social, and legal norms.
(8) The right to welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) letter g, includes:
a. the right to have welfare, either alone or together; and
b. the right to do work and receive fair wages in accordance with their work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity in accordance with statutory provisions.
(9) The right to participate in government as referred to in paragraph (1) letter h, includes:
a. the right to be elected and to vote in general elections; regional head elections, and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable statutory regulations;
- 14 -
b. the right to have a career in government; and
c. the right to convey aspirations directly or through intermediaries in government.
Part Two
Rights of Women Victims of Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination
Article 5
(1) Every Woman victim of Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination has:
a. the right to handling;
b. the right of Victims to Protection; and
c. the right of Victims to recovery.
(2) The right to handling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes:
a. the right to information on all processes and results of Handling, Protection, and Recovery;
b. the right to obtain handling result documents;
c. the right to legal services;
d. the right to psychological strengthening;
e. the right to health services including examination, treatment, and medical care;
f. the right to services and facilities in accordance with the special needs of victims; and
g. the right to deletion of sexual content for cases of sexual violence using electronic media.
- 15 -
(3) The right of Victims to Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b includes:
a. provision of information regarding rights and Protection facilities;
b. provision of access to information on the implementation of Protection;
c. protection from threats or violence by perpetrators and other parties and recurrence of violence;
d. protection of identity confidentiality;
e. protection from attitudes and behavior of law enforcement officers that demean Victims;
f. protection from loss of employment, job transfer, Education, or political access; and
g. protection of Victims and/or reporters from criminal prosecution or civil lawsuits for Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence that have been reported.
(4) The right of Victims to recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. medical rehabilitation;
b. mental and social rehabilitation;
c. social empowerment;
d. restitution and/or compensation;
e. social reintegration; and
f. receiving skills training for economic improvement for vulnerable women.
Article 6
(1) Forms of Violence referred to in Article 5 include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic violence;
e. exploitation; and
f. KBGO.
- 16 -
(2) Economic Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d includes:
a. taking full control over the victim's income, including salary, savings, or other financial assistance received by the victim:
b. restricting or prohibiting the victim from owning or using money, so that the victim is completely dependent on the perpetrator for financial needs:
c. prohibiting or preventing the victim from working or continuing education with the aim of limiting the victim's financial independence:
d. using the victim's assets or property for personal gain or damaging those assets as a form of punishment; and
e. making all financial decisions without involving the victim, so that the victim has no control over household finances.
(3) Exploitation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e at least:
a. exploiting women's labor by providing inadequate wages, forcing excessive working hours, or not providing safe and healthy working conditions;
b. exploiting women for sexual purposes, by coercion, deception, or pressure. Including trafficking in persons for the purpose of prostitution or pornography production; and
c. exploiting women unfairly in economic transactions, such as providing loans with very high interest or manipulating markets for personal gain.
(4) KBGO as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f, includes:
a. comments or messages that are insulting, demeaning, or belittling of women;
- 17 -
b. messages or comments that threaten to commit physical or sexual violence against women;
c. disseminating the victim's personal information (such as address, telephone number, or other identity) without permission with the aim of intimidating or harming the victim;
d. extortion involving threats to spread intimate images or videos of the victim unless the victim meets the perpetrator's demands;
e. spreading private photos or videos that are intimate in nature without the consent of the women in the content;
f. use of technology to stalk or monitor the victim continuously, often with the aim of frightening or controlling the victim; and
g. digitally altering images or videos of women for the purpose of insulting, humiliating, or sexually exploiting.
CHAPTER III
EFFORTS TO PROTECT WOMEN
Part One
General
Article 7
The implementation of Protection of Women includes efforts to:
a. prevent and protect women from acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination quickly, in an integrated and integrated manner;
b. provide services to victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination;
c. empower women;
d. fulfill the special needs of women; and
e. improve family quality.
- 18 -
Part Two
Prevention of Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination
Article 8
(1) The Regional Government makes efforts to prevent violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in an integrated manner in the Region.
(2) Prevention of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women is intended to create a safe environment for women and to reduce vulnerability to violence, exploitation and discrimination to vulnerable women groups.
(3) Vulnerable Women groups as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. women in disaster and social conflict situations;
b. women with disabilities;
c. women with HIV/AIDS;
d. migrant women workers;
e. women heads of households;
f. domestic women workers;
g. home-based women workers;
h. elderly women;
i. informal women workers;
j. women in situations of intolerance; and
k. other vulnerable women groups.
(4) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are implemented by:
a. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing prevention of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination based on partnership patterns;
b. socializing statutory regulations related to the protection of women's rights;
c. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system for prevention of violence, exploitation and discrimination;
- 19 -
d. providing easy access to obtain civil rights, education, health, employment, training and funding, welfare improvement and services;
e. developing communication media, information, education and public campaigns through media;
f. developing educational materials and curricula;
g. developing safe transportation systems and public spaces;
h. building early detection systems, security and integrated complaint services in industrial areas, companies, residential environments, educational environments, Islamic boarding schools and other public spaces;
i. providing consultation services for families, prospective brides, students, santri, youth, university students and vulnerable groups;
j. encouraging behavioral changes in parents and society;
k. developing policies related to districts/cities, sub-districts, schools, Islamic boarding schools, and universities that are safe and friendly for women and integrated with regional spatial planning policies;
l. forming and developing cadres, communities, and groups from among youth, students, santri, university students, journalists, social media influencers, educators, and religious leaders for prevention;
m. conducting education and advocacy to owners, managers and/or users of social media;
n. developing protection systems and special support for vulnerable women groups;
o. raising awareness among perpetrators;
- 20 -
p. increasing the capacity of Regional Apparatus, government agencies, educational institutions, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, media, religious leaders, community leaders and communities; and
q. forming cooperation networks in prevention efforts from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination with law enforcement apparatus, government agencies, Regional Apparatus, community institutions, educational institutions, community leaders, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, and media.
(5) Efforts to prevent Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination against women in an integrated manner as referred to in paragraph (1) are coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection as well as government affairs in the field of population control and family planning.
(6) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) letter a may involve Regional Apparatus, agencies, community institutions, educational institutions, community leaders, integrated service posts, family learning centers, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, and media.
- 21 -
Article 9
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in Article 8, is implemented by Regional Apparatus that organize government affairs in the fields of:
a. health;
b. education;
c. employment;
d. cooperatives, small and medium enterprises and industry;
e. social;
f. communication and informatics;
g. culture;
h. tourism;
i. environment;
j. transportation;
k. trade;
l. youth and sports;
m. politics;
n. tranquility, order, and protection of the Community;
o. public works and spatial planning;
p. people's housing and residential areas;
q. women's empowerment and child protection;
r. population administration and civil registration;
s. population control and family planning; and
t. other related fields.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of Protection and Empowerment of Women.
- 22 -
Part Three
Services for Victims of Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination
Article 10
(1) Services are implemented to fulfill the rights of women victims carried out with the following principles:
a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. confidentiality;
d. empathy;
e. inclusion;
f. empowerment;
g. victim-based decisions;
h. honesty;
i. professional;
j. integration; and
k. sustainability.
(2) The implementation of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA.
(3) In the implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (1), UPTD PPA may cooperate with:
a. community health centers, hospitals, and other health service facilities;
b. technical implementation units that handle affairs in the social field;
c. detention centers, correctional institutions, and correctional centers;
d. police;
e. prosecutor's office;
f. courts;
g. technical implementation units of agencies that organize protection of migrant workers;
h. provincial regional offices of ministries that organize government affairs in the field of religion;
- 23 -
i. regional offices and technical implementation units of the Ministry that organizes government affairs in the field of law and human rights;
j. representatives of the Witness and Victim Protection Agency in the region;
k. social welfare organizing institutions;
l. community-based service provider institutions; and
m. other institutions.
Article 11
(1) Forms of services for the protection of women and women victims of violence include:
a. receiving reports and outreach to Victims;
b. providing information about Victim Rights;
c. facilitating the provision of health services;
d. facilitating the provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitating the provision of psychosocial services, social rehabilitation, and social reintegration;
f. providing legal services;
g. identifying economic empowerment needs;
h. identifying temporary shelter needs for Victims and Victim Families that need to be met immediately;
i. facilitating the needs of Victims with Disabilities;
j. coordinating and cooperating on the fulfillment of Victim Rights with other Institutions; and
k. monitoring the fulfillment of Victim Rights by law enforcement apparatus during the judicial process.
- 24 -
(2) Implementation of forms of services for the protection of women and women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with statutory provisions.
Part Four
Empowerment of Women
Article 12
(1) Empowerment of Women victims of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination is carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with statutory provisions.
(2) Empowerment of Women victims of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings to be able to play a role and participate in activities:
a. health;
b. education;
c. economy;
d. law;
e. employment;
f. politics;
g. government;
h. social;
i. culture; and
j. environment.
Article 13
(1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the health field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter a is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the health field.
- 25 -
(2) Forms of empowerment in the health field as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of reproductive and sexuality health services that are healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. health services before pregnancy, pregnancy, childbirth and after childbirth;
b. pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health;
c. reproductive health services; and
d. services and provision of adequate lactation rooms in every Regional government agency, public facilities and industry.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.
Article 14
(1) Empowerment of Women in the education field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the education field in the form of organizing formal and non-formal education.
(2) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve women's abilities.
(3) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (2) includes providing skills and job training.
Article 15
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter c is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of micro, small and medium enterprises and other related agencies in the form of:
- 26 -
a. providing skills and job training;
b. facilitating the formation and strengthening of productive economic business groups; and
c. facilitating the development of marketing networks.
Article 16
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter d is implemented by Regional Apparatus and other related institutions in the form of:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitating access and legal consultation services.
Article 17
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the employment field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter e is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the labor field and other related agencies in the form of:
a. women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment; and
b. employers who employ women workers, provide access and skills training.
- 27 -
Article 18
(1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the political and government fields as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letters f and g is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of national unity and politics, Regional Apparatus and other related agencies in the form of:
a. developing women's capacity;
b. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions;
c. involving women in decision-making at various levels;
d. providing access for women to hold public office; and
e. participation in general elections, regional head elections and other political positions in the region.
(2) The Regional Government provides guarantees to women to have the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting in accordance with statutory provisions.
(3) The Regional Government provides opportunities for women to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in regional government.
(4) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties are responsible for providing political education for women.
- 28 -
Article 19
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the social field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter h is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the social field and other related agencies in the form of:
a. awareness raising and self-capacity building in the social field;
b. providing and developing access for women to participate in the social field;
c. improving women's competence through social training and education for women;
d. involving women in social activities; and
e. developing forums or women's institutions in the social field.
Article 20
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the arts and culture field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter i is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the tourism and culture field and other related agencies in the form of:
a. awareness raising and self-capacity building in the arts and culture field;
b. providing and developing access for women to participate in the arts and culture field;
c. improving women's competence through arts and culture literacy training and education for women;
d. involving women in arts and culture activities; and
e. developing forums or women's institutions in the arts and culture field.
.
- 29 -
Article 21
The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the environmental field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) letter j is implemented by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the environmental field and other related agencies in the form of:
a. raising awareness and forming environmentally conscious women's behavior;
b. increasing women's capacity and competence through environmental training and education;
c. providing and developing women's access to participate in the environmental field;
d. involving women in environmental activities; and
e. developing forums or women's institutions in the environmental field.
Part Five
Fulfillment of Special Needs of Women
Article 22
(1) Fulfillment of special needs of women relates to the protection of women from all things that can threaten the safety and/or health of women's reproductive organs.
(2) Fulfillment of special needs as referred to in paragraph (1) at least in the form of:
a. health services especially family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth, post-childbirth, breastfeeding and menstruation;
b. fulfillment of the right to receive paid leave including maternity leave; and
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure for women.
(3) Further provisions regarding the fulfillment of special needs of women as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Mayor Regulation.
- 30 -
Part Six
Improving Family Quality
Article 23
Provisions regarding efforts to Protect Women through improving Family quality as referred to in Article 7 are regulated in a Regional Regulation.
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 24
In efforts to protect women victims of violence, the Regional Government is obliged to:
a. guarantee the implementation of the fulfillment of women's rights and provision of guarantees of security from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in the region;
b. establish policies, programs, activities for the protection of women and guarantees of victim handling to eliminate all forms of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in the region; and
c. provide guidance and supervision in efforts to protect women carried out by Regional Apparatus that handle government affairs in the field of Protection and Empowerment of Women.
Article 25
The Regional Government is responsible for:
a. implementing policies, programs, activities for the protection of women to guarantee the implementation of the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. facilitating facilities and infrastructure for the protection of women; and
- 31 -
c. applying service standards for the protection of women and SOP.
CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONS
Article 26
(1) The Regional Government in efforts to provide and organize handling services for the protection of women victims of violence, exploitation and acts of violence forms UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is under and responsible to the head of the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) has the task of:
a. receiving reports or outreach to Victims;
b. providing information about Victim rights;
c. facilitating the provision of health services;
d. facilitating the provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitating the provision of psychosocial services, social rehabilitation, social empowerment, and social reintegration;
f. providing legal services;
g. identifying economic empowerment needs;
h. identifying temporary shelter needs for Victims and Victim Families that need to be met immediately;
i. facilitating the needs of Victims with Disabilities;
j. coordinating and cooperating on the fulfillment of Victim rights with other institutions; and
- 32 -
k. monitoring the fulfillment of Victim rights by law enforcement apparatus during the judicial process.
(4) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is grouped into the following roles:
a. health;
b. psychology;
c. social-education;
d. law; and
e. economy.
(5) Further provisions regarding the formation, main tasks and functions and management of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.
Article 27
(1) In order to coordinate and synchronize policies, programs and activities for the protection of women to eliminate all acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in the Region, the Mayor forms a task force, forum, working group or other institutions.
(2) Membership of the task force, forum, working group or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of related Regional Apparatus, community leaders, religious leaders, and universities.
(3) Further provisions regarding the formation of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Mayor Regulation.
- 33 -
CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Part One
Coordination
Article 28
In the context of implementing the protection of women, the Regional Government carries out coordination with the central government, provincial government, district/city government, related agencies, law enforcement institutions, service institutions, educational institutions, religious institutions, social community institutions, Islamic boarding schools, professional organizations, legal aid organizations, youth organizations, broadcasting supervisory institutions, media, communities, professional institutions, business world and other related stakeholders through synergy.
Part Two
Cooperation
Article 29
(1) In the context of implementing the protection of women, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with statutory provisions.
CHAPTER VII
PARTICIPATION
Article 30
(1) Everyone can participate in the implementation of Protection of Women in the Region.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, Law Enforcement Institutions, service institutions, religious institutions, Islamic boarding schools, professional organizations, legal aid organizations, youth organizations, broadcasting supervisory institutions, media, communities, professional institutions, business world and other related stakeholders.
- 34 -
(3) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of:
a. providing information or reporting to the competent authority if they know of acts of violence, and or exploitation and or discrimination against women;
b. taking preventive actions against violence against women;
c. conducting professional skills training in the form of:
1. leadership training;
2. management training;
3. business communication training;
4. negotiation skills training;
5. technology and digital training; and
6. entrepreneurship training;
d. conducting specific skills training in the form of:
1. self-defense training;
2. creative arts skills training; and
3. handicrafts, cooking skills, sewing skills, child care skills, and household management skills;
e. conducting health and welfare training in the form of:
1. fitness training; and
2. mental health training;
f. conducting community and social training in the form of:
- 35 -
1. activism and advocacy training; and
2. volunteer training in various social, health, and environmental fields;
g. forming social community institutions that handle the guidance and empowerment of women.
(4) Further provisions regarding community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated in a Mayor Regulation
CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Part One
Monitoring
Article 31
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women in the Region.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out periodically from planning to policies, programs and activities for the protection of women for the current year.
(4) The results of monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) are reported to the Mayor periodically.
- 36 -
Part Two
Evaluation
Article 32
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women is carried out by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection periodically.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women are used as input material for the preparation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.
Part Three
Reporting
Article 33
(1) To improve coordination of service delivery to women in the Region, UPTD PPA reports the implementation of its duties to the Head of the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection with a copy to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the implementation of handling problems of protection of women in the Region.
Article 34
Further provisions regarding monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women as referred to in Articles 31 to 33 are regulated in a Mayor Regulation.
- 37 -
CHAPTER IX
AWARDS
Article 35
(1) The Mayor gives awards to educational institutions, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions and business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, media that organize the protection of women.
(2) Further provisions regarding procedures for giving awards as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Mayor Regulation.
CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 36
Financing for the implementation of Protection of Women in the Region is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with statutory provisions.
- 38 -
CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 37
Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional regulation.
Article 38
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Surakarta City.
Established in Surakarta
on 22 August 2024
MAYOR OF SURAKARTA,
signed
TEGUH PRAKOSA
Promulgated in Surakarta
on 22 August 2024
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SURAKARTA CITY,
signed
BUDI MURTONO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SURAKARTA CITY OF 2024 NUMBER 7
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SURAKARTA CITY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE NUMBER (7-238/2024)
- 39 -
Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
SECRETARIAT OF SURAKARTA CITY REGION
YENI APRILIAWATI
EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SURAKARTA CITY
NUMBER 7 OF 2024
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
Violence against women is a violation of human rights so their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and nature without discrimination. The fate of women victims of violence must be given attention by the regional government. The large number of cases of violence against women are often caused by factors that develop in society, for example low economic levels, education, environments in the industrial sector.
Therefore, victims of violence like this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights. For empowerment of victims of violence, the regional government forms an Integrated Service Center (PPT) which is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as the Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment (P2TP), Safe House, Social Protection House (RPS), Trauma Center Protection House (RPTC), Women's Social Protection House (RPSW), Shelter, etc. Which specifically has the main tasks and functions for empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
The Regional Government is obliged and responsible to implement efforts to protect women victims of violence through: implementing policies for the protection of women victims of violence applied by the government, establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women victims of violence, forming PPT, ensuring the implementation of ease of service to victims, seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process, and seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
- 2 -
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by respect for human rights is respect, upholding the human rights inherent in citizens, and protecting dignity and honor as human beings.
Letter b
What is meant by non-discrimination is protection for all women without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, belief, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, political choice, legal status and physical or mental condition. Special treatment or actions for vulnerable women groups with the aim that they obtain equal rights are not included as acts of discrimination.
Letter c
What is meant by gender justice is fair treatment given to women and men. What is meant by gender equality is a condition and position that describes equal, harmonious and balanced relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development and enjoying the results of development in family life, as well as in society, nation and state.
Letter d
What is meant by benefit is the implementation of protection of women that provides benefits to women in the form of welfare, equality and justice, security and avoidance of all forms of violence, exploitation and discrimination.
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
- 3 -
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
Sufficiently clear.
Letter e
Sufficiently clear.
Letter f
Sufficiently clear.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.
Letter h
Sufficiently clear.
Letter i
Sufficiently clear.
Letter j
Sufficiently clear.
Letter k
Sufficiently clear.
Letter l
What is meant by social media influencers are people or groups who have the ability to influence society widely through social media (youtube, instagram, facebook, twitter, web, and vlogs and others) including bloggers, youtubers, vloggers, celebrities to experts who generally have a large number of followers.
- 4 -
Letter m
Sufficiently clear.
Letter n
What is meant by special support includes provision of clothing, food, sanitation facilities, mobility support, communication support, special service assistance and other infrastructure to prevent violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in vulnerable situations.
Article 9
Sufficiently clear
Article 10
Letter a
Sufficiently clear
Letter b
Sufficiently clear
Letter c
Sufficiently Clear
Letter d
Sufficiently clear
Letter e
What is meant by inclusion is the implementation of protection of women carried out by inviting and involving everyone with various diversities of abilities, backgrounds, characteristics, status, conditions, ethnicity, culture and others and facilitating special needs based on that diversity and eliminating barriers that can hinder the equality of every woman in obtaining their rights.
Letter g
What is meant by victim-based decisions is decision-making on services provided must be based on agreement (confirmation) with the victim.
- 5 -
Letter h
Sufficiently clear
Letter i
Sufficiently clear
Letter j
What is meant by integration is services to women victims carried out by various elements or components that integrate or cooperate harmoniously and synergistically to achieve certain goals according to the needs of victims.
Letter k
What is meant by sustainability is services to women victims carried out thoroughly and completely according to the needs of victims and have connections between one form of service and other forms of service.
Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
Article 16
Sufficiently clear.
Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.
Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20
Sufficiently clear.
- 6 -
Article 21
Sufficiently clear.
Article 22
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by fulfillment of special needs is given to women because their reproductive function is guaranteed and protected by law.
paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 23
Sufficiently clear.
Article 24
Sufficiently clear.
Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.
Article 27
Sufficiently clear.
Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
Article 29
Sufficiently clear
Article 30
Sufficiently clear.
Article 31
Sufficiently clear.
Article 32
Sufficiently clear.
Article 33
Sufficiently clear.
Article 34
Sufficiently clear.
Article 35
Sufficiently clear.
- 7 -
Article 36
Sufficiently clear.
Article 37
Sufficiently clear.
Article 38
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SURAKARTA CITY NUMBER 156