TRENGGALEK REGENCY GOVERNMENT
COPY
TRENGGALEK REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 10 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

THE REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,

Considering: a. that the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia guarantees the welfare of each of its citizens, including protection of women's rights and children's rights which are human rights;

b. that in order to improve the position, role, and quality of women is an effort to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation, and state;

c. that every child is a bud, potential, and successor generation of the nation's struggle, and is expected to be able to bear that responsibility, therefore they need to be given the widest possible opportunity to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally and socially, and have noble character, so protection efforts need to be carried out as well as to realize child welfare by providing guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and treatment without discrimination;

d. that violence against women and children is a crime against humanity which is a violation of human rights;

- 2 -

e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 41, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 90) as amended by Law Number 2 Year 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);

3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

5. Law Number 3 Year 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 3, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

- 3 -

6. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

7. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition And Immediate Action for The Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

11. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

- 4 -

12. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

13. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

14. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

15. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

16. Law Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of Convention On The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

17. Government Regulation Number 58 Year 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 140, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);

18. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

- 5 -

19. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

20. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

21. Government Regulation Number 44 Year 2008 concerning Provision of Compensation, Restitution, and Assistance to Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 84, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4860);

22. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 Concerning Ratification of Convention of The Rights of The Child;

23. Presidential Decree Number 23 Year 2011 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia Year 2011-2014;

24. Joint Decree of 3 (three) Ministers and Chief of Police Number: 14/MenegPemberdayaan Perempuan/Dep.V/X/2002 Number 1329/MENKES/SKB/X/2002, Number 75/HUK/2002, Number POL.B/3048/2002, concerning Integrated Services for Victims of Violence against Women and Children;

25. Presidential Decree Number 59 Year 2002 concerning National Action Plan for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour;

26. Presidential Decree Number 52 Year 2004 National Commission for the Elderly;

- 6 -

27. Presidential Regulation Number 65 Year 2005 concerning National Commission on Violence Against Women;

28. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 Year 2011 (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);

29. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

30. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 53 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 694);

31. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 2 Year 2009 concerning Principles of Regional Financial Management (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency Year 2009 Number 1 Series E);

32. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 22 Year 2011 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Apparatus of Trenggalek Regency (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency Year 2011 Number 1 Series D);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF TRENGGALEK

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

- 7 -

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Trenggalek Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Trenggalek Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Trenggalek.
4. Regional People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional People's Representative Council of Trenggalek Regency.
5. Implementation is a form of implementation of protection for women and children including protection for women and children victims of violence.
6. Protection of Women is all efforts made by family, government and others directed at women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or threat of violence.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering either physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.

- 8 -

10. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
12. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse (drugs), children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children who are victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children who are victims of mistreatment and neglect.
13. Protection of Women and Children Victims of violence is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, family, advocates, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women and Children will or has occurred.
14. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies and programs.
15. Child rights mainstreaming is a strategy to integrate child issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of legislation, policies, programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.
16. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not met properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.

- 9 -

17. Child with disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with their growth and development properly.
18. Child with excellence is a child who has extraordinary intelligence, or has special potential and/or talent.
19. Adopted child is a child whose rights are transferred from the environment of the power of the family of parents, legal guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the child, into the family environment of adoptive parents based on a court decision or determination.
20. Foster child is a child who is cared for by a person or institution, to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health, because their parents or one of their parents is unable to guarantee the child's proper growth and development.
21. Custody is the power of parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop children in accordance with their religion and abilities, talents, and interests.
22. Child's rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, society, government, and the state.
23. Society is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
24. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
25. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and their children, or mother and their children, or blood relatives in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
26. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
27. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises custody as a parent over a child.

- 10 -

28. Every person is an individual or corporation.
29. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children (PPTPA) is a cooperative network that carries out the function of integrated services for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
30. Safe House (Shelter) is a protection house for women and children including families and witnesses of victims of violence.
31. Social Community Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
32. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person who has control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
33. Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons is any action or series of actions that meet the elements of a criminal act determined in the Law on Trafficking in Persons.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

(1) The Implementation of Protection of Women is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia including:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and

- 11 -

d. protection of victims.

(2) The implementation of child protection is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child including:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

Article 3

The objectives of implementing protection for women are:
a. to guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. to protect women and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women; and
c. to maintain the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

Article 4

The objectives of implementing child protection are:
a. to guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity;
b. to protect children and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against children; and
c. to realize children who are of quality, have noble character, and are prosperous.

- 12 -

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One
Rights and Obligations of Women

Article 5

Every Woman has the right:
a. to life and the right to maintain life and livelihood;
b. to form a family and continue offspring through legal marriage;
c. to develop themselves through fulfillment of their basic needs;
d. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, to improve their quality of life and for the welfare of humanity;
e. to advance themselves in fighting for their rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i. to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
j. to protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity and property under their control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from fear to do or not do something which is a basic right;
k. to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;

- 13 -

l. to live prosperously physically and mentally, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m. to social security that enables their full development as dignified human beings;
n. to equality of position in law and government;
o. to work and a livelihood worthy of humanity;
p. in efforts to defend the state;
q. to communicate and obtain information to develop their personality and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available channels;
r. to embrace their respective religions and to worship according to their religion and beliefs; and
s. to obtain education.

Article 6

Every person must respect the human rights of others in the orderly life of society, nation and state.

Part Two
Obligations of Regional Government

Article 7

The Regional Government is obligated to implement efforts to protect women.

- 14 -

Article 8

(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government implements gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. implementing protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;

- 15 -

i. facilitating the integration of protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating strengthening and development of networks of institutions or community organizations and the business world for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l. developing a gender-based information system; and
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.

(2) Further provisions regarding forms of protection for women and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Community Participation

Article 9

(1) To provide protection for women as referred to in Article 8, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, Social Community Institutions, religious institutions and/or other legitimate institutions.

- 16 -

CHAPTER IV
CHILD PROTECTION

Part One
Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 10

Every child has the right:
a. to survival, growth, development and participation properly in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence and discrimination;
b. to a name as self-identity and citizenship status;
c. to worship according to their religion, think, and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age, under parental guidance;
d. to know their parents, be raised, and cared for by their own parents;
e. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
f. to obtain education and teaching in the framework of developing their personality and level of intelligence according to their interests and talents;
g. to express and be heard their opinion, receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with moral values and propriety;
h. to rest and use leisure time, socialize with peers, play, recreate, and create according to their interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development;
i. to receive protection from discriminatory treatment, exploitation, whether economic or sexual, neglect, violence, abuse, injustice, other mistreatment, while in the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care;

- 17 -

j. to be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules showing that separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration; and
k. to obtain protection from abuse in political activities, involvement in armed conflict, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence and involvement in warfare.

Article 11

(1) Every child has the right to obtain protection from being the target of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhuman punishment.
(2) Every child has the right to obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
(3) Arrest, detention, or criminal imprisonment of a child may only be carried out if in accordance with applicable law and can only be carried out as a last resort.

Article 12

(1) Every child who is deprived of freedom has the right to:
a. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
b. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal remedies; and
c. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a closed session for the public.

(2) Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.

- 18 -

Article 13

Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act has the right to obtain legal assistance and other assistance.

Article 14

(1) In the event that for some reason their parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development, or the child is in a neglected state, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

(2) In the event that parents, guardians, or caregivers of children commit all forms of treatment as referred to in Article 10 letter j, then the perpetrator is subject to aggravated punishment in accordance with Legislation.

Article 15

Especially for children with disabilities, in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Articles 10 through 12 and Article 14, they also have the right to:
a. obtain special education, while for children with excellence they also have the right to receive special education; and
b. obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards.

Article 16

Every child is obligated to:
a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, society, and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship according to the teachings of their religion; and

- 19 -

e. implement ethics and noble character.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities

Paragraph 1
General

Article 17

The Regional Government, society, family, and parents are obligated and responsible for the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 2
Obligations and Responsibilities
of Regional Government

Article 18

The Regional Government is obligated in efforts to protect children.

Article 19

(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 18, the Regional Government implements child rights mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of child rights mainstreaming;
b. coordinating and facilitating child rights mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of child mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. coordinating and facilitating child-responsive programs and activities and development of communication, information, and education about child rights mainstreaming;

- 20 -

e. implementing child rights mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. improving the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. integrating development efforts related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
i. seeking protection of children especially against victims of violence, children with disabilities in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. facilitating the integration of child protection especially protection against victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
k. coordinating child protection especially protection against victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
l. facilitating strengthening and development of networks of institutions or community organizations and the business world for the implementation of child rights mainstreaming; and
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for child victims of violence, children with disabilities, and neglected children.

- 21 -

(2) Further provisions regarding forms of child protection and mechanisms for mainstreaming children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20

The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to respect and guarantee the human rights of every child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Article 21

The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to provide support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of child protection.

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government guarantees the protection, maintenance, and welfare of children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons who are legally responsible for the child.
(2) The Regional Government supervises the implementation of child protection.

Article 23

The Regional Government guarantees children to use their rights in expressing opinions according to the child's age and level of intelligence.

- 22 -

Paragraph 3
Obligations and Responsibilities
of Society

Article 24

The obligations and responsibilities of society for child protection are implemented through community role activities in the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 4
Obligations and Responsibilities
of Family and Parents

Article 25

(1) Parents are obligated and responsible to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children according to their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent marriage at child age.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or for some reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may transfer to the family, which is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

Part Three
Position of Children, Custody, Guardianship, Care and
Adoption of Children

Article 26

Regarding the position of children, custody, guardianship, care and adoption of children shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

- 23 -

Part Four
Implementation of Protection

Paragraph 1
Religion

Article 27

(1) Every child receives protection to worship according to their religion.
(2) Before a child can determine their choice, the religion embraced by the child follows the religion of their parents.

Article 28

(1) The Regional Government, society, family, parents, guardians, and social community institutions guarantee the protection of children in embracing their religion.
(2) Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes guidance, mentoring, and practice of religious teachings for children.

Paragraph 2
Health

Article 29

(1) The Regional Government is obligated to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb.
(2) The provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) is supported by community participation.
(3) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.

- 24 -

(4) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) are organized free of charge for families who cannot afford it.
(5) The implementation of provisions as referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be adjusted to the provisions of Legislation.

Article 30

(1) Parents and family are responsible for maintaining children's health and caring for children from the womb.
(2) In the event that parents and family are unable to carry out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), then the Regional Government is obligated to fulfill them.
(3) The obligations as referred to in paragraph (2), their implementation is carried out in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

Article 31

The Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to ensure that newborn children are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Article 32

(1) The Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from efforts to transplant their body organs to other parties.
(2) The Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from acts of:
a. removal of child's organs and/or child's body tissue without regard to the child's health;
b. buying and selling of organs and/or child's body tissue; and
c. health research that uses children as research objects without parental consent and does not prioritize the best interests of the child.

- 25 -

Paragraph 3
Education

Article 33

(1) The Regional Government is obligated to organize basic education of at least 9 (nine) years for all children.
(2) Parents are obligated to fulfill the child's right to obtain basic education of at least 9 (nine) years.

Article 34

The Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to provide the widest possible opportunity for children to obtain education.

Article 35

Education as referred to in Article 33 is directed at:
a. development of attitudes and personality abilities of children, talents, mental and physical abilities to reach their optimal potential;
b. development of respect for human rights and basic freedoms;
c. development of respect for parents, cultural identity, language and their own values, national values where the child resides, from where the child originates, and civilizations that are different from their own civilization;
d. preparation of children for a responsible life; and
e. development of respect and love for the environment.

- 26 -

Article 36

Children with physical and/or mental disabilities are given equal opportunities and accessibility to obtain regular education and special education.

Article 37

Children with excellence are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.

Article 38

(1) The Regional Government is responsible for providing education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children living in remote areas.
(2) The Regional Government's responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.

Article 39

Children in and around schools must be protected from acts of violence committed by teachers, school administrators or their friends in the school concerned, or other educational institutions.

Paragraph 4
Social

Article 40

(1) The Regional Government is obligated to organize maintenance and care for neglected children, both in institutions and outside institutions.

- 27 -

(2) The organization of maintenance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by community institutions.
(3) To organize maintenance and care for neglected children, government institutions and community institutions, as referred to in paragraph (2), may cooperate with various related parties.
(4) In the case of organizing maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (3), supervision is carried out by regional apparatus institutions that administer affairs in the social field in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

Article 41

(1) The Regional Government in organizing maintenance and care is obligated to strive for and assist children, so that children can:
a. participate;
b. freely express opinions and think according to their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information according to the child's age and development stage;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and work in arts and culture; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.

(2) Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the child's age, level of ability, and environment so as not to hinder and disturb the child's development.

- 28 -

Article 42

In the event that a child is neglected because for some reason their parents neglect their obligations, then the institution as referred to in Article 40, family, or authorized official may submit a request to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 43

(1) The court determination as referred to in Article 42 simultaneously determines the place of shelter, maintenance, and care for the neglected child concerned.
(2) The Regional Government or authorized institution is obligated to provide a place as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Five
Special Protection

Article 44

The Regional Government and other state institutions are obligated and responsible to provide special protection to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse (drugs), children who are victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, children who are victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children who are victims of mistreatment and neglect.

Article 45

Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 44 consist of:
a. children who become refugees;

- 29 -

b. children who are victims of riots;
c. children who are victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 46

Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 45 letter a is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

Article 47

Special protection for children who are victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 45 letters b through d, is implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, housing, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 48

Every person is prohibited from recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests and leaving children without protection of life.

Article 49

(1) Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 44 includes children in conflict with the law and children who are victims of criminal acts, which is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and society.

- 30 -

(2) Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. treatment of children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of children;
b. provision of special companion officers for children from an early stage;
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the child;
e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of children in conflict with the law;
f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
g. protection from identification reporting through mass media and to avoid labeling.

(3) Special protection for children who become victims of criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. rehabilitation efforts, both in institutions and outside institutions;
b. protection efforts from identification reporting through mass media and to avoid labeling;
c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, whether physical, mental, or social; and
d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Article 50

(1) Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 44 is carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

- 31 -

(2) Every person is prohibited from preventing children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religion, and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Article 51

(1) Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 44 is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and society.
(2) Special protection for children who are exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of Legislation related to protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various Regional Government agencies, companies, labor unions, Social Community Institutions, and society in the elimination of exploitation of children economically and/or sexually.

(3) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing exploitation of children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 52

(1) Special protection for children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse (drugs) as referred to in Article 44, and involved in their production and distribution, is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and society.

- 32 -

(2) Every person is prohibited from intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering to involve children in the abuse, production and distribution of drugs as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 53

(1) Special protection for children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and trafficking in children as referred to in Article 44 is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and society.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing kidnapping, sale, or trafficking as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 54

(1) Special protection for child victims of violence as referred to in Article 44 includes physical, psychological, and sexual violence carried out through efforts to:
a. disseminate and socialize provisions of Legislation that protect child victims of acts of violence; and
b. monitor, report, and impose sanctions.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing violence as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 55

(1) Special protection for children with disabilities as referred to in Article 44 is carried out through efforts to:
a. treat children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of children;

- 33 -

b. fulfill special needs; and
c. obtain the same treatment as other children to achieve full social integration and individual development.

(2) Every person is prohibited from treating children by disregarding their views in a discriminatory manner, including labeling and equalization in education for children with disabilities.

Article 56

(1) Special protection for children who are victims of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 44 is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation by the Regional Government and society.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering to involve children in situations of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Six
Community Participation

Article 57

(1) Society has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to play a role in child protection.
(2) The role of society as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social community institutions, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 58

The role of society is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Legislation.

- 34 -

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
Rights of Victims

Article 59

Every victim has the right:
a. to receive protection from family, Regional Government, police, prosecutors, courts, advocates, social institutions or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the Court;
b. to receive health services according to medical needs;
c. to receive special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. to receive assistance from social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of Legislation; and
e. to receive spiritual guidance services;
f. to obtain protection from threats that endanger themselves, life and/or property both before, during and after the case examination process from the Police;
g. to obtain health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation and social reintegration if the person concerned experiences suffering both physically and psychologically;
h. to obtain restitution for victims of the criminal act of trafficking in persons or their heirs in accordance with the provisions of Legislation; and
i. other rights regulated in the provisions of Legislation.

- 35 -

Article 60

Every victim has the right to report and receive assistance both psychologically and legally and receive guarantees for their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

Article 61

The rights as referred to in Article 59 letter c, are also given to the family of witnesses and/or victims up to the second degree, if the family of witnesses and/or victims receive threats both physically and psychologically from other people related to the testimony of witnesses and/or victims.

Part Two
Obligations of Regional Government and Society

Article 62

The Regional Government is obligated to implement prevention of acts of violence, criminal acts of trafficking in persons, and efforts to protect victims.

Article 63

(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 62, the Regional Government:
a. formulates policies on efforts to prevent violence and prevent criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
b. formulates policies on the elimination of violence;

- 36 -

c. organizes communication, information, education, socialization, and advocacy about violence against women and children and criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
d. forms institutions as a forum for cooperation in protection and recovery of victims;
e. implements mechanisms for medical services, medicolegal services, psychosocial services, legal services, assistance services, spiritual guidance services, and victim recovery services;
f. provides infrastructure for protection and recovery of victims;
g. facilitates resocialization of victims, so that victims can return to performing their social functions in society; and
h. organizes health rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, and social reintegration for victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children.

(2) Further provisions regarding forms and mechanisms of victim protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 64

(1) Family and society are obligated to prevent violence and criminal acts against women and children.
(2) Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence is obligated to make efforts according to their capabilities to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims;
c. provide emergency assistance; and

- 37 -

d. assist in the process of submitting applications for protection determination.

Part Three
Community Participation in
Protection of Victims

Article 65

(1) Society participates in helping efforts to prevent and handle victims of violence and criminal acts against women and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is realized by actions of providing information and/or reporting the existence of violence and criminal acts against women and children to law enforcement or authorities, or participating in handling victims of violence and criminal acts against women and children.
(3) To implement participation as referred to in paragraph (2), society has the right to obtain legal protection.
(4) The Regional Government in organizing victim protection may cooperate with society or social community institutions.

- 38 -

CHAPTER VI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 66

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency.

Enacted in Trenggalek
on April 30, 2012

REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,

Promulgated in Trenggalek on July 5, 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY,

signed

SUKIMAN
signed

MULYADI WR

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 3 SERIES E

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

ANIK SUWARNI, SH, M.Si
Pembina Level I
NIP. 19650919199602 2 001

Registration Number 188.342/XIV/406.004/2012 Date July 9, 2012

- 39 -

EXPLANATION
OF
TRENGGALEK REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 10 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

The existence of Regional Regulations that side with vulnerable or subordinated groups, especially women and children, becomes very necessary in connection with the many social problems that result in the deprivation of human rights of women and children.

The human rights of women and children are part of human rights contained in the 1945 Constitution and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child as well as the ratification of the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women, but the enforcement of human rights of women and children still cannot encourage them to become political commitments in the Region.

The form of implementation of protection for women carried out by the Government is to implement gender mainstreaming, which is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Regional development policy programs within the framework of National development.

Children are a trust as well as a gift from God Almighty, which we must always protect because in them is inherent dignity, honor, and rights as human beings that must be upheld. From the perspective of national and state life, children are the future of the nation and the successor generation of the nation's ideals, so that every child has the right to survival, growth, and development, participation and the right to protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.

- 40 -

Although Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection has included children's rights, the implementation of obligations and responsibilities of parents, family, society, government, and the state to provide protection to children, a Regional Regulation is still needed as a juridical basis for the implementation of these obligations and responsibilities in the Region. Thus, the formation of this Regional Regulation is based on the consideration that child protection in all its aspects is part of development activities in the Region, especially in advancing national and state life.

Parents, family, and society are responsible for maintaining and preserving these basic rights in accordance with the obligations imposed by law. Likewise, in the context of organizing child protection, the state and Regional Government are responsible for providing facilities and accessibility for children, especially in ensuring their optimal and directed growth and development.

This Regional Regulation affirms that the responsibility of parents, family, society, Regional Government and the state is a series of activities carried out continuously for the protection of children's rights. This series of activities must be sustainable and directed to ensure the growth and development of children, both physically, mentally, spiritually and socially. This action is intended to realize the best life for children who are expected as potential, resilient successors of the nation, who have nationalism imbued with noble character and Pancasila values, and have a strong will to maintain the unity and integrity of the nation and state.

Child protection efforts need to be implemented as early as possible, namely from the fetus in the womb until the child is 18 (eighteen) years old. Starting from the concept of complete, comprehensive, and comprehensive child protection, this Regional Regulation places the obligation to provide protection to children based on the following principles:

a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

- 41 -

In conducting guidance, development and protection of children, the role of society is needed, whether through child protection institutions, religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations, social organizations, the business world, mass media, or educational institutions.

The form of implementation of child protection carried out by the Regional Government is through child rights mainstreaming, which is integrating child issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of legislation, policy programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.

The integrity and harmony of a happy, safe, peaceful and peaceful household is the desire of everyone in the household. The Republic of Indonesia is a state based on Belief in the One and Only God guaranteed by Article 29 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Thus, every person within the household in exercising their rights and obligations must be based on religion. This needs to be continuously developed in order to build household integrity.

To realize this integrity and harmony, it is very dependent on each person within the household, especially the quality level of behavior and self-control of each person within the household.

The integrity and harmony of the household can be disrupted if quality and self-control cannot be controlled, which ultimately can result in domestic violence resulting in insecurity or injustice for people within the household.

To prevent, protect victims, and take action against perpetrators of domestic violence, the state and society are obligated to implement prevention, protection, and action against perpetrators in accordance with the philosophy of Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The state views that all forms of violence, especially domestic violence, are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination. The state's view is based on Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, along with its amendments. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from fear to do or not do something which is a basic right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to receive facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits to achieve equality and justice".

- 42 -

Current developments show that acts of violence physically, psychologically, sexually, and domestic neglect in reality occur so that adequate legal instruments are needed to eliminate domestic violence.

The Regional Regulation regulates matters of prevention and protection as well as recovery of victims of violence, and regulates matters of obligations for law enforcement officers, health workers, social workers, volunteer companions, or spiritual counselors to protect victims so that they are more sensitive and responsive to household interests which from the outset are directed at household integrity and harmony. To prevent domestic violence, the Regional Government is obligated to carry out tasks in the field of women's empowerment to implement preventive actions, among others, organizing communication, information, and education about prevention of violence against women and children.

Based on these thoughts, it is time to form a Regional Regulation that is regulated comprehensively, clearly, and firmly in the implementation of protection for women and children including protection for women and children victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

- 43 -

Article 2
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by "gender equality" is a situation where women and men enjoy equal status and have the same conditions to fully realize human rights and their potential for the integrity and continuity of the household proportionally.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by "the principle of the best interests of the child" is that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration.
Letter c
What is meant by "the principle of the right to life, survival, and development" is the most basic human right for children that is protected by the state, government, society, family, and parents.
Letter d
What is meant by "the principle of respect for the views of the child" is respect for children's rights to participate and express their opinions in decision-making especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.

- 44 -

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
This provision is intended to give freedom to children in order to develop their creativity and intellectuality (reasoning power) according to the child's age level. The provisions of this article also affirm that this development must still be under parental guidance.
Letter d
The provisions regarding the child's right to know who their parents are, in the sense of their origins (including their wet nurse), are intended to avoid the severing of lineage and blood relations between the child and their biological parents, while the right to be raised and cared for by their parents is intended so that children can obey and respect their parents.
Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

- 45 -

Letter f
Sufficiently clear.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.
Letter h
Sufficiently clear.
Letter i
Discriminatory treatment, for example treatment that differentiates ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.
Exploitative treatment, for example actions or acts of exploiting, utilizing, or extorting children to obtain personal, family, or group benefits.
Neglectful treatment, for example actions or acts of deliberately neglecting the obligation to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should.
Cruel treatment, for example actions or acts in a cruel, vicious, brutal manner, or not showing compassion to children.
Violent and abusive treatment, for example acts of injuring and/or harming children, and not only physical, but also mental and social.
Unjust treatment, for example acts of partiality between one child and another, or arbitrariness toward children.
Other mistreatment, for example acts of harassment or indecent acts toward children.
Letter j
What is meant by "separation" is not eliminating the child's relationship with their parents.
Letter k
What is meant by "protection" includes activities that are direct and indirect, from actions that endanger children physically and psychologically.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

- 46 -

Article 12
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by "other assistance" for example social guidance from social workers, consultation from psychologists and psychiatrists, or assistance from linguists.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
What is meant by "other assistance" includes medical, social, rehabilitation, vocational, and educational assistance.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
What is meant by "rights" is intended to guarantee their lives in accordance with human dignity, increase self-confidence, and the ability to participate in community, national, and state life.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
What is meant by "support for facilities and infrastructure" for example schools, playgrounds, sports fields, places of worship, health centers, art buildings, recreation areas, breastfeeding rooms, child care centers, and special detention centers for children.

- 47 -

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
What is meant by "a child can determine their choice of religion" is if the child has reason and is responsible, and meets the requirements and procedures in accordance with the provisions of the religion they choose, and the provisions of applicable legislation.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
What is meant by "diseases that threaten survival and cause disability" for example HIV/AIDS, TB, leprosy, polio.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

- 48 -

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by "in institutions" is through government and private orphanage systems, while "outside institutions" is a family/individual care system.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2)
What is meant by "institution" is a social community institution

Article 44
What is meant by "other state institutions" are police, prosecutors, courts, and legal aid institutions.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear

- 49 -

Article 47
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by "psychosocial disorders" include psychological trauma and developmental disorders in children at an early age.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

Article 50
Sufficiently clear

Article 51
Sufficiently clear

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear

Article 56
Sufficiently clear

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Letter a
What is meant by "social institution" is an institution or social organization that cares about the problem of domestic violence, for example legal aid institutions.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

- 50 -

Letter d
What is meant by "social worker" is a person who has professional competence in social work obtained through formal education or practical experience in the field of social work/social welfare that is officially recognized by the government and carries out professional social work tasks.
Letter e
Sufficiently clear.
Letter f
Sufficiently clear.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.
Letter h
Sufficiently clear.
Letter i
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear

Article 61
Sufficiently clear

Article 62
Sufficiently clear.

Article 63
Sufficiently clear

Article 64
Sufficiently clear

Article 65
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
What is meant by "cooperation" is as a form of community participation.

- 51 -

Article 66
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY NUMBER 11