COPY OF THE REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO,

Considering: a. that women and children are creatures of Almighty God who have human rights guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, therefore women and children must be protected from all forms of violence and discrimination;

b. that violence against women and children in the Region tends to increase, therefore the Regional Government and/or the community need to play an active role optimally to provide protection, so that women and children are prevented and free from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity;

c. that protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as a basis for the implementation of comprehensive and integrated protection of women and children;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette Year 1950 Number 41) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);

3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);

5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

10. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette 5234);

11. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5512) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 24, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5657);

13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);

14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 446);

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 42);

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 903);

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 903);

20. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2013 Number 3 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 23);

21. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 2 of 2014 concerning the Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2014 Number 2 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 38);

22. Regional Regulation of Probolinggo Regency Number 6 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus.

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Probolinggo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Probolinggo Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Probolinggo.
4. Agency is a Regional Apparatus that has the duties and functions of protecting women and children.
5. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, which is established by the Regional Government or community-based.
6. Protection of Women and Children is all activities to protect the rights of women and children and provide a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights without violence and discrimination in accordance with human dignity.
7. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old or a child who is suspected, charged with a crime and a child who becomes a victim of a criminal act.
9. Violence is any act that results in suffering or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
10. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of gender, ethnicity, religion, taste, and skin color that has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights.
11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professionals in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
13. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
14. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
15. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
16. Safe House hereinafter referred to as Shelter is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined operational standards.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of protection of women and children is based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of children and women;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of women and children victims of violence; and
e. legal certainty.

Article 3

The implementation of protection of women and children aims to:
a. ensure the fulfillment of the rights of women and children so that they can participate optimally in society in accordance with human dignity;
b. provide protection and provide a sense of security to women and children from all forms of violence and discrimination;
c. prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children including trafficking in persons;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. empower women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 4

The Regional Government is obliged to implement protection of women and children.

Article 5

In implementing protection of women and children, the Regional Government is obliged to:
a. establish basic policies for the implementation of protection of women and children in the Regional Action Plan;
b. implement policies for the protection of women and children established by the government and provincial government;
c. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children among regional apparatus organizations;
d. cooperate with other regions for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children;
e. strengthen institutions for gender mainstreaming and mainstreaming of children's rights for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children
f. establish PPT in the Region;
g. ensure the implementation of excellent service in the protection of women and children, including for women and children victims of violence; and
h. preparation of a data system for the protection of women and children, including data on violence against women and children;
i. establishment and development of Child-Friendly Regency;

CHAPTER IV
PLANNING

Article 6

The Regent establishes basic policies for the implementation of protection of women and children in the Region.

Article 7

(1) The basic policy as referred to in Article 6 is elaborated in the Regional Action Plan.
(2) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) is integrated with the Regional Long-Term Development Plan, Regional Medium-Term Development Plan and Regional Government Work Plan documents.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) contains at least:
a. programs and action activities for the protection of women and children, including women and children victims of violence;
b. regional action programs and activities to prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women and children;
c. programs and action activities for improvement and enhancement of protection services for women and children victims of violence; and
d. programs and action activities for empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8

The Regional Action Plan must be used as a guideline for the Regional Government in formulating policies related to the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
General

Article 9

(1) The Regent is obliged to implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children in an integrated manner in order to fulfill the rights of women and children in the Region.
(2) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (1), the Agency coordinates with regional apparatus organizations, law enforcement officials and the community.

Part Two
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Paragraph 1
Forms of Violence

Article 10

Violence against women and children can be in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 11

Physical violence as referred to in Article 10 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 12

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 13

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 14

Neglect as referred to in Article 10 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the non-fulfillment of the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties or those responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be carried out by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or agreement they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 15

Exploitation as referred to in Article 10 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or obscenity.

Paragraph 2
Rights of Victims

Article 16

Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. excellent service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantees of rights related to status as family members and community members.

Article 17

In addition to obtaining rights as referred to in Article 16, child victims of violence also obtain special rights in the form of:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 18

(1) In the event that women and children victims of violence require continuous handling, then women and children victims of violence have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is handling at the rehabilitation stage, whether carried out by PPT, individuals, non-governmental organizations, or by the community.

Article 19

(1) The safe house as referred to in Article 18 paragraph (1) provides a safe temporary place and/or shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The implementation and/or management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the relevant Agency.
(3) Provisions regarding the implementation of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Rights of Witnesses and Perpetrators

Article 20

(1) Every woman and child who becomes a witness or perpetrator of violence has the right to obtain information, protection, rehabilitation, confidential handling, psychological and legal assistance, as well as fulfillment of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a community member.
(2) The fulfillment of rights as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Scope

Article 21

Protection of women and children victims of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. service; and
c. empowerment.

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government carries out prevention as referred to in Article 21 letter a by:
a. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of women and children;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education about the dangers of domestic violence;
d. forming cooperation networks in efforts to prevent violence;
e. coordinating, integrating, and synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
f. collecting data and information and forming a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence;
g. monitoring and evaluating the implementation of protection of women and children;
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with social norms.
(2) In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention efforts are also carried out by families and/or the community.
(3) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT

Article 23

(1) Services as referred to in Article 21 letter b are carried out through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social services;
f. legal assistance and support services; and/or
g. repatriation and reintegration.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out with:
a. fast and precise;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. a sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not charged; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(3) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.

Article 24

(1) Empowerment as referred to in Article 21 letter c is carried out through:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.
(2) Job training as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.
(3) Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; and
b. business actor assistance.
(4) Capital assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. assistance with facilities and infrastructure; and
b. working/business capital assistance facilities.
(5) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by PPT.

Part Three
Special Protection of Children

Article 25

(1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible for implementing special protection of children.
(2) Special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (1) is given to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. child victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. child victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. child victims of sexual crimes;
k. child victims of terrorism networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. child victims of abuse and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' conditions.
(3) Provisions regarding procedures for special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four
Assistance

Article 26

(1) Assistance is carried out by individuals or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence, perpetrators and witnesses.
(2) Provisions regarding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five
Recovery of Victims, Witnesses, and Perpetrators

Article 27

For the purposes of recovery, women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence can obtain services from:
a. Social institutions (groups or institutions that have scope for women and children) and or;
b. Social workers (Individuals who have competence to carry out recovery or rehabilitation) namely:
1. Nurses
2. Health workers

Article 28

(1) Women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to obtain health examination services by health facilities in accordance with professional standards.
(2) In the event that women and children victims, witnesses, and perpetrators of violence require treatment, health workers are obliged to provide health recovery and rehabilitation services.
(3) The provision of health recovery and rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29

(1) Women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to obtain counseling services from social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors.
(2) Social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors as referred to in paragraph (1) are obliged to provide services to women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence in the form of providing counseling to strengthen, provide a sense of security and rehabilitation.

CHAPTER VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF PPT

Article 30

(1) In the context of implementing protection of women and children, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for women and children.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of regional apparatus that handle affairs:
a. health;
b. education;
c. youth
d. social;
e. cooperatives;
f. industry;
g. manpower;
h. trade;
i. population and civil registration;
j. women's empowerment and child protection;
k. public peace and order;
l. regional general hospital;
m. police;
n. non-governmental organizations; and
o. universities.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by Regent Decree.
(4) Provisions regarding the organizational structure, duties and functions of PPT are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION

Article 31

(1) In implementing protection of women and children, the Regional Government can cooperate with:
a. other regional governments;
b. government commissions/agencies/institutions in the field of protection of women and children;
c. police;
d. advocates;
e. health workers;
f. social workers;
g. volunteer assistants;
h. spiritual counselors;
i. non-governmental organizations engaged in the protection of women and children; and
j. community.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal assistance;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance;
h. repatriation and social reintegration;
i. Family Welfare Consultation Institution (LK3).
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 32

(1) The community can participate in the implementation of protection of women and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. forming family partners at the village/sub-district level;
b. forming non-governmental organizations whose field of work is in the field of protection of women and children;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's rights;
d. making prevention efforts if finding indications of violence against women and children in the community;
e. providing first aid to women and children victims of violence; and
f. reporting to the competent authority if violence against women and children occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business world.

Article 33

In implementing protection of women and children, individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business world coordinate with PPT.

Article 34

(1) The Regional Government encourages the business world to participate in the protection of women and children.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of:
a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the rights of women and children;
b. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children;
c. providing assistance in the implementation of protection of women and children as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 35

(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children, both carried out by PPT and non-governmental organizations.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of women and children in accordance with the mechanisms and service procedures stipulated in laws and regulations.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the relevant Agency.

Article 36

(1) Supervision as referred to in Article 35 is carried out on:
a. implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children; and
b. fulfillment of guidelines and minimum service standards in the implementation of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Supervision is carried out at the end of each fiscal year and the results are used as input for the formulation of policies, programs, activities for the protection of women and children for the following year.

Article 37

Provisions regarding guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
REPORTING

Article 38

(1) PPT is obliged to report the implementation of protection of women and children to the Regent through the Agency.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. service; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING

Article 39

Funds for the implementation of protection of women and children are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. other legal sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40

(1) The Regional Government can provide funding assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection of women and children.
(2) Funding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided in accordance with regional financial capacity and is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
PROHIBITIONS

Article 41

Everyone is prohibited from:
a. treating women and children in a discriminatory manner that results in women and children experiencing losses, both material and moral, thereby hindering their social function;
b. treating women and children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of abuse and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing violence against women and children;
e. committing violence or threats of violence forcing women and children to have sexual intercourse with him or with others;
f. committing violence or threats of violence, forcing, committing fraud, committing a series of lies, or persuading women and children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of women and children;
h. obstructing women and children from enjoying their own culture, recognizing and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of women and children;
j. deliberately placing, allowing, involving women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropics and/or
k. deliberately placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

Article 42

PPT organizers or safe houses are prohibited from collecting fees in providing services to women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER XIII
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 43

(1) Health workers who refuse or do not want to provide health examination services as referred to in Article 28 are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. suspension of practice license/work permit;
c. practice restrictions for health workers in independent practice;
(2) Social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors who refuse or do not want to provide counseling services as referred to in Article 29 are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. reprimand; or
b. written warning.
(3) Provisions regarding the mechanism for imposing sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XIV
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS

Article 44

(1) Civil Servant Investigators within the Regional Government are given special authority to conduct investigations of criminal acts as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.
(2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. receive, search for, collect and examine information or reports relating to criminal acts;
b. examine, search for and collect information or reports relating to criminal acts;
c. request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. examine books, records and other documents relating to criminal acts;
e. conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, recording and other documents and seize such evidence;
f. request the assistance of experts in the context of carrying out the task of investigating criminal acts;
g. order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving the room or place when the examination is in progress and examine the identity of the person and or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. photograph a person related to a criminal act;
i. summon a person to be heard and examined as a suspect or witness;
j. stop the investigation;
k. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts according to applicable law and can be accounted for.
(3) The investigator as referred to in paragraph (1), notifies the commencement of the investigation and submits the results of the investigation to the public prosecutor through the Police Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XV
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 45

(1) Anyone who violates the prohibitions as referred to in Article 41 and Article 42 is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of 3 (three) months or a maximum fine of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(2) Criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are violations.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 46

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know it, orders the promulgation of this regional regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Probolinggo Regency.

Established in Probolinggo
On the date of March 1, 2019

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO

signed.

Hj. P. TANTRIANA SARI, SE

Promulgated in Probolinggo
On the date of March 1, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY

signed

H. SOEPARWIYONO, SH, MH
Main Trustee Young
NIP. 19621225 198508 1 002

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 2 SERIES E

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY NUMBER 24-2/2019

Copy in accordance with the original:
on behalf of REGIONAL SECRETARY
Assistant for Administration
Government and Public Welfare
for.
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

P A R J O N O, SH. M.Si
Trustee Level I
NIP. 19610607 198102 1 002

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL EXPLANATION

That protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as a basis for the implementation of comprehensive and integrated protection of women and children in a Regional Regulation.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE EXPLANATION

Article 1: Sufficiently clear.
Article 2: Sufficiently clear.
Article 3: Sufficiently clear.
Article 4: Sufficiently clear.
Article 5: Sufficiently clear.
Article 6: Sufficiently clear.
Article 7: Sufficiently clear.
Article 8: Sufficiently clear.
Article 9: Sufficiently clear.
Article 10: Sufficiently clear.
Article 11: Sufficiently clear.
Article 12: Sufficiently clear.
Article 13: Sufficiently clear.
Article 14: Sufficiently clear.
Article 15: Sufficiently clear.
Article 16: Sufficiently clear.
Article 17: Sufficiently clear.
Article 18: Sufficiently clear.
Article 19: Sufficiently clear.
Article 20: Sufficiently clear.
Article 21: Sufficiently clear.
Article 22: Sufficiently clear.
Article 23: Sufficiently clear.
Article 24: Sufficiently clear.
Article 25: Sufficiently clear.
Article 26: Sufficiently clear.
Article 27: Sufficiently clear.
Article 28: Sufficiently clear.
Article 29: Sufficiently clear.
Article 30: Sufficiently clear.
Article 31: Sufficiently clear.
Article 32: Sufficiently clear.