A
SUMENEP REGENCY GOVERNMENT
SUMENEP REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION NUMBER: 7 YEAR 2011
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND
CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF SUMENEP

Considering:
a. that the number of violence against women and children in Sumenep Regency is still high while services and protection for women and children in Sumenep Regency have not been carried out optimally;
b. that in the framework of regional autonomy implementation, the regulation and service to the community, especially for women and child victims of violence, is the duty and function of the regency government because violence against women and children is a violation of Human Rights;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence in the Sumenep Regency Regional Regulation.

In view of: 1. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3277);
2. Law Number 5 year 1998 Concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3783);
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
4. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning ILO Convention number 182 concerning Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2001 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4235);
6. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4389);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4419);
8. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4437), as amended for the second time by Law Number 12 Year 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4844);
9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4720);
10. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4593);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
12. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4737);
13. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2006 concerning Forms and Types of Regional Legal Products;
14. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 16 Year 2006 concerning Procedures and Preparation of Regional Legal Products;
15. Decree of the Minister of Home Affairs and Regional Autonomy Number 5 Year 2001 concerning Prevention of Child Labor;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) in the field of integrated services for women and child victims of violence.
17. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 9 Year 2005 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2005 Number 4 Series E);
18. Sumenep Regency Regional Regulation number 4 Year 2003 concerning Community Participation in Government and Development

With Joint Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SUMENEP REGENCY
and
REGENT OF SUMENEP

DECIDES:

To Establish: SUMENEP REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Sumenep Regency Government;
2. Regent is the Regent of Sumenep;
3. Regional Apparatus is an organization/institution in the Regional Government that is responsible to the Regional Head in the framework of government administration consisting of the Regional Secretariat, Regional Agencies and Regional Technical Institutions, Sub-districts and Civil Service Police Units according to regional needs;
4. Implementation is a form of implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence;
5. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including those in the womb;
6. Violence is any unlawful act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim;
7. Violence against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life;
8. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in discrimination, exploitation, whether economic or sexual, neglect, cruelty, abuse, injustice and other mistreatment;
9. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causes death;
10. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes;
11. Economic violence is any act that neglects family members in the form of not providing proper livelihood, care or maintenance;
12. Psychological Violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person;
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence;
14. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred;
15. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination;
16. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is a service center that has the duties and functions of coordinating with relevant agencies in formulating technical policies and implementation in the field of prevention and eradication as well as elimination of acts of violence against children and women, implementation of prevention and eradication of acts of violence against women and children in accordance with applicable laws and regulations as well as implementation of policies and prevention of problems in the field;
17. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations;
18. Population is Indonesian citizens and foreigners who enter legally and reside in the territory of Indonesia.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence is carried out based on respect and recognition of equal human rights and dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of women's and children's human rights and the best interests of victims.

Article 3
Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence aims to provide protection and services to women against gender-based violence and the best interests of children that occur in the household or public.

CHAPTER III
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND
CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4
(1) The Regent through the Regional Apparatus establishes a community service work unit that functions as P2TP2A.
(2) The Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in implementing Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence may coordinate with other Regional Apparatus.

CHAPTER IV
HANDLING AND MECHANISM

Article 5
(1) Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the P2TP2A framework.
(2) P2TP2A in handling medical, legal, medicolegal, psychological and economic protection in its implementation may partner with community social institutions engaged in the field of protection of women and children.
(3) Implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) must take into account religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands/other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION

Article 6
(1) Forms of violence against Women and Children include physical, sexual, economic and psychological.
(2) Forms of physical violence are any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causes death.
(3) Forms of sexual violence are sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
(4) Forms of economic violence are neglect of family members in the form of not providing proper livelihood, care or maintenance.
(5) Forms of psychological violence are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7
(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
(2) Protection for women and child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out for residents of Sumenep Regency whether carried out in Sumenep or outside Sumenep.
(3) Protection for women and child victims of violence in addition to being carried out for residents of Sumenep as referred to in paragraph (2), also for non-residents of Sumenep carried out in the territory of Sumenep Regency.

Article 8
(1) Forms of protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence are in the form of medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), economic and psychological protection.
(2) Forms of medical protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics free of charge.
(3) Forms of legal protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of services and assistance to help victims go through the legal and judicial process.
(4) Forms of medicolegal protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of medical services for the purposes of proof in the field of law.
(5) Forms of economic protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(6) Forms of psychological protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in solving problems.

CHAPTER IX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 13
Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation insofar as concerning its implementation shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 14
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sumenep Regency.

Promulgated in: Sumenep
on date: 20 April 2011

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SUMENEP
REGENCY

Established in Sumenep
on date: 14 February 2011

REGENT OF SUMENEP

KH. A. BUSYRO KARIM, M.Si

Drs. MOH. SALEH, M.Si
Main Trustee Junior
NIP. 19560506 198002 1 004

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUMENEP REGENCY YEAR 2011 NUMBER 8

= COMMAND LINE
= COORDINATION LINE

APPENDIX I: SUMENEP REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER: 6 Year 2011
DATE: 14 February 2011

ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE CHART OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE KORPRI BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF SUMENEP REGENCY

SECRETARY

FUNCTIONAL
POSITION
GROUP

GENERAL AND COOPERATION SUB-SECTION

SPORTS, ARTS, CULTURE, MENTAL AND SPIRITUAL SUB-SECTION

BUSINESS, LEGAL AID AND SOCIAL SUB-SECTION

REGENT OF SUMENEP
KH. BUSYRO KARIM, M.Si