REGENCY
ww
REGIONAL REGULATION OF JOMBANG REGENCY
NUMBER 14 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
LEGAL SECTION REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF JOMBANG REGENCY YEAR 2008
*-
18 NOVEMBER
REGIONAL GAZETTE
JOMBANG REGENCY YEAR 2008
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF JOMBANG REGENCY
NUMBER 14 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
SERIES E NUMBER 14
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Considering
Noting

VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF JOMBANG,

and
: a. that in order to optimize efforts directed towards reducing the rate of violence against women and children, it is deemed necessary to improve
improve protection services for women and children victims of violence; b. that to achieve the purpose of the Considering clause letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence by stipulating its provisions in a Regional Regulation.

: 1. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3143);

2. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

3. Law Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 100); 4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4389);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended for the second time by Law Number 12 Year 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844); 11. Government Regulation
Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006
2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence

12. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 36 Year 1990
concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

13. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 88 Year 2002 concerning National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;

14. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 61 Year 2003 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 1998-2003.

With Joint Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF JOMBANG REGENCY
and
REGENT OF JOMBANG

DECIDES:

To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION
: REGIONAL
REGULATION OF JOMBANG REGENCY
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
CONCERNING
WOMEN
AND

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Region is Jombang Regency;
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus
as elements of regional government administration;
3. Regent is the Regent of Jombang;
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration;
5. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the Regional Government and DPRD according to the principles of Autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the
Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
6. Agency is a Regional Work Unit whose main tasks and functions include the fields of social affairs, women's empowerment and child protection;
7. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age,
including those in the womb;
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering to the victim;
9. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death;
10. Psychological Violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person:
11. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner against another person whether for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes;
12. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences misery and or suffering as a result of violence;
13. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims either temporarily or based on a Court order;
14. Service is an action that must be immediately taken to victims when seeing, hearing and reasonably suspected that violence against victims will, is or has occurred; 15. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence;
16. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter referred to as P2T-P2A is a service provider institution based in a Hospital for victims of violence especially women and children managed jointly by the regional government and community members of the Team conducted in a cross-functional and cross-sectoral manner in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services;
17. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims; 18. Community is individuals,
individuals, families, groups,
community and social organizations;
19. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children;
#
}
20. Household is family members and relatives (a person who has blood relations with family members) and non-relatives, who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:

1. Respect for the rights of victims;
2. Justice and gender equality;
3. Non-discrimination;
4. Best interests of victims.

Article 3

The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide
is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence based on gender and the best interests of women and children.

CHAPTER III RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4

Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 5

Every victim has the right to report and obtain assistance both psychologically and legally and to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6

(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent violence against women and children in the form of:

a. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence and anti-violence values against women and children; b. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of
socialization and understanding of anti-violence values. (2) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement protection efforts for victims in
the form of:

a. collecting data and information about victims;

b. establishing and facilitating integrated service institutions
and safe houses for victims;

c. encouraging public awareness of the importance of
protection for victims;

(3) Implementation of obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is technically implemented in an integrated manner by relevant Regional Work Units.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

First Part Institutional

Article 7

Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children (P2T-P2A).

Second Part
Forms and mechanisms of Service

(1) Forms
Article 8
of services to
victims
that

are organized by P2T-P2A include:

a. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; b. Medicolegal services are forms of medical services
for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;

that
c. Psychosocial services are services
provided by companions to help restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses that protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems or undergoing legal processes;

d. Legal assistance services to victims during
the legal process;

e. Socio-political services in the form of policy advocacy that
is preventive and curative in nature for victims.

(2) Service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to Standard Operational Procedures (SOP) which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Service Principles

Article 9

(1) Implementation of services to victims is carried out quickly, safely, empathetically, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and with guaranteed confidentiality;

(2) Implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (1) regarding visum et repertum examination is not subject to fees.

CHAPTER VI ASSISTANCE

Article 10

Assistance is provided by a person or institution that has the expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims who are members of the P2T-P2A Management Team.

CHAPTER VII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 11

This Regional Regulation comes into effect on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Jombang Regency.

Established in Jombang on October 15, 2008

REGENT OF JOMBANG,

i

Promulgated in Jombang
on November 18, 2008

Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF
JOMBANG REGENCY,

signed
signed

SUYANTO
M. MUNIF KUSNAN, SH, M.SI

Principal Supervisor
NIP. 010 091 082

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF JOMBANG REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 14/E

Copy in accordance with the original
ERINDRA Secretary of the Region
Acting Assistant for General Administration
REGIONAL
SECRETARIAT

Drs. MACHMUD, M.Si Principal Supervisor
010 088 477

D:\PERDA 2008\SALINAN 14 TH 08 Perlindungan Perempuan dan Anak.doc

EXPLANATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF JOMBANG REGENCY
NUMBER 14 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

1. GENERAL EXPLANATION

VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

The State has an obligation to provide security for its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual or economic security, this is philosophically stated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, that the first purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and all Indonesian territory.

Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it is obliged to comply with these provisions.

Likewise in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia fourth amendment, Chapter X.A concerning Human Rights, states that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the State, especially the Government.

Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women Year 1999 it is stated that women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by God Almighty, so they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be maintained properly and proportionally both legally, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

. From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE EXPLANATION

Article 1

Sufficiently clear

Article 2

Number 1

Respect for the rights of victims is intended
for the fulfillment of the rights of victims.

Number 2

i
}

Gender justice is a process to become fair to men and women;

#

Number 3

Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural activities, national defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment towards victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Number 4

Article 3

The best interests of victims are all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, so the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.

What is meant by gender-based violence is action based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men and all actions that deprive children of their rights and freedoms.

Article 4

Article 5

Article 6

What is meant by obtaining protection is obtaining protection from family, Police, Prosecutor's Office, Court, Advocates, Social Institutions or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court, husband, wife and children.

What is meant by obtaining information is knowing about the existence of complaint centers, P2T-P2A and or other competent companion institutions regarding matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and being involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and case handling developments.

What is meant by integrated services are services that include medical, medico-legal, psychosocial, legal and socio-political services. What is meant by continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until victims can resume their lives in society including restoration of good name and victims have the right to obtain socio-economic empowerment.

What is meant by victims having the right to report is that victims can report acts of violence to the P2T-P2A Secretariat of Jombang Regency or Jombang Police (UPPA), or Women's Crisis Center (WCC) Jombang,

What is meant by obtaining psychological and legal assistance is obtaining psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process.

Sufficiently clear

T

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Paragraph (1)

Letter a

Sufficiently clear

Letter b

forms of services
what is meant by medicolegal services are medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field; Medicolegal services consist of:

Letter c

Visum et Repertum is a written statement made by a doctor under oath or promise about what is seen on the object examined which has evidentiary power in criminal cases (State Gazette year 1973 No 350 article 1 and article 2);

Visum Psychiatricum is a Visum et Repertum made by a psychiatrist containing the mental condition of a person.

Sufficiently clear

Letter d

Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (2)

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Paragraph (1) What is meant by fast, safe, empathetic, non-discriminatory, easily accessible and with guaranteed confidentiality in handling/examining women and children victims of violence, victims are examined at the P2T-P2A Secretariat or the Women and Children Protection Unit (UPPA) Room, which is a special closed and comfortable room at the Police Unit, where women and children victims of Domestic Violence and violence or sexual abuse can report their cases safely to policewomen who are empathetic, understanding and professional.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by not subject to fees is that there is a free visum fee exemption for women and children victims of physical and sexual violence that can be carried out at the Regional General Hospital of Jombang Regency as well as at the Community Health Center (PUSKESMAS) with a visum letter from the Police, which is further stipulated in the Technical Guidelines Book;

Article 10

Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF JOMBANG REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 14/E