NUMBER 5 REGIONAL GAZETTE
Considering:
BEKASI REGENCY YEAR 2020
REGENT OF BEKASI
WEST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI REGENCY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2020
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BEKASI,

a. that women are assets who play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations so they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;

b. that in order to realize the fulfillment of women's constitutional rights to be free from torture, treatment that degrades human dignity, the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all violence and to improve the quality of life of women, they need to receive protection and empowerment from the regional government of Bekasi Regency;

c. that the implementation of protection of women in Bekasi Regency cannot yet be implemented optimally and is accompanied by violations of women's rights so that comprehensive regulation is needed to provide direction, foundation, and legal certainty;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 14 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Areas Within the Province of West Java (State Gazette year 1950) as amended by Law Number 4 Year 1968 concerning Formation of Purwakarta Regency and Bekasi Regency by Amending Law Number 14 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Areas within West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968 Number 31, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia year 1948 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);

3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

4. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

5. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

6. Law Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of Persons With Disabilities (Convention Concerning the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 567);

8. Law Number 8 Year 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);

9. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BEKASI REGENCY
and
REGENT OF BEKASI

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Regency Area is Bekasi Regency Area.

2. Regent is the Regent of Bekasi.

3. Regency Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.

4. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Bekasi Regency.

5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional People's Representative Council in government affairs that are the authority of the region.

6. Women are persons of female gender starting from babies, adolescents, adults to the elderly, who have been recognized by law.

7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.

8. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.

9. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, educational, social, cultural and other aspects of life.

10. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.

11. Household is husband, wife, children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.

12. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.

13. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially as well as discrimination against victims that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.

14. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically, socially and discrimination, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.

15. Domestic Violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or threats of domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.

16. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or defects to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.

17. Psychological Violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.

18. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain other purposes.

19. Women's Rights are a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly carried out by state apparatus or by the state or by regional government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by Almighty God.

20. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and or knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.

21. Integrated Service is a series of activities to provide protection for witnesses and victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation of health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.

22. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.

23. Complaint is a series of actions taken by the organizer of the Integrated Service Center to follow up on reports of acts of violence against victims of violence.

24. Health Rehabilitation is recovery of victims of violence from health disorders they suffer.

25. Social Rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring the psychological condition and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so they can carry out their social functions properly.

26. Legal Assistance is legal services provided by companions, law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.

27. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the receiving area/where violence occurred to the area of origin or family.

28. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims of violence with family, community, institutions or other social environments that can provide protection.

29. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an institution formed by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children experiencing criminal and civil problems.

30. Safe House is a shelter for victims during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers from perpetrators.

31. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

First Part
Basic Rights of Women

Article 2

(1) Women have the right:
a. to life;
b. to have a family and continue offspring;
c. to develop themselves;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to a sense of security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.

(2) Every woman has the right:
a. to live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and spiritually;
b. to be free from all threats of violence and/or exploitation;
c. to live in a family within the bonds of legal marriage;
d. to maintain life and improve their standard of living;
e. to have work they like and also to fair employment conditions;
f. to obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education in accordance with specified requirements;
g. to a healthy and clean environment;
h. to receive fair wages in accordance with their work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity;
i. to choose and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable laws and regulations;
j. to receive special protection in carrying out work or profession against matters that can threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive functions; and
k. special rights inherent in women due to their reproductive functions are guaranteed and protected by law.
l. to receive protection and legal assistance for problems they face in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
m. other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(3) Every woman in conditions of disability, old age, pregnancy has the right to obtain facilities and special treatment.

(4) Every elderly woman, physically and/or mentally disabled, has the right to receive care, education, training and special assistance from the Regional Government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.

(5) The Regional Government seeks an old age protection guarantee system for elderly women.

Second Part
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 3

Every woman with disabilities has the right:
a. to reproductive health;
b. to accept or reject the use of contraceptives;
c. to receive more protection from multiple discrimination;
d. to receive more protection from acts of violence, including sexual violence and exploitation;
e. to obtain education at all units, paths, types and levels of education;
f. to obtain work and decent livelihood according to the type and degree of disability, education and ability;
g. to obtain accessibility in the context of independence;
h. to obtain rehabilitation, social assistance and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
i. to obtain equal rights to develop talents, abilities and social life.

Third Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 4

Every woman victim of violence has the right to:
a. receive protection;
b. determine their own decisions;
c. receive information;
d. receive complaint handling;
e. receive assistance;
f. receive continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage; and
g. receive confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government.

Article 5

Women victims of violence have the right to receive protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government.

Fourth Part
Special Rights for Protection of Women

Article 6

(1) Women have the right to receive special protection from matters that threaten their safety and/or health.

(2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive functions are guaranteed and protected by law.

(3) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of health services related to:
a. menstruation;
b. pregnancy;
c. childbirth; and
d. breastfeeding.

(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (3) can be provided by parties employing female workers in accordance with health service standards.

Article 7

(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain work.

(2) Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through fulfillment of women's rights to receive equal treatment from employers.

(3) Parties employing female workers must provide protection in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

(4) Protection that must be provided by parties employing female workers as referred to in paragraph (3) will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 8

Forms of violence include:
a. Physical Violence;
b. Psychological Violence;
c. Sexual Violence; and
d. Domestic Violence;

Article 9

Physical Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, bruising, injury, wounds or defects to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or cause death.

Article 10

Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 11

(1) Sexual Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. sexual abuse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and
d. forced sexual intercourse with others and/or exploitation of women for commercial purposes and certain other purposes.

(2) Forced sexual intercourse as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter c is excluded for people who have mental disorders or sexual disorders in marital relations.

Article 12

Domestic Violence as referred to in Article 8 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that neglect women within the household scope by someone who is obliged to provide life, care or maintenance to that woman;
b. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that victims are under someone's control; and
c. acts committed by family members that result in pain, bruising, injury, wounds or defects to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or cause death.

CHAPTER IV
PREVENTION, PROTECTION SERVICES, AND EMPOWERMENT

First Part
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 13

(1) The Regional Government carries out integrated efforts to prevent violence against women in the Region.

(2) Integrated efforts to prevent violence against women as referred to in paragraph (1) are coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for protection and empowerment of women.

(3) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are implemented by:
a. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing prevention of acts of violence based on partnership patterns that can involve community organizations, universities, professionals and customary heads and/or community leaders;
b. socializing laws and regulations related to protection of rights of women victims of violence;
c. forming an integrated violence prevention system;
d. providing easy access to obtain civil rights, education, health, employment, training and funding, welfare improvement and social services;
e. providing education about women's rights to the community;
f. fostering and developing community participation and concern for protection of women from acts of violence;
g. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system; and
h. forming cooperation networks in prevention efforts from acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women.

Article 14

(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in Article 13 is implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for:
a. health;
b. education;
c. employment;
d. socio-political affairs;
e. protection and empowerment of women; and
f. peace and order;

(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan with the Regional Apparatus responsible for Protection and Empowerment of Women.

Second Part
Protection Services

Article 15

(1) Implementation of services for victims is carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA.

(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) can receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.

Article 16

Forms of services for protection of women and women victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal assistance; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Article 17

Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 16 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims;
b. follow-up recommendations; and
c. follow-up approval.

Article 18

(1) Assistance services as referred to in Article 16 letter b include:
a. assisting victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. assisting victims during medical examination for legal purposes;
c. assisting victims during examination at police, prosecutors and courts;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at police, prosecutors and courts;
e. maintaining privacy and confidentiality of victims from all interested parties, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

(2) Assistance Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are service activities and actions carried out by assistants from individuals or representatives of institutions that have expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy, and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Article 19

Health services as referred to in Article 16 letter c are implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for health affairs in the form of:
a. medical assistance to victims;
b. care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel;
c. implementation of visum for investigation purposes;
d. provision of services in accordance with SOP to women victims of violence; and
e. health service referrals in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 20

(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 16 letter d are implemented by UPTD PPA in the form of:
a. providing spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including provision of safe houses to protect witnesses and victims from various threats and intimidation.

Article 21

Legal services as referred to in Article 16 letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information about victim rights and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with law enforcement apparatus, volunteer assistants and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds properly.

Article 22

(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 16 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment;

(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. regency/city governments within one provincial area; and
b. relevant agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Third Part
Women's Empowerment

Article 23

(1) Empowerment of women victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(2) Empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings to be able to play a role and participate in activities:
a. health;
b. education;
c. economy;
d. law;
e. employment;
f. politics and government.

Article 24

(1) Implementation of women's empowerment in the health sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a is implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for Health affairs.

(2) Forms of empowerment in the health sector as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of health services to undergo reproductive life and sexual life that is healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence.

(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. Health services before pregnancy, during pregnancy, childbirth and after giving birth;
b. Pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health;
c. Reproductive health services; and
d. Services and provision of adequate lactation rooms at every Regional Government agency, public facilities and industry.

(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Article 25

(1) Women's empowerment in the education sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b is implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for Education in the form of organizing formal and non-formal education.

(2) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve women's abilities.

(3) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (2) includes women's empowerment education, skills education and job training.

(4) Implementation of formal and non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 26

Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the economic sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c is implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for micro, small and medium enterprises and other related agencies in the form of:
a. providing skills and job training;
b. facilitating formation and strengthening of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitating development of marketing networks.

Article 27

(1) Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the legal sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d is implemented by Regional Apparatus and other related institutions in the form of:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitating access and legal consultation services.

(2) Women's empowerment in the legal sector as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 28

Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the employment sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter e is implemented by the Regional Apparatus responsible for labor and other related agencies in the form of:
a. women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain work; and
b. employers who use female workers must provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.

Article 29

(1) Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the political and government sector as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter f is implemented by the National Unity and Politics Agency and other related agencies in the form of:
a. involving women in decision-making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public positions;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.

(2) Women's empowerment in the political and government sector as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

(3) The Regional Government provides guarantees to women to have the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(4) The Regional Government provides opportunities for women to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in regional government.

(5) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties are responsible for providing political education for women.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 30

In efforts to protect women victims of violence, the Regional Government is obliged to:
a. ensure the implementation of fulfillment of women's rights and provision of security guarantees from acts of violence and exploitation efforts against women in the region;
b. establish policies, programs, activities for protection of women and guarantees of victim handling to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the region;
c. provide guidance and supervision in efforts to protect women carried out by the Regional Apparatus handling Protection and Empowerment of Women;
d. seek the formation of women's protection institutions;
e. establish policies, programs and activities for protection of women that have been established; and
f. socialize laws and regulations related to protection of women victims of violence and discrimination;

Article 31

The Regional Government is responsible for:
a. implementing activities to ensure the implementation of fulfillment of women's rights;
b. providing facilities and infrastructure for protection of women;
c. applying minimum service standards in women's protection services and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration that apply;
d. providing implementing officers and functional officers at UPTD PPA;
e. involving the community in implementing protection of women;
f. providing adequate budget for women's protection programs according to regional capacity; and
g. conducting guidance and supervision of the implementation of women's protection in the Region.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONS

Article 32

(1) The Regional Government in efforts to provide and implement protection service handling for women victims of violence, forms UPTD PPA.

(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is under and responsible to the head of the regional apparatus that implements government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

(3) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) has the task of:
a. coordinating and synchronizing handling of women's protection services in cooperation with related parties;
b. maintaining and developing networks and referral systems; and
c. coordinating, compiling and presenting reports on women's protection.

(4) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is grouped into the following roles:
a. health;
b. psychology;
c. social-education;
d. law; and
e. economy.

(5) Further provisions regarding formation, main tasks and functions and management of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 33

(1) In order to coordinate, synchronize policies, programs and activities for protection of women to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the Region, the Regent forms a task force, forum, working group or other institutions.

(2) Membership of the task force, forum, working group or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of related Regional Apparatus, community leaders, religious leaders, and universities.

(3) Further provisions regarding formation of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by the Regent.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

First Part
Monitoring

Article 34

(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness in implementing policies, programs and activities for empowerment and protection of women, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.

(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in implementing policies, programs and activities for empowerment and protection of women in the Region.

(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out periodically starting from planning to policies, programs and activities for empowerment and protection of women for the current year.

(4) Monitoring results as referred to in paragraph (3) are reported to the Regent periodically.

Second Part
Evaluation

Article 35

(1) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women is carried out at the end of each fiscal year.

(2) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women are used as input material for formulating policies, programs and activities for the following year.

Third Part
Reporting

Article 36

(1) To improve coordination of service implementation for women and children in the Region, UPTD PPA reports its task implementation to the Head of the Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection with a copy to the Regent.

(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes implementation of handling women's protection issues in the Region.

Article 37

Further provisions regarding supervision, evaluation, and reporting of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women as referred to in Articles 34 to 36 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 38

(1) The community can participate in implementing protection of women in the region.

(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, business world and mass media.

(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of:
a. providing information or reporting to authorized agencies if they know of acts of violence against women;
b. taking preventive actions against violence against women;
c. conducting skills training for women; and
d. forming social community institutions that handle guidance and empowerment of women.

(4) Further provisions regarding community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING

Article 39

Financing for implementation of protection of women in the Region is sourced from the regional revenue and expenditure budget and other legal and non-binding sources of funds.

CHAPTER X
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 40

(1) Anyone or institution or entity that deliberately does not provide protection to women so as to cause acts of violence against women, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report to related agencies may be subject to administrative sanctions.

(2) Business entities or non-governmental organizations are obliged to provide Protection to Women and acts of Violence in their work environment.

(3) Business entities or non-governmental organizations are obliged to report acts of violence in their work environment to related agencies.

(4) Violations as referred to in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning;
c. temporary suspension from activities;
d. termination of cooperation;
e. revocation of registration certificate;
f. revocation of operational license;
g. sealing;
h. withdrawal of facilities; and/or
i. administrative fine of at least Rp.10,000,000,- (Ten Million Rupiah) and at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (Fifty Million Rupiah)

(5) Provisions regarding procedures for applying administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated in Regent Regulation.

Article 42

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows, orders the Promulgation of this Regional Regulation, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Bekasi Regency.

Promulgated in Cikarang Pusat
on date

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF BEKASI REGENCY,

UJU

Established in Cikarang Pusat
on date

REGENT OF BEKASI,

Signed

EKA SUPRIA ATMAJA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI REGENCY YEAR 2020 NUMBER 5

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI REGENCY WEST JAVA PROVINCE (5/145/2020)