MAYOR OF BLITAR
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR CITY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
MAYOR OF BLITAR,

Considering: a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture, discrimination or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence, therefore they need legal Protection;
c. that based on the provisions in Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015, women's empowerment and child protection are governmental affairs that must be implemented by Regional Governments;
d. that the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence in Blitar City has not been optimal, therefore institutional strengthening and regulations are needed that can guarantee its implementation in accordance with applicable provisions;
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 17 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Small City Regions within the Province of East Java, Central Java and West Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 42) as amended by Law Number 13 Year 1954 concerning Amendment of Laws Number 16 and Number 17 Year 1950 (Former Republic of Indonesia) Concerning the Establishment of Large Cities and Small Cities in Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1954 Number 40, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 551);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3143);
4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);
5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3886);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143); as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
11. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
12. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 48 Year 1982 concerning Amendment of the Territorial Boundaries of the Municipality of Level II Region of Blitar (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1982 Number 75, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);
15. Presidential Regulation Number 87 Year 2014 concerning Implementation Regulations of Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 199);
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 56);
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
21. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 6 Year 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 615);
22. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036);
23. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 Year 2012 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2013 Number 3 Series D);

With Mutual Approval:
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BLITAR CITY
and
MAYOR OF BLITAR

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Blitar City.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Blitar City.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Blitar.
4. Regional apparatus is an element assisting the Mayor and the Regional People's Representative Council in the administration of governmental affairs that are regional authority.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child in the womb.
6. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
7. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, community, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
10. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
11. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
12. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral lines up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
16. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
17. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
21. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
23. Counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert/trained person in such a way that the psychological understanding and ability of the victim and/or perpetrator increases in solving the problems they face.
24. Integrated Service Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UPT is technical service units in the Region that carry out integrated service functions for women and children victims of crime and/or violence, including as a center for information on women's empowerment and child protection.
25. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is one form of UPT established by the Regional Government that functions as an information center, service center and empowerment center for women and children.
26. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of violence.
27. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
The implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of victims;
e. empowerment of women and children victims of violence.

Article 3
(1) The purpose of implementing protection of women and children victims of violence is to:
a. prevent violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity; and
f. Empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The purpose of implementing protection of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), includes aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reintegration and rehabilitation; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4
Forms of violence against women and children can be:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 5
Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death.

Article 6
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b includes acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8
Neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d includes:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties or those responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should, carried out by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 9
Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e includes:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including all prostitution or obscenity activities.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 10
Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and reintegration stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantees of rights related to status as a family member or community member.

Article 11
Child victims of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 10, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 12
Obligations and responsibilities in implementing protection of women and children victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 13
(1) The Regional Government implements efforts to protect women and children victims of violence through:
a. implementing protection policies for women and children victims of violence applied by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. establishment and implementation of P2TP2A functions;
d. ensuring the implementation of service facilities for victims;
e. seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection of women and children victims of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 14
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b, are carried out in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. forming family partners at the village level;
b. forming women and child protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.
(4) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly.

Article 15
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 12 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
UPT

Article 16
(1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection of Child Victims of Violence is realized in part through the establishment of integrated and networked UPTs established by the Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions or other institutions.
(2) UPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is P2TP2A or similar institutions that have the same functions and roles.

Part Two
P2TP2A

Paragraph 1
Establishment

Article 17
(1) P2TP2A is established in the Region.
(2) The institutional structure of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is determined by Mayor Decree.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is under the coordination of the Regional Work Unit or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.

Paragraph 2
Coordination Mechanism

Article 18
(1) The implementation of P2TP2A functions as referred to in Article 17, is carried out through coordination with Regional Apparatus or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of:
a. Coordination meetings with work networks;
b. Consultation;
c. Submission of data and information; and/or
d. Follow-up on case handling.

Article 19
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. Medical services;
b. Medicolegal services;
c. Psychosocial services;
d. Legal services and;
e. Economic independence services.

Article 20
In carrying out the task of providing services to women and children victims of violence, P2TP2A can coordinate with governmental and non-governmental institutions.

Part Three
Prevention

Article 21
(1) To prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, the government carries out empowerment and awareness to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government makes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women and children from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from violence.

Article 22
(1) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 21, is carried out by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. Social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Violence prevention by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Part Four
Assistance Mechanism

Article 23
(1) Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions that cooperate with P2TP2A.
(2) The assistance mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1), is regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Part Five
Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 24
The implementation of services and assistance to victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Part Six
Services

Article 25
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence organized by UPT, include:
a. Medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical conditions carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. Legal aid services to assist victims of violence in undergoing the judicial process;
d. Spiritual services;
e. First psychosocial aid to victims is carried out to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;
f. Assistance to victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions who have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with UPT; and
g. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and provision of economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented according to minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial governments, other district/city governments, communities, families and parents.
(4) Further provisions regarding service procedures, and handling of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), are regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Part Seven
Protection

Article 26
(1) In the event that victims of violence require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1), is handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 27
(1) Safe house as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1), provides a place and/or temporary safe shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The implementation and/or management of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(3) For security and at the request of victims of violence, the manager or organizer of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) may place victims of violence in certain places that are kept confidential.
(4) Further provisions regarding the operation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 28
(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 29
Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 28 paragraphs (2) and (3), are carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of women and children victims of violence according to minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING

Article 30
(1) P2TP2A reports the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out every 3 (three) months.
(4) The reporting procedure as referred to in paragraph (1), is further regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING SOURCES

Article 31
Funds for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 32
(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity.

CHAPTER X
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 33
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, the old institutions that administer women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence may still exercise their authority until new institutions are established.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING

Article 34
Implementation regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 35
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Blitar City.

Established in Blitar
On the date of June 16, 2017

MAYOR OF BLITAR,

Signed.

MUH. SAMANHUDI ANWAR

Promulgated in Blitar
On the date of June 16, 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BLITAR CITY

Signed.

Rudy Wijonarko

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLITAR CITY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR CITY NUMBER 130-2/2017

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL AND
ORGANIZATIONAL DIVISION,

JUARI
Supervisor Level I
NIP. 19651204 198603 1 006