REGENT OF BANDUNG WEST JAVA PROVINCE
COPY

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 21 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BANDUNG,

Considering: a. that in order to improve the position, role and quality of women is an effort to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation and state;

b. that all forms of violence against women constitute violations of human rights so that women need to be protected in their dignity and honor and guaranteed their right to life in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;

c. that in order to protect society, realize equity, and justice as an obligation of regional government to provide protection and welfare for women, a legal foundation is needed in the implementation of protection of women;

d. based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Areas Within West Java Province (State Gazette of 1950) as amended by Law Number 4 of 1968 concerning Formation of Purwakarta Regency and Subang Regency by amending Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Areas Within West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1968 Number 31, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);

3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58 Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

6. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

7. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446).

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANDUNG REGENCY and
REGENT OF BANDUNG

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Bandung Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Bandung.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is an assistant element to the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Women are human beings of female sex starting from infants, adolescents, adults to the elderly, who have been recognized by law.
6. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against Women.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily.
8. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women will or has occurred.
9. Victim is a Woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.

10. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social and psychological to the victim.
11. Victim of Violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights violations or criminal acts as well as acts of Violence committed either by state apparatus, Regional Government apparatus, or individuals.
12. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering to Women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
13. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of the Woman.
14. Parents are biological father and/or mother, step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
15. Discrimination Against Women is any distinction, exclusion, or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil fields, or whatever by Women, regardless of their marital status on the basis of equality between men and Women.
16. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and Women that occurs as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
17. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of Victims including physical, psychological, and sexual health so that Victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
18. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.

19. Repatriation is an effort to return Victims of Violence to their area of origin.
20. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
21. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main tasks of integrated services for Women and child Victims of Violence, including complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and legal assistance.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 2

Every Woman has the right:
a. to life;
b. to have a family and continue offspring;
c. to develop oneself;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to a sense of security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 3

Every Woman with disabilities has the right to obtain:
a. education at all units, paths, types, and levels of education;
b. work and decent livelihood according to the type and degree of disability, education, and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. accessibility in the context of their independence;

e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life.

Part Three
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 4

Every Woman Victim of Violence has the right:
a. to have their dignity and honor respected as a human being;
b. to Health Rehabilitation;
c. to determine their own decisions;
d. to obtain information;
e. to confidentiality;
f. to compensation;
g. to Social Rehabilitation;
h. to complaint handling;
i. to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
j. to assistance;
k. to health and psychological recovery; and
l. to protection from family, community, Regional Government, and social institutions.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

Article 5

Forms of Violence Against Women include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Domestic Neglect;
e. trafficking of Women;
f. exploitation; and
g. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
General

Article 6

Protection of Women in the Region is the obligation and joint responsibility of:

a. Regional Government;
b. Community;
c. Family; and
d. Parents.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 7

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 6 letter a include:
a. implementing policies for Protection of Women from all forms of Discrimination Against Women and acts of Violence;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women;
c. collecting data and information about Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women as well as supporting regulations;
d. conducting education on matters related to Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women;
e. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women;
f. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women; and
g. providing support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of Protection of Women.

(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of Violence, the Regional Government:
a. establishes and facilitates the implementation of integrated service institutions for Victims by involving community elements;
b. facilitates legal assistance and legal services according to the needs of Victims;
c. provides safe houses or alternative residences along with handling procedures, psychosocial and spiritual services;
d. conducts continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and Social Reintegration stage;

e. conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of Victims;
f. encourages public awareness of the importance of Protection for Victims;
g. creates integrated service posts to receive complaints in each sub-district;
h. facilitates comprehensive health services including visum et repertum services and psychological services; and
i. facilitates protection guarantees needed by victims during assistance to Victims.

(3) In carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), the Regional Government takes into account the rights and obligations of Parents, guardians, husbands, or other persons who are legally responsible for Victims.

(4) To carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (3) the Regional Government prepares an action plan for Protection of Women Victims of Violence.

(5) Provisions regarding the action plan for Protection of Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8

(1) The Regent integrates policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women into Regional development planning.

(2) The integration of programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is incorporated into planning and budget documents which include:
a. regional long-term development plan;
b. regional medium-term development plan;
c. strategic plan of Regional Apparatus;
d. Regional Government work plan; and
e. work plan and budget of Regional Apparatus.

(3) The Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women facilitates the integration of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women into the preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (2).

(4) In carrying out activities as referred to in paragraph (3) the Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women coordinates with Regional Apparatus that have direct relevance to the field of Women.

Article 9

(1) The Regent implements policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women to eliminate all forms of Discrimination Against Women and acts of Violence Against Women.

(2) The Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women implements policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women that have been established in cooperation and coordination with relevant Regional Apparatus, law enforcement, community institutions, universities, and the community.

(3) Implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (2) in the form of:
a. policy analysis;
b. advocacy;
c. coordination and communication;
d. socialization;
e. education;
f. training;
g. facilitation; and
h. provision of services.

Article 10

(1) The Regent in implementing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women as referred to in Article 9 makes efforts to:
a. coordinate implementation among Regional Apparatus;
b. cooperate with the central government, provincial government, and other regency/city governments in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. strengthen Gender institutional capacity;
d. facilitate Protection of Women services;
e. provide Protection of Women services;
f. implement affirmative action for Protection of Women; and
g. prepare a data system for Protection of Women including a data system for Violence Against Women.

(2) Implementation of policies, programs, and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the Vice Regent.

Part Three
Obligations and Responsibilities of Community, Family, and Parents

Article 11

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b through letter d are carried out in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. forming Family partners at the village and/or sub-district level;
b. forming Protection of Women units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of Women's rights;
d. providing first aid to Victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if Violence Against Women occurs in their environment.

(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and social media.

(4) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12

Family and/or Parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c and letter d, have full responsibility to prevent all forms of Violence and protect Women as Family members.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION, PROTECTION SERVICES, AND RECOVERY OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 13

To prevent the occurrence of acts of Violence Against Women, the Regional Government:

a. conducts preparation and socialization regarding matters relating to Violence Against Women;
b. conducts socialization of Women's rights;
c. seeks to improve education for Women;
d. opens skills courses for Women to support Family economic needs;
e. creates employment opportunities for Women;
f. provides counseling related to Violence Against Women;
g. empowers social community organizations and Women's organizations at the Regional, sub-district, village, and/or sub-district level to increase Women's knowledge and insight;
h. builds complaint posts for Protection of Women; and
i. forms a network in efforts to prevent Violence Against Women.

Part Two
Protection Services

Article 14

(1) Protection services for Women are carried out in the form of:
a. Protection of the personal security of Victims from physical and mental threats;
b. health services according to the needs of victims;
c. medical services for the purposes of legal evidence;
d. confidentiality of victim identity;
e. provision of testimony during examination at trial without facing the suspect;
f. spiritual guidance services; and/or
g. Protection for Women who work as laborers or workers in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(2) Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a are carried out by Family, law enforcement officials, social institutions, and other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court.

Article 15

(1) In providing Protection services as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1), the Regional Government:
a. provides services and handling as quickly as possible to assistants, witnesses and/or Victims;
b. provides convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for assistants, witnesses and/or Victims;
c. maintains confidentiality of witnesses and/or Victims;
d. guarantees justice and legal certainty for witnesses and/or Victims;
e. provides special service rooms at the offices of the Indonesian National Police;
f. provides apparatus, health workers, social workers, and spiritual counselors;
g. creates and develops a system and procedures for cooperation in implementing service programs involving parties easily accessible to Victims;
h. provides protection for assistants, witnesses, Family, and friends of Victims;
i. provides work and decent livelihood according to the type and degree of disability, education, and ability; and
j. provides protection for Women workers or laborers in accordance with the provisions of protection for laborers or workers in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

(2) The Regional Government in providing Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with the central government, provincial government, other regency/city governments, community, and/or other social institutions.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) is set forth in a cooperation agreement.

Article 16

(1) Provision of Protection of Women services as referred to in Article 14 consists of identification of Victims, legal assistance, medical rehabilitation, psychosocial rehabilitation, Social Reintegration, Repatriation assistance.

(2) Provision of Protection of Women services as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided for Women Victims of Violence including Victims of human trafficking, Women in disaster-prone areas, Women workers, elderly Women, Women with disabilities, and Women Victims of sexual exploitation.

Part Three
Recovery

Article 17

(1) For the purposes of recovery, Victims have the right to obtain:
a. health services;
b. assistance to Victims;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance; and
e. resocialization; and
f. economic empowerment.

(2) For the purposes of recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regional Government is obliged to provide:
a. special service rooms at the offices of the Indonesian National Police;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and
d. other facilities and infrastructure needed for recovery of Victims.

(3) Expert and professional personnel as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b consist of:
a. health workers;
b. social workers;
c. volunteer assistants; and/or
d. spiritual counselors; and/or
e. psychologists.

(4) Health workers as referred to in paragraph (3) letter a are obliged to examine Victims in accordance with their professional standards, restore, and rehabilitate the health of Victims if Victims require treatment.

(5) Social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors as referred to in paragraph (3) letter b, letter c, and letter d are obliged to provide services to Victims in the form of counseling to strengthen and/or provide a sense of security for Victims.

(6) Violations of the provisions as referred to in paragraph (4) and paragraph (5) may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. temporary suspension from activities;
c. termination of cooperation;
d. revocation of registration certificate;
e. revocation of operational permit;
f. withdrawal of facilities; and
g. administrative fines.

(7) Provisions regarding procedures for applying administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (6) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 18

Further provisions regarding procedures for prevention, protection services, and Recovery of Women Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 13 through Article 17 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONS

Article 19

(1) The Regional Government establishes P2TP2A in the implementation of Protection of Women services.

(2) Protection of women services by P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) involve elements of:
a. health;
b. psychology;
c. law;
d. clergy;
e. social; and
f. economy.

(3) Provisions regarding the establishment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20

(1) In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 19, the Regional Government establishes a task force in the implementation of Protection of Women services.

(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Ministry that administers government affairs in the field of religion;
c. Indonesian National Police;
d. Prosecutor's Office;
e. non-governmental organizations; and
f. family welfare development mobilization team.

(3) Provisions regarding the establishment, organizational structure, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 21

(1) Community participation in Protection of Women can be in the form of:
a. providing counseling on Women's rights;
b. providing skills training to support Family economy;
c. forming social community institutions to help Victims of Violence; and
d. reporting to the competent authority if Violence Against Women occurs in their environment.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

Article 22

(1) Every person related to the implementation of Protection of Women who knows of the occurrence of acts of Violence against Women but allows it, does not provide Protection to Victims, and/or does not report to the relevant agency may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning;
c. temporary suspension from activities;

d. termination of cooperation;
e. revocation of registration certificate;
f. revocation of operational permit;
g. withdrawal of facilities; and
h. administrative fines.

(2) Provisions regarding procedures for applying administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
SUPERVISION, EVALUATION, AND GUIDANCE

Part One
Supervision

Article 23

(1) The Regent conducts supervision over the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women.

(2) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness in an integrated manner in the implementation of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regent conducts monitoring through the Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women.

(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women for the current year.

(4) The results of monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) are reported to the Regent periodically.

Part Two
Evaluation

Article 24

(1) The Regional Government conducts evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women at the end of each fiscal year.

(2) The results of evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) are used as input material for the preparation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women for the following year.

(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Three
Guidance

Article 25

The Regent conducts guidance over the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women to relevant Regional Apparatus and sub-districts.

Article 26

Further provisions regarding supervision, evaluation, and guidance of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women as referred to in Article 21 through Article 23 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING

Article 27

Financing for the implementation of Protection of Women is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources of funds

Article 28

(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement Protection of Women.

(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 29

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 30

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bandung Regency.

Established in Soreang
on December 23, 2016

REGENT OF BANDUNG,

signed

DADANG M. NASER

Promulgated in Soreang
on December 23, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF BANDUNG REGENCY,

signed

SOFIAN NATAPRAWIRA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 21

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE: (22/340/2016)

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

DICKY ANUGRAH, SH, M.Si
Pembina Tk. I
NIP. 19740717 199803 1 003

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 21 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL

The position, role and quality of women in current developments have undergone changes in efforts to realize gender equality and justice, both in family life, society, nation and state. Protection of human rights has also become a spotlight, especially related to all forms of violence against women which constitute violations of human rights so that women need to be protected in their dignity and honor and guaranteed their right to life in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination.

In order to protect society, realize equity, and justice as an obligation of regional government to provide protection and welfare for women, the Government of Bandung Regency establishes a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women. The implementation of protection of women is carried out based on Pancasila principles and based on the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, which includes:
a. Protection;
b. Respect for human rights;
c. Justice and gender equality;
d. Non-discrimination; and
e. Best interests of women.

The objectives of establishing the Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women are:
a. To guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and honor;
b. To provide justice and gender equality;
c. To provide protection and a sense of security for women victims of violence and discrimination, as well as criminal acts of human trafficking;
d. To eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women;
e. To provide services to women victims of violence and witnesses;
f. To conduct recovery for women victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by the right to life is the right to live and the right to maintain life and livelihood.

Letter b
What is meant by the right to have a family and continue offspring is the right to form a family and continue offspring through lawful marriage.

Letter c
What is meant by the right to develop oneself is to develop oneself through fulfillment of basic needs and obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, in order to improve quality of life and for the welfare of humanity.

Letter d
What is meant by the right to obtain justice is to obtain recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law.

Letter e
What is meant by personal freedom is to advance oneself in fighting for one's rights collectively to build society, nation and state.

Letter f
What is meant by the right to a sense of security is the right to protection of oneself, family, honor, dignity and property under one's control, as well as the right to a sense of security and protection from fear to do or not do something that is a basic right.

Letter g
What is meant by the right to welfare is to live prosperously physically and spiritually, to have a place to live and obtain a good and healthy living environment, as well as the right to obtain health services.

Letter h
What is meant by the right to participate in government is to obtain equal opportunities in government.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a

What is meant by physical violence is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Letter b
What is meant by psychological violence is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Letter c
What is meant by sexual violence as referred to in Article 15 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Letter d
What is meant by domestic neglect is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of the needs of women as wives in a reasonable manner, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by husbands, parents, guardians, or other parties;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of women as wives as they should, committed by husbands, parents, guardians or other parties
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of the household, even though according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting work

Letter e
What is meant by Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether done within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

Letter f

What is meant by Exploitation as referred to in Article 15 letter f is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or obscenity.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Letter a
What is meant by policy analysis is applied social research that is systematically prepared in order to know the substance of the policy so that information can be clearly known about the problems answered by the policy and problems that may arise as a result of policy implementation

Letter b
What is meant by advocacy is social, political and cultural action carried out in a planned, structured manner, and carried out collectively, involving various tactics including lobbying, campaigns, establishing coalitions, applying pressure through mass action, and research used to change policy.

Letter c
What is meant by coordination is activities carried out by various parties of equal rank to mutually provide information and jointly regulate or agree on something, while communication is a process in which a person or several people, groups, organizations, and society create and use information to be connected with the environment and others.

Letter d
What is meant by socialization is the process of instilling or transferring habits or values and rules from one generation to another in a group or society

Letter e
What is meant by education is a learning process carried out both formally and informally that aims to educate, provide knowledge and develop human potential and realize that learning process better.

Letter f
What is meant by training is a process where people achieve certain abilities to help achieve organizational goals and is part of education concerning the learning process to acquire and improve skills outside the applicable education system in a relatively short time with methods that prioritize practice over theory.

Letter g
What is meant by facilitation is a conscious process to help a community group so that they can successfully carry out their tasks while maintaining the existence of that group.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
What is meant by Monitoring is to know the developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG REGENCY NUMBER 28.