REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SALATIGA CITY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2013
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SALATIGA CITY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2013
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF SALATIGA,

Considering:
a. that all forms of Violence, especially Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination;

b. that discriminatory treatment and Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children in Salatiga City tend to be increasing and can potentially reduce the quality of family and community life, thus requiring integrated handling including prevention efforts, case management, and post-crisis management for Victims of Violence;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children;

Observing:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 17 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Small City Regions within the Province of East Java, Central Java, and West Java;

3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

7. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

8. Government Regulation Number 6 Year 1988 concerning Coordination of Vertical Agency Activities in the Regions (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 10, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3373);

9. Government Regulation Number 69 Year 1992 concerning Changes to the Territorial Boundaries of the Municipality of Second Level Region Salatiga and the Regency of Second Level Region Semarang (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 114, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3500);

10. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

11. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 Year 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children (Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Year 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);

12. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 3 Year 2007 concerning Principles of Regional Financial Management (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2007 Number 3);

13. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 8 Year 2008 concerning Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Regional Government of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2008 Number 8);

14. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of the Regional Secretariat of Salatiga City and the Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2008 Number 9), as amended by Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 7 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of the Regional Secretariat of Salatiga City and the Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2011 Number 7);

15. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 10 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Agencies of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2008 Number 10), as amended by Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 8 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 10 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Agencies of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2011 Number 8);

16. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 11 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions, Integrated Licensing Service Office, and Civil Service Police Unit of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2008 Number 10), as amended by Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 9 Year 2011 concerning Second Amendment to Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 11 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions, Integrated Licensing Service Office, and Civil Service Police Unit of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2011 Number 9);

17. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Sub-districts and Sub-district Offices of Salatiga City (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2008 Number 12);

18. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 5 Year 2011 concerning Implementation of Public Services (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2011 Number 5, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Number 4);

19. Regional Regulation of Salatiga City Number 1 Year 2012 concerning Medium-Term Regional Development Plan of Salatiga City Year 2011-2016 (Regional Gazette of Salatiga City Year 2012 Number 1);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SALATIGA CITY
and
THE MAYOR OF SALATIGA

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Salatiga City.

2. Regional Government is the Mayor and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.

3. Mayor is the Mayor of Salatiga.

4. Regional Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is a Regional Work Unit within the Regional Government that implements certain regional government affairs based on the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks.

5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of Victims carried out by family, integrated Services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.

6. Implementation of Protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of Violence, case management and post-crisis management, coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation.

7. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and distress whether physical, sexual, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.

8. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.

9. Gender-Based Violence is any act based on gender differences that results in suffering or distress physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life, including domestic violence.

10. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child still in the womb as referred to in Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection.

11. Violence against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion, and all forms of treatment carried out against children that results in and is not limited to physical, sexual, psychological violence, economic exploitation, including neglect and ill-treatment that degrades the dignity of Children.

12. Complaint is notification regarding an incident of violence either in writing or orally by the Victim or other parties to interested parties.

13. Victim Recovery is all efforts to strengthen Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.

14. Accompaniment is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, as well as translation for the purpose of self-strengthening of Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children to resolve the problems they face.

15. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and Victims that supports the reunification of Victims into the family environment or family substitute that can provide Protection and fulfillment of Victim needs.

16. Safe House (shelter) is temporary housing used to provide Protection for Victims.

Article 2
Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. best interests of the Victim;
c. justice and Gender equality;
d. victim protection;
e. maternal survival;
f. child survival, growth, and development;
g. respect for the child's opinion;
h. openness;
i. integration;
j. not blaming the victim;
k. empowering;
l. victim confidentiality; and
m. decision-making in the hands of the victim.

Article 3
The Implementation of Gender-Based Protection and Child Protection aims to:
a. prevent all forms of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children that occur within the household and/or community;
b. protect and provide a sense of security for victims;
c. provide Accompaniment to victims;
d. provide integrated services to victims;
e. seek Recovery and Social Reintegration; and
f. increase synergy and community participation as well as stakeholders.

Article 4
The Implementation of Gender-Based Protection and Child Protection has a scope, including:
a. rights and obligations of Victims;
b. obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government, community, family, and parents;
c. implementation;
d. organization;
e. resources;
f. community participation; and
g. guidance, control, and supervision.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

Article 5
(1) Every Victim of Gender-Based Violence and Children has the right to:
a. obtain Protection for the security of themselves, their family, and their property, and be free from threats related to information that will be, is being, or has been provided;
b. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of Protection and security support;
c. be free from ensnaring questions;
d. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
e. receive services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and according to needs;
f. Recovery and Social Reintegration; and
g. obtain legal, psychological, spiritual, economic, social accompaniment and translation.

(2) The rights of Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 6
Every Victim of Gender-Based Violence and Children is obligated to:
a. provide true and accountable information to interested parties; and
b. be willing to become a witness if it does not endanger themselves and receive security guarantees.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

Article 7
The Regional Government, community, family, and parents are obligated and responsible for the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children.

Article 8
(1) In the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, the Regional Government is obligated and responsible to:
a. prevent the occurrence of Violence;
b. provide Protection for Victims of Violence;
c. provide Recovery and Social Reintegration services;
d. facilitate the implementation of integrated services;
e. provide facilities and infrastructure;
f. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
g. encourage and increase community participation; and
h. cooperate with service provider institutions in prevention, protection and Recovery efforts for Victims of Violence.

(2) To carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs concerning the Elimination of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children;
b. establish service institutions for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children; and
c. conduct monitoring and evaluation.

(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations and responsibilities as well as authority as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must consider the rights and obligations of parents, family or other persons who are legally responsible for the Victim.

Article 9
In the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, the community, family, and parents are obligated and responsible to:
a. prevent the occurrence of Violence incidents;
b. provide information and report Violence incidents to interested parties; and
c. participate in handling Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION

Article 10
The Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children consists of:
a. prevention;
b. case management;
c. post-crisis management;
d. coordination and cooperation;
e. increasing community participation; and
f. monitoring and reporting.

Article 11
Prevention as referred to in Article 10 letter a, includes:
a. forming a coordinated, integrated, and synchronized network for prevention and handling of Violence based on partnership patterns;
b. establishing a Violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to Violence;
c. organizing communication, information, and education regarding Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children along with prevention and handling efforts; and
d. organizing socialization of Laws and Regulations related to Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children.

Article 12
Case management as referred to in Article 10 letter b, includes:
a. providing Complaint services for cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children;
b. providing temporary Protection in safe houses (shelters);
c. providing Medicolegal services;
d. conducting legal Accompaniment in handling and resolving cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children, both inside and outside the court; and
e. providing special legal Protection for Child Victims of Violence in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 13
Post-crisis management as referred to in Article 10 letter c includes:
a. providing physical Recovery at health Service institutions;
b. assisting Victim repatriation;
c. providing psychosocial Recovery and Accompaniment;
d. providing spiritual guidance Services;
e. preparing families and communities in the social reintegration process; and
f. providing skills training services and increasing economic access.

Article 14
(1) Coordination and cooperation as referred to in Article 10 letter d, include:
a. conducting coordination and inter-regional cooperation in handling cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children;
b. conducting coordination and cooperation with institutions handling Gender and Child issues.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes Accompaniment, referral, repatriation, Social Reintegration, and development of integrated Service systems.

Article 15
Increasing community participation as referred to in Article 10 letter e, includes:
a. fostering community awareness of cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children; and
b. encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children;
c. fostering local wisdom in handling Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children;
d. strengthening community groups in handling Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children; and
e. disseminating information about Laws and Regulations related to Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children.

Article 16
Monitoring and reporting as referred to in Article 10 letter f includes monitoring, documentation, and reporting on the handling and resolution of cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children.

CHAPTER V
ORGANIZATION

Article 17
(1) The Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children is carried out by a non-structural institution under the coordination of the SKPD that oversees women's empowerment and Child Protection.

(2) The non-structural institution as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of the Regional Government, elements of vertical agencies in the field of law enforcement, community elements, and relevant stakeholder elements.

(3) The non-structural institution as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duty to:
a. implement Protection efforts for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, including prevention, case management, post-crisis management, as well as monitoring and reporting;
b. prepare action plans, programs, and activities for the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children;
c. prepare service standards for the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children; and
d. report the results of task implementation and be accountable to the Mayor.

(4) Further provisions regarding the establishment, membership, and description of duties as well as work procedures of the non-structural institution as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
RESOURCES

Article 18
Resources for the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children consist of:
a. human resources;
b. supporting facilities and infrastructure; and
c. financing.

Article 19
Human resources as referred to in Article 18 letter a can come from civil servants, academics, practitioners, and professionals.

Article 20
Supporting facilities and infrastructure as referred to in Article 18 letter b can be in the form of secretariat offices, safe houses (shelters), lactation rooms, operational vehicles, as well as supporting facilities and infrastructure according to needs.

Article 21
Financing as referred to in Article 18 letter c is sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Central Java Province;
c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Salatiga City; and/or
d. other legal and non-binding funding sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 22
Community participation in the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, includes:
a. providing information and/or reporting every incident of Violence that is known;
b. providing Protection for Victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing Accompaniment to Victims and/or the community in handling and resolving cases of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children; and
e. assisting in the repatriation and Social Reintegration process.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE, CONTROL, AND SUPERVISION

Article 23
Guidance and control of the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children include:
a. providing guidelines, instructions, guidance and direction, as well as supervision;
b. coordinating the preparation and implementation of action plans, programs, and activities;
c. providing consultation on program and activity implementation as well as providing solutions to obstacles faced; and
d. implementing monitoring and evaluation.

Article 24
Supervision of the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children is carried out by functional officials in the field of supervision in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 25
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Salatiga City.

Established in Salatiga
on May 20, 2013
December 27

MAYOR OF SALATIGA,

Seal signed

YULIYANTO

Promulgated in Salatiga
on May 20, 2013

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF SALATIGA CITY,

Seal signed

AGUS RUDIANTO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SALATIGA CITY YEAR 2013 NUMBER 6

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SALATIGA CITY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2013 20
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

In essence, Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children constitute forms of social discrimination, violations of human rights, and crimes against human dignity. The issue of Gender-Based Violence needs serious attention, therefore the state has issued Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence and Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, which can serve as a foundation in creating a community and state life filled with peace, equality, and gender-based social justice.

Law Number 23 Year 2004 has stated that all forms of Violence within the household scope, whether affecting one partner (husband/wife) or family members (especially children) constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination that must be eliminated, so that the state and/or society must prevent and are obligated to fulfill the rights of every citizen to obtain Protection in order to avoid and be free from Violence, threats of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth.

Discriminatory treatment and Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children in Salatiga City can potentially reduce the quality of family and community life, thus requiring integrated handling. The Government of Salatiga City carefully captures the issue of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children and subsequently implements regional development programs based on the spirit of strengthening opportunities, equality, and Gender-Based social justice as stated in the Medium-Term Development Plan of Salatiga City Year 2011-2016. Nevertheless, in line with community aspirations, the Government of Salatiga City deems it necessary to increase attention, response, and action in handling these issues.

In relation to this, the Government of Salatiga City together with the Regional People's Representative Council of Salatiga City needs to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children, which regulates clearly, firmly, and comprehensively that is useful for providing understanding, knowledge, and education regarding various forms of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children as well as to provide legal certainty to Victims about where they should seek Protection.

This Regional Regulation is also intended to provide understanding and instill values that every citizen without exception has the right to obtain a sense of security and be free from all forms of Violence, whether occurring within the household (family) or community scope.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
letter a
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is protection for all victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence against Children without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status, and physical and mental condition.

letter b
What is meant by "best interests of the victim" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.

letter c
What is meant by "Gender justice" is fair treatment given to women and men.

What is meant by "Gender equality" is a condition and position that describes harmonious, balanced, and equal relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in development implementation as well as enjoying development results in family life, as well as in society, nation and state.

letter d
What is meant by "Victim Protection" is providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.

letter e
What is meant by "maternal survival" is ensuring that a mother does not experience death occurring during pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum, whether caused by physical and non-physical conditions.

letter f
What is meant by "child growth and development" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to education, the right to play, the right to create and recreate.

What is meant by "child survival" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to identity and the right to enjoy the highest attainable health status.

letter g
What is meant by "respect for the child's opinion" is respect for children's rights to participate and express their opinions in decision-making, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.

letter h
What is meant by "openness" is that in the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children it is transparent among integrated service providers.

letter i
What is meant by "integration" is that in the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children it is carried out by building coordination between service providers, including medical services, legal Accompaniment, psychologists, spiritual counselors, social workers, and police.

letter j
What is meant by "not blaming the victim" is an attitude and treatment of not blaming the victim for the occurrence of Violence experienced.

letter k
What is meant by "empowering" is that every effort provided must be able to strengthen victims, whether physically, psychologically, socially or economically.

letter l
What is meant by "victim confidentiality" is every action taken to ensure Victims are in a safe condition from threats or other actions that threaten the life and psychology of Victims.

letter m
What is meant by "decision-making in the hands of the victim" is the victim's right to determine the best choice in resolving their problem.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.

Letter c
What is meant by "Medicolegal" is the effort to collect evidence for the purpose of proof in the judicial process.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SALATIGA CITY NUMBER 6.