- 1 - 
MAYOR OF MADIUN
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF MADIUN,

Considering : a. that forms of violence against women and children constitute a form of violation of human rights based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that acts of violence against women and children will have prolonged physical, psychological, sexual, social and economic impacts, therefore a sense of security and protection needs to be provided;

c. that at present there is no Regional Regulation that guarantees protection for women and children victims of violence in Madiun City;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 16 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large City Regions Within the Provinces of East Java, Central Java, West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 45);

- 2 - 

3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

6. Government Regulation Number 49 Year 1982 concerning Amendment to the Territorial Boundaries of the Municipality of Second Level Region of Madiun (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1982 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3244);

7. Presidential Regulation Number 18 Year 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict;

8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

- 3 - 

9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;

10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;

11. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 Year 2012 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2012 Number 3 Series D);

12. Regional Regulation of Madiun City Number 02 Year 2009 concerning Civil Servant Investigators within the Madiun City Government (Regional Gazette of Madiun City Year 2009 Number 1/E);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF MADIUN CITY
and
MAYOR OF MADIUN

DECIDES:

To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Madiun City.
2. Regional Government is the Madiun City Government.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Madiun.
4. Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security, hereinafter abbreviated as BPMKB and KP, is the Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security of Madiun City.

- 4 - 

5. Appointed Official is the Head of the Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security of Madiun City.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Protection of Women is all efforts made by families, government and others aimed at women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
9. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually, or psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

- 5 - 

12. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
13. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Service is an action that must be immediately taken for victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against victims.
16. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence from within/outside the country to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
18. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
19. Empowerment is strengthening victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
20. Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection for victims in accordance with determined operational standards.

- 6 - 

21. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
22. Integrated Service Center for Acts of Violence Against Women and Children, hereinafter referred to as PPT, is a form of government and non-government network that organizes community-based integrated services handling victims of violence against women and children which includes legal, medical, and psychosocial assistance services.
23. Minimum Service Standards, hereinafter abbreviated as SPM, is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. best interests of victims; and
f. empowerment.

Article 3

(1) Implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence;
b. protect victims of violence;

- 7 - 

c. prosecute perpetrators of violence; and
d. maintain the integrity of harmonious and prosperous households.

(2) Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic neglect; and
e. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 4

(1) Everyone is prohibited from allowing acts of violence against women and children to occur.
(2) Everyone is obliged to report the occurrence of violence against women and children to the competent authority.
(3) Protection of women and children victims of violence is carried out by:
a. Regional Government;
b. related agencies along with other social institutions;
c. family and/or closest relatives;
d. community; and/or
e. educational institutions.
(4) Protection efforts for women and children in case of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. forming work networks in violence prevention efforts based on partnership patterns;
b. providing repressive protection in the form of compensation and curative in the form of medical assistance, psychosocial rehabilitation; and

- 8 - 

c. conducting education and socialization regarding laws and regulations related to protection of women and children victims of violence.
(5) Further provisions regarding protection efforts for women and children as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
RESPONSIBILITY

Article 5

Implementation of services for women and children victims of violence is the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family; and/or
d. parents.

Article 6

(1) The Regional Government implements efforts to prevent violence against women and children by:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

- 9 - 

(2) To anticipate the occurrence of violence, the Regional Government is obliged to provide and organize services for women and children victims of violence by:
a. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for victims involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for women and children victims of violence;
c. conducting continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and social reintegration stage.
(3) The Regional Government in implementing violence prevention and anticipation efforts against women and children as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of the community, family and/or parents who are legally responsible for victims.

Article 7

Community responsibility as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3) is implemented in the form of:
a. preventing acts of violence against women and children; and
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or competent authorities.

Article 8

Family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3) have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

- 10 - 

CHAPTER V
VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 9

Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to:
a. receive protection from family, police, prosecutors, courts, advocates, social institutions, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on protection determination from the court;
b. health and psychological services according to medical needs;
c. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with statutory provisions;
e. spiritual guidance services;
f. right to information on case developments;
g. right to safe house (shelter) services;
h. right to restitution;
i. right to psychosocial services/recovery; and
j. right to social reintegration.

Article 10

(1) In the event that women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 9 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 11

(1) Implementation and/or management of safe houses is carried out by BPMKB and KP.

- 11 - 

(2) For the safety and/or at the request of victims of violence, the manager or organizer of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is obliged to place victims of violence in a certain confidential location.
(3) Further provisions regarding the implementation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutional

Article 12

(1) Implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework.
(2) Further provisions regarding PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Two
Forms and Service Mechanisms

Article 13

(1) Forms of protection services for women and children victims of violence organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at physical recovery of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services are forms of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;

- 12 - 

c. psychosocial services are services provided by companions in the context of traumatic recovery of victim conditions, including provision of space and victim housing to protect victims from threats and intimidation for victims;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing judicial processes;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so victims can be independent.
(2) Further provisions regarding service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to Standard Operating Procedures regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Three
Service Principles

Article 14

Implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, empathetically, non-discriminatorily, easily accessible and with guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 15

PPT managers organize services in accordance with service principles as referred to in Article 14.

CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS

Article 16

SPM for Integrated Services for women and children victims of violence includes:
a. handling complaints/reports;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. law enforcement and legal assistance; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration.

- 13 - 

Article 17

(1) SPM as referred to in Article 16 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at community health centers and hospitals;
c. coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for women and children victims of violence in PPT;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children;
f. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal assistance;
g. coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.
(2) Further provisions regarding SPM as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
EMPOWERMENT

Part One
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 18

Implementation steps for empowerment of women victims of violence include:
a. job training;

- 14 - 

b. productive economic enterprises and/or joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 19

Implementation steps for empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in Article 18 are carried out by:
a. procuring the needs required for entrepreneurship training for women victims of violence, to improve business knowledge, attitudes and skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large enterprises as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of women victims of violence;
e. seeking provision of capital for women victims of violence; and
f. expanding information access and promoting productive economic enterprise results of women victims of violence.

Part Two
Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence

Article 20

Implementation steps for empowerment of child victims of violence include efforts to increase children's understanding not to commit violence.

Article 21

Implementation steps for empowerment of child victims of violence as referred to in Article 20 are carried out by:
a. skills training according to children's interests; and
b. fulfillment of both formal and non-formal education.

- 15 - 

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure continuity and effectiveness of integrated steps in implementing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by BPMKB and KP.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of regional work units implementing policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Monitoring is conducted from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence every year.

Article 23

(1) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence is conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when needed as required.
(2) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence are used as input material for formulating policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with statutory provisions.

- 16 - 

CHAPTER X
REPORTING

Article 24

The Mayor through the Appointed Official reports the implementation of SPM for integrated services for women and children victims of violence annually in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 25

(1) The Mayor through the Appointed Official conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of SPM for integrated services for women and children victims of violence in the Region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision of implementation instructions;
b. guidance;
c. supervision; and/or
d. monitoring and evaluation of implementation for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 26

(1) In implementing protection for women and children victims of violence, the community may:
a. form family partners at the Sub-district level by the community;
b. conduct independent socialization of women's and children's rights;

- 17 - 

c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to competent authorities if violence against women and children occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. individuals;
b. community social institutions;
c. non-governmental organizations;
d. educational institutions;
e. religious institutions;
f. private sector; and/or
g. mass media.

CHAPTER XIII
FUNDING

Article 27

Funding for implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER XIV
INVESTIGATION

Article 28

(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are given special authority as Investigators to conduct investigations of criminal violations of this Regional Regulation, as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.

- 18 - 

(2) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are certain civil servant officials within the Regional Government appointed by authorized officials in accordance with statutory provisions.
(3) The authority of Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. to receive, seek, collect, and examine information or reports concerning criminal acts so that such information or reports become complete and clear;
b. to examine, seek, and collect information about individuals or Bodies regarding the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts;
c. to request information and evidence from individuals or Bodies in connection with criminal acts;
d. to examine books, records, and other documents concerning criminal acts;
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, recording and other documents, and to seize such evidence;
f. to request expert assistance in carrying out criminal investigation tasks;
g. to order someone to stop and/or prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and to examine the identity of persons and/or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. to photograph persons related to criminal acts;
i. to summon persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. to terminate investigations; and/or

- 19 - 

k. to take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts according to accountable law.
(4) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) notify the commencement of investigations and submit investigation results to the Public Prosecutor through the Police Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with provisions regulated by Law.

CHAPTER XV
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 29

(1) Violations of provisions as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (2) are punishable by imprisonment of a maximum of 3 (three) months and/or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 25,000,000.00 (twenty-five million rupiah).
(2) In the event that acts as referred to in paragraph (1) are committed by Civil Servants, additional sanctions are imposed in accordance with statutory provisions.
(3) Criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) are violations.
(4) Violations of provisions as referred to in Article 4 paragraphs (1) and (2) are subject to sanctions in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

Further provisions as implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation are established at the latest 3 (three) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

- 20 - 

Article 31

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Madiun City.

Established in M A D I U N
on 15 October 2015

MAYOR OF MADIUN,

signed

H. BAMBANG IRIANTO

Promulgated in M A D I U N
on 3 May 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY,

signed

MAIDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN CITY YEAR 2016
NUMBER 7/D

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY EAST JAVA PROVINCE: 343-9/2015

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN
AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

That every citizen has the right to live free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, and to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence, violence against women and children constitutes a violation of human rights and therefore needs to receive protection to ensure their right to life in accordance with human dignity without discrimination.

The Regional Government has an obligation to provide protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, socially, psychologically, including neglect or ill-treatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child. The existence of women and children victims of violence has not yet received adequate services, therefore minimum services for victims of violence are needed.

This Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is based on Pancasila, and based on the 1945 Constitution, and refers to many Laws, especially those regulating protection of women and children victims of violence.

- 2 - 

Among them are Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence and other related laws and regulations.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children victims of violence in Madiun City so as to avoid threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, protection for women and children victims of violence needs to be carried out in the form of regional regulations.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for women and children victims of violence, particularly in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and children victims of violence in Madiun City.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
letter a
Sufficiently clear

letter b
What is meant by the principle of "justice" is a state where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to obtain access, as well as welfare.

What is meant by the principle of "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

letter c
What is meant by the principle of "non-discrimination" is attitudes and treatment toward women and children without making distinctions based on gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

- 3 - 

letter d
What is meant by the principle of "victim protection" is protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity, and property under one's control, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.

letter e
What is meant by the principle of "best interests of victims" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.

letter f
What is meant by "empowerment" is strengthening victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3
paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear

paragraph (2)
letter a
What is meant by "Physical violence" is an act that results in pain, illness or serious injury such as slapping, hitting, spitting, pulling hair/grabbing, kicking, burning with hot objects, hitting/injuring with weapons and or causing disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.

letter b
What is meant by "Psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

- 4 - 

letter c
What is meant by "Sexual violence" includes but is not limited to:
a. forced sexual intercourse committed against persons residing within the household and/or forced sexual intercourse against one person within the household with another person, for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes;
b. by violence or threat of violence forcing a woman who is not his wife to have intercourse with him;
c. by violence or threat of violence forcing someone to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
d. intentionally committing violence or threat of violence forcing a child to have intercourse;
e. intentionally committing violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing deception, a series of lies or persuading a child to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed.

letter d
What is meant by "economic neglect" is neglecting the economic needs of wife or children or family members or relatives such as not providing for the wife, even spending the wife's money, not providing or withholding wages of domestic workers or drivers and includes acts of restricting and/or prohibiting family members from working appropriately.

letter e
What is meant by "restriction of movement" is restricting the movement of wife or children in developing their potential both for economic and social purposes such as prohibiting gathering and socializing in the community and restricting the movement of relatives such as preventing domestic workers or drivers from communicating or relating with family.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

- 5 - 

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
letter a
Handling reports/complaints of victims of violence against women and children, with the main indicator being coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units.

Handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against women and children can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely coverage of availability of officers in integrated service units who have the ability to follow up on community complaints about violence against women and children, in this case the ability to reach victims and follow up on complaints related to alleged violence against women and children;

- 6 - 

letter b
Health services for women and children victims of violence, with the main indicator being coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at community health centers capable of managing KtP/A and PPT/PKT at Hospitals.

The health services referred to are services that include promotional, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects carried out by trained health workers, namely specialist doctors, doctors, dentists, nurses/midwives who have received training on medical management of violence against women and children victims of violence. The health services referred to are carried out at hospitals that provide integrated services and also for women and children at community health centers that provide comprehensive basic services.

Health services for women and children victims of violence can be measured through supporting indicators:
a. coverage of community health centers capable of managing KtP;
b. coverage of Regional General Hospitals/vertical General Hospitals/Regional General Hospitals/private Hospitals/Police Hospitals that implement integrated services for women and children victims of violence;
c. coverage of health workers trained in case management of victims of violence against women and children at community health centers; and
d. coverage of health workers trained in case management of victims of violence against women and children at hospitals.

letter c
Social rehabilitation for women and children victims of violence with the main indicator being coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units and coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units.

- 7 - 

Social rehabilitation services for women and children victims of violence can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely coverage of trained social rehabilitation officers and coverage of officers trained in conducting spiritual guidance.

letter d
Law enforcement and legal assistance for women and children victims of violence with the main indicators being coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children and coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal assistance services.

Law enforcement is action by apparatus authorized by the State to carry out duties and functions as enforcement of applicable laws and regulations. Legal assistance is anything related to aspects related to the legal field provided to a person in criminal or civil judicial processes.

Law enforcement for women and children victims of violence can also be measured through supporting indicators:
a. coverage of completion of handling cases of violence against women and children at the police level;
b. coverage of availability of women and children service units (UPPA) at Regional Police and District/City Police;
c. coverage of availability of facilities and infrastructure at UPPA;
d. coverage of availability of Police trained in providing gender-sensitive services;
e. coverage of availability of prosecutors trained in prosecuting cases of violence against women and children; and
f. coverage of availability of judges trained in handling cases of violence against women and children.

Furthermore, legal assistance services can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely coverage of availability of legal companion officers or advocates who have the ability to accompany witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children.

- 8 - 

letter e
Repatriation and Social Reintegration for women and children victims of violence, with the main indicators being coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence and coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.

Repatriation and Reintegration are efforts to return victims to their area of origin to be returned to nuclear family, substitute family, or community. Specifically for social reintegration services, it can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely coverage of availability of trained officers to conduct social reintegration.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by needed as required is if there are developments in laws and regulations.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

- 9 - 

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN CITY NUMBER 36