COPY
MAYOR OF BANDUNG CITY
WEST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG CITY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2025
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
MAYOR OF BANDUNG,

Considering:
a. that women have a strategic position as an asset of the nation, therefore empowerment and protection of women must be carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner through acceleration of fulfillment of empowerment and protection of women in community, national and state life;

b. that every woman has the right to survival, growth, development and to obtain protection from threats of fear, treatment that degrades dignity, self-worth, human dignity and has the right to obtain access to and control over economic, political, social, and cultural resources, so that women can play a role and participate actively in social life;

c. that to guarantee legal certainty in the implementation of empowerment and protection of women as well as carrying out mandatory regional government affairs, regulation in a Regional Regulation is necessary;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

Noting:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

-2-

4. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 238, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);

5. Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 238, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);

6. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);

7. Law Number 4 Year 2024 concerning Welfare of Mothers and Children in the First Thousand Days of Life Phase (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 98, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6923);

8. Law Number 104 Year 2024 concerning Bandung City in West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 290, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 7041);

9. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

10. Presidential Regulation Number 55 Year 2024 concerning Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 73);

11. Regional Regulation of West Java Province Number 2 Year 2023 concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women (Regional Gazette of West Java Province Year 2023 Number 2, Supplement to Regional Gazette of West Java Province Number 264);

-3-

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BANDUNG CITY
and
MAYOR OF BANDUNG CITY

DECIDES:

To Establish:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Part One
General

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. City Region hereinafter referred to as Region is Bandung City Region.

2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.

3. Mayor is the Mayor of Bandung.

4. Regional Government Administration is the implementation of government affairs by the regional government and regional people's representative council according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the broadest autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as intended in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.

5. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Institution which is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.

6. Woman is a person or human who has a uterus, experiences menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding.

7. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over economic, political, social, and cultural resources, so that women can regulate themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.

8. Protection of Women is all efforts to protect and provide a sense of security to women as well as fulfillment of their rights through consistent, structured, and systematic attention.

-4-

9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their children, or father and children or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward and downward up to the third degree.

10. Regional Apparatus is an assistant element to the Mayor and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.

11. Every Person is an individual or corporation, whether legal entity or not.

12. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women.

13. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

14. Handling is action taken to provide complaint services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement, legal services, repatriation, and social reintegration.

15. Companion is a trusted person who has the competence to accompany Victims in accessing rights to handling, protection and recovery.

16. Accompaniment is activities and actions carried out by companions during the service process.

17. Institution is a Service/Agency/Office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides accompaniment.

18. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

19. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an operational technical implementation unit in a work unit that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, which functions as an organizer of Integrated Services for women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, and other problems.

20. Integrated Service is the implementation of integrated, multi-aspect, cross-functional and cross-sectoral services for Victims, Victim's Families, and/or Witnesses of Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence.

-5-

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Part One
Principles

Article 2

The principles of Empowerment and Protection of Women are:
a. protection;
b. non-discrimination;
c. kinship;
d. inclusivity;
e. synergy;
f. order and legal certainty;
g. sustainability; and
h. accountability.

Part Two
Purpose

Article 3

This Regional Regulation is formed to serve as a guide for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection of Women by Regional Government, business world and Community in development services in the Region.

Part Three
Objectives

Article 4

The objectives of forming this Regional Regulation are as follows:
a. to serve as a guide for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection of Women by Regional Government, business world and Community;

b. to guarantee legal certainty in the implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women by Regional Government, business world and Community;

c. to realize synergy between Regional Government, business world and Community in organizing effective, efficient, transparent and accountable handling services for Empowerment and Protection of Women victims of acts of violence;

d. to empower Women both individually, family, group and Community to be able to live independently; and

e. to prevent, serve and handle Women victims of acts of violence and Women experiencing vulnerability to achieve independence.

-6-

Part Four
Scope

Article 5

The scope of this Regional Regulation is as follows:
a. women's rights;
b. Women's Empowerment;
c. Protection of Women;
d. guidance and supervision; and
e. community participation.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Article 6

Every Woman in the Region has the right:
a. to life;
b. to have a family and continue offspring;
c. to develop oneself;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to security;
f. to welfare; and
g. to participate in government.

Article 7

(1) The right to life as referred to in Article 6 letter a, includes:
a. the right to maintain life and improve living standards;
b. the right to obtain tranquility, security, peace, happiness, physical and spiritual welfare; and
c. the right to a good and healthy environment.

(2) The right to have a family and continue offspring as referred to in Article 6 letter b, is to form a family, continue offspring through legal marriage in accordance with religion and laws and regulations.

(3) The right to develop oneself as referred to in Article 6 letter c, includes:
a. the right to fulfillment of basic needs to grow and develop properly;
b. the right to protection for personal development, to obtain education, educate oneself and improve quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
c. the right to develop and obtain benefits from science and technology, arts and culture for the welfare of individuals, nation and state;

-7-

d. the right to obtain information to develop oneself and social environment in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
e. the right to seek, obtain, own, store, process, and convey information using all types of available means in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
f. the right to fight for self-development, both personally and collectively, to build society, nation, and state in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
g. the right to participate in conducting social activities in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
h. the right to participate in planning and implementing government policies in accordance with laws and regulations;
i. the right to assemble and associate in accordance with laws and regulations; and
j. the right to obtain education and teaching in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms.

(4) The right to obtain justice as referred to in Article 6 letter d, includes:
a. the right to receive equal treatment without discrimination; and
b. the right to submit applications, complaints, and lawsuits, whether in criminal, civil, or administrative cases;

(5) The right to security as referred to in Article 6 letter e, includes:
a. the right to protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity, and property rights;
b. the right to protection from violence in digital space including cyber harassment;
c. the right to recognition before the law as a personal human being; and
d. the right to be free from threats that violate religious, social, and legal norms.

(6) The right to welfare as referred to in Article 6 letter f, includes:
a. the right to perform work and receive fair wages in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. the right to maternity leave, granted to working Mothers for at least the first 3 (three) months, and the next 3 (three) months if there are special conditions proven by a doctor's certificate;
c. the right to rest time, granted to working Mothers for 1.5 (one and a half) months or in accordance with a doctor's certificate, or midwife if experiencing miscarriage;

-8-

d. the right to obtain proper opportunities and facilities for health and nutrition services and to perform lactation during working hours;
e. the right to guarantee fulfillment of Mother's rights, husbands have the right to obtain leave to accompany wives during childbirth, for 2 (two) days and can be given for a maximum of the next 3 (three) days or according to agreement.

(7) The right to participate in government as referred to in Article 6 letter g, includes:
a. the right to be elected and to elect;
b. the right to have a career in government; and
c. the right to convey aspirations directly or through intermediaries in government.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Part One
Implementation of Empowerment

Article 8

(1) Regional Government is obligated and responsible for Women's Empowerment efforts.

(2) Women's Empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with laws and regulations.

(3) Women's Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. socio-cultural;
b. economic;
c. legal; and
d. political.

Article 9

(1) Women's Empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter a is implemented by Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment, social, cultural, education, health, tourism affairs with the participation of individuals, Community, educational world and business world.

(2) Women's Empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage fulfillment of formal education in stages and strengthening women's capacity in informal and non-formal education according to potential to improve their social status;

-9-

b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts;
c. strengthening women's capacity through social institutions and/or cultural preservation center institutions;
d. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
e. active participation of women in socializing and educating the Community to develop themselves in social and cultural fields;
f. including women in various socio-cultural and tourism events at various levels both local, national and international; and
g. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, sports, arts and culture for the advancement of Women.

Article 10

(1) Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter b is implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Regional Apparatus in charge of manpower affairs;
c. Regional Apparatus in charge of industry and trade affairs;
d. Regional Apparatus in charge of tourism and culture affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises affairs;
f. Work Unit in charge of economic affairs;
g. Work Unit in charge of welfare affairs; and
h. participation of individuals, Community, educational world and business world.

(2) Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. job training;
b. productive economic business and joint economic business;
c. facilitation of capital and employment accessibility; and
d. facilitation of marketing network development.

(3) Job training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. briefing, workshops, guidance for women to be ready for work;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

(4) Productive economic business and joint economic business as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b includes:
a. entrepreneurship skills training;
b. facilitation of joint business group formation; and
c. accompaniment of business implementation.

(5) Facilitation of capital and employment accessibility as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c includes:
a. assistance for work facilities and infrastructure;
b. facilitation of working capital; and
c. employment accessibility that is fair for women.

(6) Facilitation of marketing network development as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d includes:
a. facilitation of women's business product marketing;
b. facilitation of women's business product marketing domestically and abroad; and
c. inclusion of women's groups in economic, industrial and trade promotion.

Article 11

(1) Women's Empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter c, is implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Work Unit in charge of legal affairs; and
c. participation of individuals, Community, educational world and business world.

(2) Women's Empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, consultation, information and education services;
b. facilitating access and consultation services and legal assistance;
c. conducting socialization and education regarding women's rights and women's obligations;

-11-

d. providing capacity strengthening to Women so they can perform legal actions independently and responsibly;
e. facilitating discussion activities, FGDs, training that raises issues/problems regarding law in local, national and international perspectives; and
f. encouraging Women to be actively involved and contribute in advocacy education, and government as well as business world.

(3) Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12

(1) Women's Empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter d, is implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Work Unit in charge of general government affairs;
c. participation of individuals, Community, educational world and business world.

(2) Women's Empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. involvement of Women in decision making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for Women to hold public positions;
c. participation in political activities in various political activities; and
d. self-development through political education.

(3) Regional Government must provide a certain percentage to Women Civil Servants for managerial positions, according to needs through established mechanisms.

Article 13

In order to realize the implementation of Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 5 letter b is carried out through:
a. providing access for Women to education, health, social services and other strategic services;
b. encouraging Women's involvement in the development process;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals, and family resilience; and
d. encouraging programs to increase Women's independence in economic, political, legal, social, cultural fields, and other strategic fields.

-12-

Part Two
Women's Empowerment Institution

Article 14

(1) Formation and development of Women's Empowerment service provider Institutions is implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus in charge of government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and child protection;
b. Regional Apparatus in charge of manpower affairs;
c. Regional Apparatus in charge of industry and trade affairs;
d. Regional Apparatus in charge of tourism and culture affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises affairs;
f. Work Unit in charge of welfare affairs;
g. Work Unit in charge of economic affairs;
h. participation of individuals, Community, educational world and business world.

(2) Provisions regarding the formation of Women's Empowerment service provider Institutions are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 15

(1) Every Woman victim of acts of violence has the right to obtain continuous protection and handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

(2) Handling of Women victims of acts of violence must be kept confidential unless otherwise determined by the provisions of laws and regulations.

(3) In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain professional Accompaniment services based on the victim's condition and needs.

(4) Regional Government provides integrated Services for comprehensive and integrated protection and handling.

(5) Integrated services as referred to in paragraph (4) are coordinated by the Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment and child protection affairs.

-13-

Part Two
Forms of Acts of Violence Against Women

Article 16

(1) Forms of Violence against Women include:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence; and
d. psychological violence.

(2) Forms of physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, include any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to someone's body, fainting and/or causing death.

(3) Forms of sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, include sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forcing intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or other non-commercial purposes.

(4) Forms of economic violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, include neglecting Women by not providing proper living support.

(5) Forms of psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to victims.

Article 17

(1) Every Woman victim of acts of violence must receive protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(2) Protection of Women victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to Women who experience acts of violence in the family, Community, educational world, office and business world environment.

Part Three
Regional Government Responsibility for Protection of Women Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 18

(1) Prevention of acts of violence against Women is implemented by all Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented comprehensively and in an integrated manner.

-14-

(3) Regional Government is responsible for taking actions to prevent violence against Women in the form of:
a. collecting data and information on violence and victims of acts of violence in the family, Community, educational world, office and business world environment in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. conducting socialization to the Community about anti-violence values against Women;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of victims of acts of violence;
d. establishing service standards for Protection of Women victims of acts of violence;
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Protection of Women victims of acts of violence; and
f. preparing reports on the implementation of prevention of Protection of Women victims of acts of violence.

(4) Regional Government is responsible for providing and organizing services for Women victims of acts of violence in the form of:
a. service Institutions for Women victims of acts of violence;
b. encouraging Community awareness about the interests of protection of Women victims of acts of violence; and
c. preparing reports on the implementation of service Protection of Women victims of acts of violence.

(5) Regional Government in carrying out its responsibilities as referred to in paragraphs (3) and (4) must pay attention to the rights of victims, victim's families and/or other parties legally related to victims.

(6) Prevention actions by Regional Government can be carried out through efforts, as follows:
a. conducting socialization about acts of violence against Women that occur in the domestic realm and/or public realm;
b. conducting socialization on handling Women victims of acts of violence in the domestic realm and/or in the public realm;
c. conducting socialization about women's rights;
d. seeking to increase Empowerment and Protection of Women;

-15-

e. facilitating and/or opening access to skills training to support the welfare of families of victims of acts of violence;
f. conducting socialization to individuals, families/groups and Community about reporting procedures if violence against Women occurs;
g. empowering social community institutions and women's organizations to prevent acts of violence against Women; and
h. forming social networks (networking) in efforts to prevent and handle Women victims of acts of violence.

Part Four
Protection of Women Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 19

(1) Regional Government provides protection to Women victims of acts of violence implemented comprehensively and in an integrated manner.

(2) Protection of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. social protection;
b. medical protection;
c. legal protection;
d. economic protection; and
e. psychological protection.

Article 20

(1) Social Protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter a is in the form of support to ensure the survival of Women from social vulnerability to ensure fulfillment of proper living needs.

(2) Medical protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter b is in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the victim's physical condition carried out by medical and paramedical personnel at the nearest health service facility from the victim according to the victim's needs.

(3) Legal protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter c is in the form of Services and Accompaniment to assist victims in undergoing legal and judicial processes by providing legal assistance, legal consultation and legal Accompaniment to victims.

-16-

(4) Economic protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter d is in the form of services for skills and to provide economic access according to the identification of economic empowerment needs of victims by considering:
a. age;
b. education level;
c. expertise;
d. interests and talents;
e. experience in participating in training; and/or
f. work history.

(5) Psychological protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter e is in the form of psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, ability to be independent in problem solving.

(6) Other psychological protection is in the form of Accompaniment of victims to recover from traumatic conditions.

(7) Provision of temporary shelter intended to protect victims from various threats and intimidation as well as to facilitate data collection and information gathering from victims.

(8) Placement of victims in temporary shelter by considering:
a. level of threat to victims that endangers life;
b. victim's security and safety;
c. acceleration of victim handling and recovery;
d. ease of access in victim accompaniment; and
e. preparation for victim's return before returning to area of origin.

Article 21

Protection as referred to in Article 19 is carried out through efforts to provide fast services and handling to witnesses and/or victims, as follows:
a. providing fast services and handling to witnesses and/or victims;
b. providing convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for witnesses and/or victims;
c. maintaining confidentiality of witnesses and/or victims;
d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for witnesses and/or victims;
e. provision of health personnel, social workers, spiritual counselors, psychologists, and legal advisors;
f. forming and developing Protection service programs for Women victims of acts of violence by involving the business world and Community to facilitate Community access to services; and
g. providing protection for Companions, witnesses, victims and their families.

-17-

Article 22

Implementation of Protection services for Women victims of acts of violence is not charged and is carried out appropriately, carefully and easily accessible to the community.

Part Five
Community Complaint Services

Article 23

(1) Regional Government in implementing Protection policies for Women victims of acts of violence must provide complaint services in the form of UPTD PPA.

(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is tasked to:
a. receive reports or victim outreach;
b. provide information about victim's rights;
c. facilitate provision of health services;
d. facilitate provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitate provision of social rehabilitation, psychosocial empowerment, social empowerment and social reintegration services;
f. provide legal services;
g. identify economic empowerment needs;
h. identify temporary shelter needs for victims and victim's families that need to be fulfilled immediately;
i. facilitate needs of victims with disabilities;
j. coordinate and cooperate on fulfillment of victim's rights with other Institutions; and
k. monitor fulfillment of victim's rights by law enforcement apparatus during court proceedings.

Article 24

(1) Regional Government forms a Protection service task force for Women by Mayor Decree.

(2) Regional Apparatus that administers Women's Empowerment and child protection affairs must issue Standard Operating Procedures in implementing complaint services.

-18-

Article 25

(1) Regional Government facilitates social community institutions as a community self-help effort in Protection of Women from acts of violence.

(2) In order to realize the implementation of Protection of Women victims of acts of violence is carried out through:
a. providing access for Women victims of acts of violence to obtain education, health, social Services and other strategic services;
b. encouraging involvement of Women victims of acts of violence in the process of resolving problems and victim recovery psychologically and physiologically as individuals, family members, groups and community;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals, and personal resilience, family resilience and Community resilience; and
d. encouraging programs that can increase Women's independence in economic, political, legal, social, cultural fields, and other strategic fields.

Article 26

Further provisions regarding procedures for implementing Empowerment and Protection of Women are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 27

(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of Empowerment and Protection of Women.

(2) Forms of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities of Empowerment and Protection of Women.

-19-

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 28

(1) Community can participate in planning and implementing Empowerment and Protection of Women policies.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), can be submitted through submission of suggestions, opinions orally and in writing through Regional Apparatus that administers Women's Empowerment and Child Protection affairs.

(3) Community, Institutions/community organizations and business world individually and/or institutionally can participate in financing/funding programs and activities of Empowerment and Protection of Women organized by Regional Government.

(4) Community, Institutions/community organizations and business world individually and/or institutionally can participate in monitoring and evaluation.

(5) Every form of Community participation is recorded and reported to Regional Government through Regional Apparatus that administers Women's Empowerment and Child Protection affairs.

(6) Regional Government can provide awards to Community that has been actively involved and has met requirements in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
FINANCING

Article 29

Financing for implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women activities, can be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

-20-

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bandung City.

Established in Bandung
on June 30, 2025

MAYOR OF BANDUNG,

signed.

MUHAMMAD FARHAN

Promulgated in Bandung
on June 30, 2025

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BANDUNG CITY,

signed.

ISKANDAR ZULKARNAIN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG CITY YEAR 2025 NUMBER 7
REGISTRATION NUMBER, REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG CITY WEST JAVA PROVINCE (7/58/2025)

Verified as true to the original
LEGAL SECTION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF BANDUNG CITY,

-21-

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG CITY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2025
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL

The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, mandates the authority of regional government to regulate and manage its own government affairs directed to accelerate the realization of community welfare through improvement of services, empowerment and community participation. Regional Government authority is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.

Implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare by always paying attention to interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, a government affair related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, basic environmental infrastructure is mandatory to be fulfilled.

Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to humans by nature, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or seized by anyone. In the context of Enforcement of Human Rights (HAM) to guarantee justice for every individual by seeking prevention of all forms of unbalanced treatment or deemed detrimental to other parties, whether individual to individual, between groups of individuals, or between individuals and between government and society, including the process of marginalization of women that causes women to be vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in the domestic and public realm.

Women have equal and equal rights with men, but in some discriminatory conditions, the government is obliged to implement affirmative action so that women's rights and women in vulnerable groups need to receive protection so they do not experience violence and can live a decent life according to the principles of humanity, equality and justice. Women's empowerment and women's protection are implemented in order to realize gender equality and justice. To carry out these affairs, efforts are needed to increase women's resource capacity and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender-disaggregated data.

-22-

Bandung City Government as a party that has the authority to regulate and protect citizens of Bandung City, deems it necessary to continuously carry out and formulate regulations to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and women's protection in Bandung City. This Regional Regulation is expected to be able to encourage efforts to improve the physical and mental conditions of women in fulfilling their rights and living needs as part of human rights from various development fields, increase commitment and effectiveness of regional government in implementing policies, programs and activities as well as encourage institutional capacity of government and society that improves women's quality of life.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

-23-

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG CITY NUMBER 7