WEST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KARAWANG REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF KARAWANG,

Considering : a. that women as one of the community groups whose existence becomes potential and
development assets need to be empowered so they can
actualize their potential optimally to
participate in development;
b. that women as national assets who play a role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations
need to receive guarantees for
the fulfillment of their rights and protection from acts of violence and discrimination;
c. that in order to make effective a comprehensive and integrative system in empowering and protecting women in Karawang Regency
regulation is needed regarding empowerment and
protection of women;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Empowerment and Protection of Women;

Considering : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within
West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of
Indonesia Number 9) as has been amended by
Law Number 4 of 1968 concerning
the Establishment of Purwakarta Regency and Subang Regency
by amending Law Number 14
of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas
within West Java Province
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968
Number 31, Supplement to the State Gazette of the
Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On
The Elimination of All Form of Discrimination Against
Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year
1984 Number 29 Supplement to the State Gazette of the
Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004
Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the
Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of
Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement
to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587)
as has been amended several times most recently
by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning
the Second Amendment to Law Number 23
of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State
Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58,
Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
5679).

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KARAWANG REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF KARAWANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Karawang Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Karawang.
3. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration who lead the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Women are human beings of female gender starting from babies, adolescents, adults up to the elderly.
6. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge and skills capacity so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
7. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties, either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Task force is a semi-permanent working group, consisting of related regional apparatus work units, community, universities, and/or community organizations chaired by the Regional Secretary, who is given additional tasks within a certain period of time, to implement certain programs/activities in the field of women's empowerment and protection.
9. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy carried out rationally and systematically to achieve and realize gender equality and justice in a number of aspects of human life (household, community and state), through policies and programs that consider the experiences, aspirations, needs and problems of women and men in the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all policies and programs in various fields of life and development.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Article 2

Every woman has the right:
a. to live and improve her standard of living;
b. to security;
c. to a good and healthy environment;
d. to have a family and continue offspring;
e. to work and receive fair wages for her work;
f. to obtain proper education;
g. to obtain care, education, training and/or special assistance;
h. to personal freedom; and
i. to health.

Article 3

Women's Rights in Employment include:
a. Having equal employment opportunities with men;
b. Equal opportunities from the selection process, work facilities, benefits to the right to receive equal wages;
c. Receiving paid leave including maternity leave; and
d. Women cannot be dismissed by the employer on grounds of pregnancy or marital status.

Article 4

Women's rights in the field of Health include:
a. Freedom from death during childbirth;
b. Obtaining health services especially family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth and post-childbirth.

Article 5

Women's rights in the field of education are to obtain opportunities to attend education and receive scholarships.

Article 6

Women's rights in marriage and family are to:
a. Choose her husband freely;
b. Marriage is based on the consent of both parties; and
c. Have equal rights and responsibilities both as parents to their children and as husband and wife.

Article 7

Women's rights in public and political life are the right to vote and be elected and to have equal opportunities to participate in the formulation of government policies up to their implementation.

Article 8

(1) Women's empowerment is implemented to improve the position, role and quality of Women in family life, society, and nation.
(2) Women's Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed so that Women:
a. Obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings;
b. Are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and security activities; and
c. Have equality in enjoying development results.

Article 9

(1) Women who become victims of violence have the right to receive protection, information, integrated services and continuous handling.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out up to the rehabilitation stage.
(3) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (2) can be carried out by individuals, groups, regional government institutions, and/or non-governmental institutions.

CHAPTER III
INSTITUTIONAL

Article 10

The Regional Government facilitates the establishment of Women's Empowerment and Protection institutions in the Region.

Article 11

(1) The Regent establishes policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against Women.
(2) Implementation of policies, programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regional Apparatus in charge of women's empowerment and Protection.
(3) The Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (2) can cooperate with the community, universities, community organizations, other regency/city governments, and/or international institutions in women's empowerment and Protection activities.
(4) Forms of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (3) are carried out through:
a. policy analysis;
b. implementation coordination;
c. advocacy;
d. socialization;
e. public communication;
f. information delivery;
g. education;
h. training;
i. service facilities;
j. service provision;
k. model development; and
l. other activities.
(5) Integration of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is set forth in documents:
a. Regional long-term development plan;
b. Regional medium-term development plan;
c. Regional Apparatus strategic plan;
d. Regional Government work plan; and
e. Regional Apparatus work plan and budget.
(6) Provisions regarding establishing policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 12

(1) Implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Protection in the Region as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) is carried out by forming, developing, strengthening or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions.
(2) Membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of related Regional Apparatus, community, Universities and/or community organizations.
(3) Provisions regarding the formation and membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 13

(1) Provision of Women's Empowerment and Protection services as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (4) letter j, includes:
a. identification of victims of criminal violence;
b. legal assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. psychosocial rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration;
f. repatriation assistance; and
g. other forms.
(2) Women's Empowerment and Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) are provided to women:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. in conflict-prone and disaster areas;
d. workers;
e. elderly;
f. persons with disabilities;
g. victims of sexual exploitation;
h. who are heads of households;
i. pregnant and/or breastfeeding; and
j. other vulnerable victims.

CHAPTER IV
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 14

(1) The community can participate in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals, groups and/or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) can take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 15

(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated steps in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for women's empowerment and Protection.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Protection in the Region.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus implementing policies, programs and activities implementing policies, programs, and activities for women's empowerment and Protection.
(4) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) is carried out starting from the planning stage, up to the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection for the current year.

Article 16

(1) The Regional Government evaluates the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Evaluation results as referred to in paragraph (1) are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Protection for the following year.

CHAPTER VI
FUNDING

Article 17

Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. Other legal and non-binding sources, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 18

At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all Regional laws and regulations related to Women's Empowerment and protection are declared to remain in force as long as they do not conflict with the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 19

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 20

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Karawang Regency.

Enacted in Karawang
on 12 April 2017

REGENT OF KARAWANG,

signed

CELLICA NURRACHADIANA

promulgated in Karawang
on 19 April 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KARAWANG
REGENCY,

signed

TEDDY RUSFENDI SUTISNA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KARAWANG REGENCY
YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2
.
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KARAWANG REGENCY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE: (3/45/2017)

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,

signed

NENENG JUNENGSIH
NIP. 19640501 199003 2 004