REGENT OF BLITAR
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR REGENCY
NUMBER 11 YEAR 2013
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BLITAR,

Considering : :

a. that women and children are creatures created by God Almighty who possess noble rights and dignity in accordance with their nature as human beings;

b. that there are still many women and children who do not receive their human rights in full, especially women and children who are victims of violence;

c. that all forms of acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of Human Rights, so that women and children who are victims of violence need to receive protection;

d. that the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, is one of the obligations that must be carried out by the Regional Government as one of the efforts to realize community welfare;

e. that to realize protection for women and children who are victims of violence in an integrated and sustainable manner, institutional support and legislation are needed that can guarantee its implementation in a coordinated and directed manner;

In View of : :

f. that based on considerations a, b, c, d, and e, it is necessary to immediately establish a Regional Regulation of Blitar Regency concerning the Protection of Women and Children

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution;

2. Law Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 41), as amended by Law Number 2 Year 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3851);

3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

5. Law Number 3 Year 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668); there is already a newer one Number 11 year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System

6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Convention concerning Minimum Age for Children Allowed to Work) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for The Elimination of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941));

9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

11. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);

12. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4419);

13. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

14. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims) State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

15. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

16. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare;

17. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82);

18. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System;

19. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration;

20. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

21. Government Regulation Number 39 Year 2012 concerning the Implementation of Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 68, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5294);

22. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention On the Rights of the Child (Convention on the Rights of the Child) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1990 Number 57);

23. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment Number 6 Year 2009 concerning Gender Disaggregated Data and Mainstreaming of Children's Rights;

24. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Fulfillment Number 11 Year 2011 concerning Policy for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;

25. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;

26. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Preparation of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) in Development as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Preparation of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) in Development;

27. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products;

28. Regional Regulation of Blitar Regency Number 5 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation Number 19 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Agencies.

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BLITAR REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF BLITAR

DECIDES:

To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Region is Blitar Regency;

2. The Regional People's Representative Council of Blitar Regency hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the DPRD of Blitar Regency;

3. Regent is the Regent of Blitar;

4. Regional Government is the Government of Blitar Regency;

5. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations;

6. Woman is a creature created by God with the female sex, or with reproductive organs in the form of ovaries or egg nests, ovum or egg cells, uterus, and hymen;

7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children still in the womb;

8. Protection of women and children is all efforts to protect women and children, starting from prevention, safeguarding and handling actions, which are aimed at providing a sense of security and comfort to women and children and their families, especially those who are victims of violence;

9. Victim of violence is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or threats of violence whether physical, psychological, sexual or economic both in the domestic sphere and in the public sphere;

10. Violence is any act or omission of obligation that results in misery or suffering whether physical, mental, sexual and economic including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully;

11. Neglect is an act that results in a person's economic dependence on another person in one household;

12. Prevention is all efforts aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence and threats of violence;

13. Safeguarding is all efforts so that women and children who are vulnerable to violence do not become victims of violence;

14. Handling is all efforts aimed at handling cases of violence against women and children and their families including litigation and non-litigation services;

15. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transferring, or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

16. Sexual exploitation is any form of utilization of sexual body organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain profit, but is not limited to all activities of prostitution and sexual abuse.

17. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A) is one form of service facility for women and children consisting of government and non-government elements in an effort to fulfill information and needs in the fields of education, health, economy, politics, law, fulfillment and overcoming acts of violence and trafficking against women and children.

18. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide fulfillment to victims in accordance with the standard operating procedures determined.

19. Child in normal or regular situation is a child who gets the opportunity to grow and develop optimally.

20. Child as victim of violence is a child who becomes a victim of one or all types of violence, whether physical, psychological, sexual, or neglected by parents and family including victims of human trafficking;

21. Child with disability is a child with a disability;

22. Parent is biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, adoptive father and/or mother;

23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree;

24. Guardian is a person or body that in fact exercises parental authority as a parent over a child;

25. Minimum Service Standard (SPM) is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance as well as repatriation-social reintegration especially for women and children victims of violence

26. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is a technical guideline for the implementation of the protection of women and children victims of violence prepared based on Minimum Service Standards according to regional financial capacity.

27. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled by those obligated according to their ability whether physical, mental and spiritual.

28. Related SKPD is an SKPD whose main tasks and functions include handling the protection of women and children.

29. SKPD responsible for regional development planning is the Regional Development Planning Agency of Blitar Regency, hereinafter abbreviated as BAPEDA of Blitar Regency.

30. SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection is the Agency for Women's Empowerment and Family Planning of Blitar Regency.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATION AND BASIC PRINCIPLES

Article 2

The implementation of the Protection of Women and Children is based on Pancasila and founded on the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, and is based on the basic principles of:

a. respect for human rights, women's human rights and children's human rights;

b. justice and gender equality;

c. non-discrimination,

d. protection for confidentiality, security and comfort of victims.

e. the best interests of the child;

f. the right to life, survival, growth and development, and respect for the child's opinion.

CHAPTER III
OBJECTIVES

Article 3

The purpose of implementing the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, is to ensure the protection of women and children, so that they do not become victims of violence and to ensure the fulfillment of the rights of women and children and their families, both before, during and after violence occurs, as well as prevention so that violence does not occur, as well as prevention so that violence does not occur in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IV
SCOPE

Article 4

The scope of implementing the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence includes:

a. implementation of the protection of women and children, both before, during and after violence occurs, as well as prevention so that violence does not occur;

b. regulation of institutions and mechanisms for implementing the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN, ESPECIALLY VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 5

(1) The implementation of the protection of women, children and families who are victims of violence is a comprehensive prevention system, covering protection against all forms of violence, trafficking in women and children, economic exploitation, sexual exploitation, mistreatment, neglect and/or abandonment in all situations including women and children with disabilities, children of migrant worker families, children in conflict with the law, children in emergency situations and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence.

(2) The regional government is obligated and responsible for implementing protection against all forms of violence against women and children and their families.

Part Two
Forms of Services

Article 6

(1) Prevention services are all forms of services provided to all communities in general, especially women and children both legally, socially, culturally and economically that have an impact on increasing knowledge, skills and awareness so as not to become victims and perpetrators of violence.

(2) Safeguarding services are all forms of services provided to the community, especially women and children who have vulnerability to becoming victims of violence, due to their situation and condition and their families. Services provided include legal, social, cultural and economic services that have an impact on increasing knowledge, skills and awareness so as not to become victims and perpetrators of violence.

(3) Handling services include all forms of minimum services both legal, medical, psychosocial, rehabilitation and social reintegration services provided to women and children who are victims of physical, psychological, sexual violence, trafficking in women and children, neglect, and exploitation.

(4) The procedures, mechanisms and service standards for prevention, safeguarding and handling, as referred to in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Institutions

Article 7

(1) The implementation of protection, prevention, safeguarding and handling of women and children, especially victims of violence, is carried out in an integrated manner, covering legal, medical, medicolegal and psychosocial aspects, by the Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A) or another name that has the same role and function as P2TP2A.

(2) The P2TP2A institution and/or other similar names are established by Regent Decree.

(3) The implementation of P2TP2A services and/or other names is carried out by referring to Minimum Service Standards (SPM) and Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in accordance with statutory provisions.

Part Four
Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention and Safeguarding Services

Article 8

(1) Policy formulation, program planning and budgeting for prevention and safeguarding services are implemented with the following mechanisms:

a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of data on women and children in general and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence;

b. coordination and synchronization of program planning with related SKPDs;

c. preparation of programs and activities supported by budgeting; and

d. determination of programs and activities in planning documents.

(2) Implementation of prevention and safeguarding of women and children in general and those vulnerable to becoming victims of violence is implemented with the following mechanisms:

a. implementation of programs and activities contained in SKPD budgeting documents;

b. coordination and synchronization of program and activity implementation with related SKPDs; and

c. monitoring, evaluation and reporting on policies, programs and activities for implementing the protection of women and children.

(3) The mechanism for formulating policies, programs and activities and services is further regulated in minimum service standards and standard operating procedures in Regent Regulations.

(4) Policy formulation, programs and activities for implementing the safeguarding of women and children vulnerable to becoming victims of violence are coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Regional Development Planning.

(5) Prevention and safeguarding efforts for women and children in general and those vulnerable to victimization are implemented by:

a. forming a network in violence prevention efforts;

b. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns among stakeholders;

c. forming a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; and

d. conducting socialization on violence prevention against women, as well as fulfillment of children's and women's rights.

Part Five
Forms and Mechanisms of Handling Services for Victims of Violence

Article 9

(1) Forms of handling services for victims of violence organized by P2TP2A include:

a. medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical conditions carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;

b. medicolegal services are a form of medical services, especially Visum et Repertum and Visum et Repertum Psychiatricum, for the purposes of evidence in the judicial process, starting from the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court levels;

c. legal aid services to assist victims of violence in undergoing the judicial process;

d. spiritual services for moral strengthening according to the religion and beliefs held;

e. first psychosocial assistance to victims is carried out to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;

f. accompaniment of victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions who have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with P2TP2T or other names;

g. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be economically independent; and

h. services to return and/or remain in educational institutions for child victims of violence.

(2) The implementation of handling services for women and children victims of violence is carried out: quickly, safely and comfortably, with empathy, non-discrimination, easily accessible, free of charge and guaranteed confidentiality.

(3) The mechanism and procedures for implementing handling services technically for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT, COMMUNITY, BUSINESS WORLD

Part One
General

Article 10

The Regional Government, community, and business world are obligated and responsible for implementing the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence and their families.

Part Two
Regional Government

Article 11

The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to:

a. build a system for implementing the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, and their families;

b. provide infrastructure including safe houses/shelters, Human Resources including lawyers, doctors and psychologists-psychiatrists, volunteer companions, spiritual figures, economists, and social workers;

c. increase the institutional capacity of protection organizers, victims of violence especially for women, children and their families;

d. build a data and information center on protection, victims of violence especially for women, children and their families;

e. conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection, victims of violence especially for women, children and their families.

Article 12

In carrying out its obligations and responsibilities, the Regional Government has the authority to:

a. make policies and programs;

b. formulate implementation guidelines;

c. organize services;

d. coordinate policies, programs, budgets and services;

e. conduct monitoring, supervision and evaluation of the implementation of protection and prevention of victims of violence especially for women, children and their families.

Article 13

In coordinating the implementation of protection for victims of violence especially for women, children and their families, the Regional Government appoints the Regional Government Work Unit (SKPD) responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as coordinator.

Part Three
Community

Article 14

(1) The community can play a role in carrying out obligations and responsibilities for implementing the protection of women and children, victims of violence especially for women, children and their families.

(2) Community members who know, hear, and see the occurrence of violence are obligated to provide assistance and protection to victims of violence especially women, children and their families.

Part Four
Business World

Article 15

The business world can play a role in carrying out obligations and responsibilities for implementing the protection of victims of violence especially for women, children and their families.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING

Article 16

(1) Financing for the implementation of the protection of women and children, prevention, safeguarding and handling of victims of violence especially women and children, is charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of the Regency, through the SKPD responsible for women's and children's protection affairs.

(2) Budget management for implementing the protection of women and children victims of violence is carried out with the principles of justice, efficiency, transparency and accountability.

CHAPTER VIII
EVALUATION, REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Article 17

(1) Evaluation, reporting and accountability by P2TP2A or other similar names as institutions organizing protection for women and children victims of violence are carried out periodically to the Regent.

(2) The mechanism for evaluation, reporting and supervision of organizers of protection for women and children, especially victims of violence, is regulated by Regent Decree.

CHAPTER IX
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
FOR CIVIL SERVANTS

Article 18

(1) Certain civil servant officials within the Regency Government are given authority to carry out investigations into violations of the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

(2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:

a. receive reports or complaints from a person or family and others, regarding the existence of actions or violations of Regional Regulations;

b. take first action and examination at the scene;

c. summon experts needed in connection with case examination;

d. summon people to be heard and examined as witnesses or suspects;

e. take actions according to law that can be accounted for.

CHAPTER X
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 19

Every person who deliberately allows violence against women and children and/or does not report the occurrence of violence against women and children, is subject to sanctions as regulated in applicable laws and regulations.

Article 20

(1) Every person who informs the whereabouts of victims of violence who are being placed in a confidential location, is threatened with imprisonment of a maximum of 3 (three) months or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

(2) In the event that the act as referred to in paragraph (1) is committed by an official appointed to organize protection, is threatened with imprisonment of a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

Article 21

Organizers or managers of P2TPA and/or Safe Houses who are proven to collect fees from victims of violence are threatened with imprisonment of a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

Article 22

In the event that the act as referred to in Article 21 is committed by an organizer or manager who is a Civil Servant, the sanction is added with employment sanctions in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 23

At the time this Regional Regulation is established and promulgated, all provisions relating to the protection of women and children, especially victims of violence, remain in effect as long as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 24

All forms of operational regulations for the implementation of this Regional Regulation must exist no later than 6 months after this Regional Regulation is established and promulgated.

Article 25

This Regional Regulation comes into effect on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Blitar Regency.

Enacted in Blitar
on 16 December 2013

REGENT OF BLITAR

Signed.

HERRY NOEGROHO

Promulgated in Blitar
on 27 January 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BLITAR REGENCY

Signed.

PALAL ALI SANTOSO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLITAR REGENCY YEAR 2013 NUMBER: 2/E