REGIONAL GAZETTE
BEKASI CITY

NUMBER: 4 2023 SERIES: E
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
MAYOR OF BEKASI,

Considering: a. that every citizen has equal rights to live a dignified life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality and justice;

b. that women are national assets who play a very important role in the national development process, continuation and creation of quality generations so they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;

c. that in order to guarantee the fulfillment of women's constitutional rights to be able to develop their potential optimally so they can participate in various fields of life in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence, discrimination and other violations of women's rights, efforts need to be made for empowerment and protection of women;

d. that Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 12 Year 2012 which regulates Protection of Women is deemed no longer in accordance with legal developments and community needs so a new Regional Regulation needs to be established to guarantee its implementation;

e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019) as amended by Law Number 16 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 1 Year 1974 on Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 186, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6401);

3. Law Number 7 year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia year 1948 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 9 Year 1996 concerning Establishment of Bekasi Level II Regional Municipality (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1996 Number 111, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3663);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

8. Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 06 Year 2016 concerning Government Affairs that are Regional Authority of Bekasi City (Regional Gazette of Bekasi City Year 2016 Number 6);

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BEKASI CITY
and
MAYOR OF BEKASI

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. City Region is Bekasi City Region.
2. City Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of autonomous regions.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Bekasi.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and Regional People's Representative Council in administering government affairs that are regional authority.
5. Regional Apparatus in charge of women and child protection is the Regional Apparatus that has main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in Bekasi City.
6. Women are persons of female gender outside the definition of children.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in families, society and community culture where we live including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
8. Discrimination is any distinction, restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.

9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
10. Household is husband, wife, children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, foster care, and guardianship, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
11. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
12. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge and skills abilities so that women are ready to be utilized according to their abilities.
13. Women's protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in fulfilling their rights carried out consistently and systematically by family, community/social institutions, government, advocates, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court decisions.
14. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially and discrimination against victims that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.
15. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially and discrimination, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
16. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or threats of domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
17. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
18. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.
19. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain other purposes.

20. Human trafficking is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether done within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or causing a person to be exploited.
21. Women's rights are a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly carried out by state apparatus or by the state or by Regional Government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by God Almighty.
22. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and or knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
23. Integrated service is a series of activities to provide protection for witnesses and victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation of health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
24. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
25. Safe House is a temporary shelter for victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
26. UPTD PPA (Protection of Women and Children) is an integrated service institution for victims of violence against women and children established by the government according to needs.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 2
(1) Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. best interests for women;
c. gender justice and equality;
d. protection of women's rights;
e. non-discriminatory; and
f. legal certainty.

(2) Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is carried out with the aim to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights to be able to live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. provide gender justice and equality;
c. improve the quality of women's lives:
d. empower women both individually and in groups as potential and resources in organizing social community life;
e. prevent and handle risks from women's vulnerability so that their survival can be fulfilled according to minimum basic needs;
f. provide protection and provide a sense of security for women victims of violence and discrimination, including criminal acts of human trafficking;
g. prevent and eliminate all forms of violence, discrimination and exploitation against women;
h. provide services to women victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
i. carry out recovery for women victims of violence; and
j. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity.

(3) The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. basic human rights and freedoms of women;
b. obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government;
c. women's empowerment;
d. protection and Prevention of Acts of Violence;
e. special protection for women;
f. community participation;
g. funding;
h. monitoring, evaluation and reporting; and
i. sanctions.

CHAPTER III
BASIC HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 3
Basic human rights and freedoms consist of:
a. right to life;
b. right to have a family and continue offspring;

c. right to self-development;
d. right to obtain justice;
e. right to personal freedom;
f. right to security;
g. right to health;
h. right to welfare; and
i. right to participate in government and development.

Article 4
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and spiritually;
b. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
c. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, live in a family in a legal marriage bond and continue offspring;
d. maintain life and improve her standard of living;
e. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
f. perform legal acts;
g. have work she likes and is also entitled to fair employment conditions;
h. be involved in every stage of the development process;
i. obtain fair work wages in accordance with her work that is comparable and equivalent;
j. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education in accordance with specified requirements;
k. obtain a healthy and clean environment;
l. develop her personality and improve her quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
m. freely choose and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, and/or other political office elections based on equal rights according to laws and regulations;
n. receive special protection in carrying out work or profession against things that can threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive functions; and
o. special rights inherent in women due to their reproductive functions are guaranteed and protected by law.

(2) Women who are adults and or married have the right to perform legal acts themselves unless otherwise determined by their religious law.
(3) A legal marriage can only take place by the free will of the woman and the man in accordance with laws and regulations.

(4) A wife during marriage has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband regarding all matters relating to their married life, relationships with their children and rights of ownership and management of joint property.
(5) After dissolution of marriage a woman has the same rights and responsibilities as her former husband regarding all matters relating to their children, taking into account the best interests of the child.
(6) After dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights as her former husband regarding all matters relating to joint property without reducing children's rights, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(7) Every woman who is disabled, elderly, pregnant has the right to obtain facilities and special treatment.
(8) Every elderly woman, physically and/or mentally disabled, has the right to obtain care, education, training and other special assistance at the expense of regional government in accordance with applicable provisions.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 5
Every woman with disabilities has the right to obtain:
a. education in all units, paths, types and levels of education both public and private;
b. work and decent livelihood according to the type and degree of disability, education and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. provision of accessibility services for their independence (such as preparation of wheelchair lanes in government offices, schools or other public facilities);
e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards;
f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life;
g. special services at public facilities and commercial centers (such as road markers on sidewalks, provision of special parking for women and disabilities in Malls, provision of special toilets for disabilities);
h. special treatment and facilities to obtain health services, population and other affairs (such as waiting rooms specifically designated for disabilities, special mobile services for disabilities for population document processing, etc.); and
i. actively participate in social, arts, sports, economic activities including in politics.

Part Three
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 6
Every woman victim of violence (physical, psychological, sexual, domestic violence and criminal acts of human trafficking) has the right to obtain:
a. right to have her dignity respected as a human being;
b. health recovery, education and psychosocial services from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. right to determine her own decision to take legal action against perpetrators of violence or forgive perpetrators based on humanitarian considerations;
d. complete and reliable information;
e. complaint handling services, consultation and legal assistance;
f. free visum services for victims of violence at RSUD health facilities owned by Bekasi City Regional Government and Private Hospitals that have visum service competence through Regional Apparatus in charge of health;
g. protection both as victims, witnesses including for their families;
h. assistance in legal processes either by advocates, Regional Apparatus related to women's protection, or other community institutions;
i. right to social rehabilitation and reintegration;
j. protection from fear and trauma in safe houses owned by government or private sector.

Part Four
Rights of Women in Emergency Situations

Article 7
(1) Every woman has the right to obtain special services if in emergency situations caused by:
a. Women who become refugees;
b. Women victims of riots;
c. Women victims of natural disasters and non-natural disasters;
d. Women in armed conflict situations;
e. Women victims of terrorism networks;
f. Women victims of kidnapping, sale and victims of sexual exploitation;
g. Women victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
h. Women with HIV/AIDS.

(2) Regional Government through authorized Regional Apparatus, community and business world must be actively involved in efforts to handle and fulfill basic rights of women in emergency situations.

(3) Regional Government can allocate special funds for handling emergency situations.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Part One
General

Article 8
(1) Regional Government is obliged and responsible to provide empowerment and protection to women so they can realize and enjoy a decent standard of living.
(2) Efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. policy, program and activity determination;
b. implementation guideline determination;
c. service delivery by relevant Regional Apparatus;
d. policy, program and activity coordination; and
e. provision of facilities, Infrastructure and facilitation.

Part Two
Policy, Program and Activity Determination

Article 9
(1) Regional Government facilitates the formation of women's empowerment and protection institutions.
(2) Mayor establishes policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the Region.
(3) Implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by forming, developing, strengthening or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions.
(4) Membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) consists of relevant Regional Apparatus, community leaders, religious leaders, business world and education world.
(5) Further provisions regarding the formation of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Three
Implementation of Policies, Programs and Activities

Article 10
Implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection can be carried out with efforts to:
a. cooperate with business world, non-governmental institutions, private companies, foundations, education world and other domestic institutions as well as international institutions, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. conduct regional cooperation, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. provide and facilitate women's empowerment and protection services;
d. compile data systems for women's empowerment and protection;
e. compile prevention programs through comprehensive education and socialization in order to prevent violence against women; and
f. carry out coordination of implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection between Regional Apparatus.

Part Four
Provision of Facilities, Infrastructure and Facilitation

Article 11
(1) Provision of facilities, infrastructure and facilitation of women's protection services as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (2) letter e in the form of:
a. victim identification;
b. legal assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. psychosocial rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration;
f. repatriation assistance;
g. providing safe houses; or
h. other forms.

(2) Provision of facilities, infrastructure and facilitation of women's protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) is given to women:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. elderly who are not independent;
d. disabled;
e. victims of terrorism networks;

f. victims of natural and non-natural disasters;
g. refugee women;
h. victims of sexual exploitation;
i. women heads of families;
j. conflict and disaster prone areas;
k. women workers; and
l. other vulnerable groups.

CHAPTER V
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Part One
General

Article 12
(1) Regional Government is obliged and responsible in women's empowerment efforts.
(2) Women's empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with laws and regulations.
(3) Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy;
b. socio-culture;
c. politics and government;
d. law;
e. education;
f. health;
g. employment; and
h. social security.

Part Two
Empowerment in Economic Field

Article 13
(1) Women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter a is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of economy, employment, industry and trade, welfare, tourism and culture, cooperatives and SMEs, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. job training;

b. productive economic enterprises and joint economic enterprises;
c. capital assistance and employment accessibility;
d. marketing network development facilities.

(3) Job training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. briefing, workshops, guidance for women to be ready to work;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

(4) Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b include:
a. entrepreneurship skills training;
b. facilities for forming joint business groups; and
c. business implementation assistance.

(5) Capital assistance and employment accessibility become the responsibility of regional financial institutions facilitated by Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises as referred to in (2) letter c including:
a. work facilities and infrastructure assistance;
b. facilitating working capital assistance by Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises; and
c. fair employment accessibility for women.

(6) Marketing network development facilities as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d include:
a. marketing assistance for women's business products through government programs;
b. facilitating marketing of women's business products domestically and abroad;
c. including women's business groups to introduce their business products.

Part Two
Empowerment in Socio-Cultural Field

Article 14
(1) Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter b is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of social, culture and tourism, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;

b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts;
c. strengthening women's capacity through social institutions, cultural preservation center institutions;
d. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
e. active participation of women in socializing and educating the community to develop themselves in social and cultural fields;
f. including women in various socio-cultural events at various levels both local, national and international; and
g. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, sports, arts and culture for women's advancement.

Part Three
Empowerment in Politics and Government Field

Article 15
(1) Women's empowerment in the politics and government field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter c is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of government, politics, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the politics and government field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. involvement of women in decision making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in political activities at various levels including general elections;
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.

(3) Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) Women are given the opportunity to obtain the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, or other political office elections based on equal rights through voting in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(5) Women are given the opportunity to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in Regional Government.

(6) Regional Government strives for the proportion of positions in Bekasi City government to be filled by women (such as in positions of school principals (elementary and junior high schools), Sub-district Heads, District Heads, Heads of Regional Apparatus, Heads of Fields and so on, according to needs through established mechanisms
(7) Women are given the opportunity to receive political education and the government is obliged to facilitate it.

Part Four
Empowerment in Legal Field

Article 16
(1) Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter d is carried out by work units in charge of law, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, consultation, information and education services;
b. facilitating access and consultation services and legal assistance;
c. conducting socialization and education regarding women's rights and women's obligations;
d. providing capacity strengthening to women so they can perform legal acts independently and responsibly;
e. promoting discussion activities, FGDs, training that raises legal issues/problems in local, national and international perspectives; and
f. encouraging women to be actively involved in advocacy education, and government and business world contribute to its implementation.

(3) Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part Five
Empowerment in Education Field

Article 17
(1) Women's empowerment in the Education field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter e is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of education, individuals, community, education world and business world.

(2) Women's Empowerment in the education field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. organizing formal, non-formal and informal education for women;
b. organizing formal compulsory education for at least 12 (twelve) years for women carried out by government and private institutions;
c. non-formal education aimed at improving women's abilities and skills carried out through equivalency education package A, Package B and Package C as well as courses/training;
d. women who become victims of violence are protected in their right to obtain continuity of education both online and offline in formal schools, or through non-formal/equivalency education paths;
e. in order to strengthen women's capacity in the field of education, every education provider facilitates the continuity of education for female students.

Part Six
Empowerment in Health Field

Article 18
(1) Women's empowerment in the health field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter f is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of Health, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Women have the right to receive health services in order to undergo healthy, safe reproductive and sexual life, and free from coercion and/or violence.
(3) Empowerment of women is carried out through education, socialization, assistance and guidance on women's rights in the health field, basic health, sexual education, reproductive health, nutritional intake and other related matters.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. health services before pregnancy, during pregnancy, childbirth and after childbirth;
b. pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health; and
c. reproductive health services.

(5) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.
(6) Health empowerment is carried out by strengthening health service institutions carried out by women such as posyandu cadres or other units that have similar functions.

Part Seven
Empowerment in Employment Field

Article 19
(1) Women's empowerment in the employment field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter g is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of employment, individuals, community, education world and business world.
(2) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
(3) Employers who employ female workers must provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.
(4) Women are given the opportunity to be appointed, receive promotions and occupy strategic positions in their workplace in accordance with applicable provisions.
(5) Empowerment and protection of female workers is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Eight
Empowerment in Social Security Field

Article 20
(1) Responsibility for women's empowerment in the social security field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter h is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of social welfare, women's empowerment.
(2) Women are given the opportunity to receive social security guidance facilities.
(3) Women are given the opportunity to obtain rights to social security.
(4) Regional Government can allocate social assistance funds for old age security for women according to regional capacity.

CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION AND PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 21
(1) Efforts to protect and prevent acts of violence against women are carried out in an integrated manner by Regional Government coordinated by Regional Apparatus that has main duties and functions of coordinating women's protection and empowerment.

(2) Protection and prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. forming cooperation networks in efforts to protect women's rights and prevention of acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, education world and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women;
b. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing prevention of acts of violence based on partnership patterns that can involve community organizations, education world, professionals and customary leaders and/or community leaders;
c. forming violence prevention systems;
d. socializing laws and regulations related to protection of rights of women victims of violence;
e. opening accessibility to obtain education, health, employment, training and funding, improving welfare and social services;
f. providing education regarding women's rights for the community
g. building community participation and concern for women's protection from acts of violence;
h. building and providing complete and easily accessible information systems; and
i. providing integrated service institutions for victims of violence against women in the form of UPTD PPA (Protection of Women and Children).

Article 22
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in Article 21 is carried out by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. employment;
e. women's protection and women's empowerment;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.

(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner.

Article 23
Efforts to protect women's rights and prevent violations of women's rights carried out by Regional Government as referred to in Article 22, protection and prevention efforts are also carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community leaders and/or customary leaders;

c. educational institutions; and
d. private parties.

Part Two
Service Providers

Article 24
(1) Service delivery to women victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by Regional Apparatus in charge of women and child protection, UPTD PPA (protection of women and children) or other service institutions that have the same function.
(2) Regional Apparatus in charge of women and child protection, UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) can receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked and tiered manner.

Part Three
Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 25
Services for women victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal assistance; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Article 26
Complaint, consultation and counseling services as referred to in Article 25 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims; and
b. consent for action (Informed consent).

Article 27
(1) Assistance services as referred to in Article 25 letter b include:
a. assisting victims during examination and health recovery processes;
b. assisting victims during medicolegal processes;
c. assisting victims during examination processes at Police, prosecutors and courts;

d. monitoring victims' interests and rights in examination processes at Police, prosecutors and courts;
e. maintaining victims' privacy and confidentiality from all interested parties, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is activities and actions carried out by assistants from individuals or representatives from institutions that have expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Article 28
Health services as referred to in Article 25 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims in all health service facilities in Bekasi City;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at recovering victims' physical condition carried out by medical and paramedical personnel;
c. implementation of visum for investigation purposes is the responsibility of and carried out by Bekasi City Regional General Hospital and private hospitals;
d. financing of visum implementation for investigation purposes is the responsibility of Regional Apparatus authorized for health;
e. providing services according to SOPs to women victims of violence; and
f. referrals to health services for women in accordance with applicable provisions.

Article 29
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 25 letter d include:
a. providing spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) are services provided by assistants in order to restore victims' traumatic conditions, including providing safe houses to protect witnesses and victims from various threats and intimidation.

Article 30
Legal services as referred to in Article 25 letter e to assist victims in undergoing judicial processes by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and judicial processes;

b. accompanying victims at the level of investigation, prosecution and court decisions that have permanent legal force; and
c. coordinating with law enforcement apparatus, volunteer assistants and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds properly.

Article 31
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in article 25 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by Regional Government in coordination with:
a. District/city governments within one provincial area and outside the provincial area;
b. Related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Part Four
Victim Protection Coordination

Article 32
(1) In efforts to provide and organize service handling for victims, Regional Government optimizes the function of UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize service handling by UPTD PPA based on partnerships with related stakeholders;
b. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on women's protection.

(3) Further provisions regarding the formation, main duties and functions and membership of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
SPECIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN

Article 33
(1) Women have the right to receive special protection from things that threaten their safety and/or health.
(2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive functions are guaranteed and protected by law.
(3) Special protection as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of health services related to:
a. menstruation;
b. pregnancy;
c. childbirth; and

d. breastfeeding.

(4) Women are given special protection to take maternity/menstruation leave.
(5) Mechanisms and duration of leave are further regulated in Mayor Regulation.

Article 34
Women victims of acts of violence have the right to receive protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government.

Article 35
(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
(2) Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through fulfillment of women's rights to receive equal treatment from employers.
(3) Employers who employ female workers must provide protection in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) Protection that must be provided by employers to women as referred to in paragraph (3) will be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 36
(1) The community can participate in organizing women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, business world, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of:
a. active role in policy formulation;
b. provision of access and services;
c. cooperation; and/or
d. complaints/reports.

(4) Procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING

Article 37
Funding for implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is sourced from:
a. Bekasi City Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 38
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated steps in implementing policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection, Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in implementing policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is carried out periodically starting from planning up to policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection for the current year.
(4) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is carried out at the end of each fiscal year.
(5) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection are used as input material for formulating policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(6) Mayor submits reports on implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to the Governor.
(7) Implementation of reporting as referred to in paragraph (6) is carried out annually and/or when necessary.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 39
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 12 Year 2012 concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Bekasi City Year 2012 Number 12) is revoked and declared invalid.

Article 40
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know it, orders the Promulgation of this Regional Regulation, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Bekasi City.

Stipulated in Bekasi
on date July 28, 2023

Plt. MAYOR OF BEKASI,

Signed

TRI ADHIANTO TJAHYONO

Promulgated in Bekasi
on date July 28, 2023

Pj. REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BEKASI CITY,

Signed

JUNAEDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 4

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY WEST JAVA PROVINCE: (6/90/2023)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

I. GENERAL

The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates regional government authority to regulate and manage its own government affairs directed to accelerate the realization of community welfare through improving services, empowerment and community participation. Regional Government authority is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.

Implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented toward improving community welfare by always paying attention to interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, a government affair related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled.

Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to human beings, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or deprived by anyone. In the context of Upholding Human Rights (HAM) to ensure justice for every individual, efforts are made to prevent all forms of unbalanced treatment or deemed detrimental to other parties, both between individuals, between groups of individuals, and between individuals and between government and society, including the process of marginalization of women that makes women vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in domestic and public spheres.

Women have the same and equal rights as men, but in some discriminatory conditions, the government must carry out affirmative action so that women's rights and women in vulnerable groups need to receive protection so they do not experience violence and can live decent lives according to the principles of humanity, equality and justice.

Women's empowerment and women's protection are carried out in order to realize gender equality and justice. To carry out these affairs, efforts are needed to increase women's resource capacity and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender-disaggregated data.

Bekasi City Regional Government as the party that has the authority to regulate and protect citizens of Bekasi City, deems it necessary to continuously carry out and formulate regulations to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and women's protection in Bekasi City.

This Regional Regulation is expected to be able to encourage efforts to improve women's physical and mental conditions in fulfilling their rights and life needs as part of human rights from various development fields, increase commitment and effectiveness of regional government in implementing policies, programs and activities and encourage institutional capacity of government and society that improves women's quality of life.

I. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
paragraph (1)
letter a
Sufficiently clear
letter b
Sufficiently clear
letter c
Sufficiently clear
letter d
Sufficiently clear

letter e
Sufficiently clear
letter f
Sufficiently clear
letter g
Sufficiently clear
letter h
What is meant by stages of the development process is through formulation of Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD), Strategic Plan (RENSTRA), Regional Government Work Plan (RKPD), and Work Plan (RENJA).
letter i
Sufficiently clear
letter j
Sufficiently clear
letter k
Sufficiently clear
letter l
Sufficiently clear
letter m
Sufficiently clear
letter n
Sufficiently clear
letter o
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (6)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (7)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (8)
Elderly women are women who have reached 60 (sixty) years and above.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI CITY NUMBER 3