REGENT OF PASURUAN
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
REGENT OF PASURUAN,

Considering: a. that women and children are creatures created by God Almighty who need to receive respect and protection for the sake of their dignity and worth as human beings;

b. that women and children have a strategic position as assets of the nation, so that women's empowerment and child protection must be carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner through acceleration of the fulfillment and protection of the rights of women and children in their personal lives, family, community, nation and state;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning Regional Government of Regencies in East Java (State Gazette of 1950 Number 32) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);

3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

5. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

7. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

8. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

9. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

12. Government Regulation Number 12 of 2017 concerning Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2017 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6041);

13. Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 87 of 2014 concerning Implementing Regulations of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 199);

14. Presidential Regulation Number 61 of 2016 concerning the Indonesian Child Protection Commission (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 135);

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;

16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3 of 2008 Concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;

17. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 927);

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);

20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 42);

21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 903);

22. Joint Regulation of the Minister of Law and Human Rights and the Minister of Home Affairs Number 20 of 2012/Number: 77 of 2012 concerning Human Rights Parameters in the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;

23. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 615);

24. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;

25. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2013 Number 3 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 23);

26. Regulation of the Governor of East Java Number 66 of 2013 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Development of East Java Province (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2013 Number 67 Series E);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PASURUAN REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF PASURUAN

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Pasuruan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of Pasuruan Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pasuruan.
4. Regional Apparatus Organization hereinafter abbreviated as OPD is the Regional Apparatus Organization within the Government of Pasuruan Regency.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
6. Woman is a person (human being) who can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth to children and breastfeed.
7. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
8. Every person is an individual or corporation, whether a legal entity or not a legal entity.
9. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
10. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family members, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court decisions.

11. Women's Empowerment is a systematic and planned effort to achieve gender equality and justice in family and community life.
12. Gender responsive is a policy, program, activity and budgeting that takes into account differences in the needs, experiences and aspirations of men and women.
13. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professionals in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
16. Companion is a person or representative of an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance and has professional competence in their field.
17. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by companions during the service process.
18. Institution is an Agency/Office/Office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that provide assistance.
19. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter referred to as PPTPPA, is an institution/functional work unit providing integrated services and assistance, counseling, referral and advocacy for women and children victims of violence.
20. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
21. Child-Friendly Regency is a Regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of government, community and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
22. Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is a coordinating institution at the city level that coordinates policy efforts, programs and activities to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.
23. Prosperous Family Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PUSYAN GATRA is a forum for activities or a series of family service activities through the provision of IEC, consultation, counseling, guidance and facilitation in order to help realize a small, happy and prosperous quality family.
24. Family Learning Center hereinafter abbreviated as PUSPAGA is a place of learning to improve the family's ability to care for and protect children and create referrals for parenting, education, health, protection for children and parents/families to support optimal child development.
25. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension in the planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development policies and programs.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. best interests of the child;
h. accountability; and
i. gender responsive.

Article 3

Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women, children and family quality;
b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection in the region, including the development of gender and child data systems; and
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article 4

In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter a, it is carried out through:
a. providing access for women and children to education, health and other strategic services;
b. encouraging the involvement of women and children in the development process;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals and family resilience; and
d. encouraging programs that can increase women's independence in the economic, political, legal, social, cultural and other strategic fields.

Article 5

In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter b, it is carried out through efforts to:
a. establish, develop and strengthen the capacity of women's and children's protection institutions including service units for complaints of violence against women and children as well as legal aid services;
b. improve the quality of management human resources;
c. strengthen the institutional capacity of PUG and Children in the region; and
d. strengthen and develop gender and child data systems.

Article 6

In order to implement the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter c, it is carried out through promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 7

Promotive efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. strengthen coordination mechanisms and networking between service units in efforts to handle cases of violence;
b. provide Communication, Information and Education (IEC) materials related to the prevention and handling of violence; and
c. conduct socialization, advocacy and social campaigns in the context of preventing and handling violence.

Article 8

Preventive efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. conduct legal awareness education for the community, especially for women and children;
b. develop massive and sustainable movements involving the community in actions to prevent and handle violence;
c. instill character values, morals, and family resilience; and
d. involve the role and participation of the community in women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 9

Curative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. optimize technical service units related to complaints of violence against women and children;
b. provide adequate facilities and infrastructure for handling complaints, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal aid, repatriation, social reintegration; and
c. handle victims of crime and violence quickly, precisely and accurately by law enforcement officials.

Article 10

Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. provide companions for victims of crime and violence, including among others psychologists, psychiatrists, clergy/spiritual companions, lawyers, medical personnel; and
b. strengthen networking and coordination in the reintegration process and repatriation of victims to their families and/or social environment.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION, ADVANCEMENT, ENFORCEMENT AND FULFILLMENT OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Article 11

Every woman and child has basic rights as human beings that must be protected, advanced, enforced and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 12

Every woman has the right to:
a. live, maintain life and improve their standard of living;
b. live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and mentally;
c. enjoy a good and healthy environment;
d. live in a family in a legal marriage bond based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
e. obtain work according to ability, conditions and fair and decent wages;
f. especially for women with disabilities, have the right to receive facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. play an active role in the political and governmental fields in accordance with their potential and abilities;
h. obtain information and legal services;
i. obtain services to increase their income; and
j. obtain other rights in accordance with their human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 13

Every child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect;
b. obtain their identity;
c. obtain other rights in accordance with their human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
d. worship according to their religion, think, and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under the guidance of Parents or Guardians;
e. obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents;
f. receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties;
g. children with disabilities have the right to obtain special education and children who have excellence have the right to receive special education;
h. children with disabilities have the right to obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
i. be cared for by their own parents, unless there are legal reasons and/or legal rules showing that separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS

Article 14

Every person is obliged to:
a. fulfill the rights of women as referred to in Article 12; and
b. fulfill the rights of children as referred to in Article 13.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONS

Part One
General

Article 15

In the context of women's empowerment and child protection in the Region, the following are established:
a. Integrated Service Center, which may take the form of:
1. PPTPPA;
2. PUSYAN GATRA; and
3. PUSPAGA.
b. Regional Child Protection Commission; and
c. Other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Two
PPTPPA

Article 16

(1) PPTPPA is located at the Regency level.
(2) PPTPPA is under the coordination of the OPD or work unit that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) PPTPPA as referred to in paragraph (1) has the authority to assist in formulating policies on women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) PPTPPA is one form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and
c. an empowerment center for women and children.

Article 17

(1) The management of PPTPPA at the regency level is determined by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PPTPPA may come from elements of the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PPTPPA are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Three
PUSYAN GATRA

Article 18

(1) PUSYAN GATRA is located at the Regency level.
(2) PUSYAN GATRA is under the coordination of the OPD or work unit that handles family welfare resilience and mobilization.
(3) PUSYAN GATRA as referred to in paragraph (1) has the authority to assist in formulating policies on family welfare development.
(4) PUSYAN GATRA is one form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. KKB (population and family planning) Information and Documentation service;
b. a family counseling center; and
c. a family economic business development center.

Article 19

(1) The management of PUSYAN GATRA at the regency level is determined by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PUSYAN GATRA may come from elements of the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PUSYAN GATRA are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Four
PUSPAGA

Article 20

(1) PUSPAGA is located at the Regency level.
(2) PUSPAGA is under the coordination of the OPD or work unit that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) PUSPAGA as referred to in paragraph (1) is a form of violence prevention service for children that has specific programs including:
a. education/parenting;
b. parenting skills;
c. skills to protect children;
d. ability to increase children's participation in the family; and
e. counseling for children and families.

Article 21

(1) The management of PUSPAGA at the regency level is determined by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PUSPAGA may come from elements of the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PUSPAGA are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
GENDER MAINSTREAMING

Article 22

(1) Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
(2) Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and national security activities, and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
(3) Gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women.

Article 23

(1) Gender Mainstreaming aims to implement planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development policies and programs with a gender perspective in order to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national and state life.
(2) Gender Mainstreaming includes all planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies and programs.
(3) Further provisions regarding Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY

Article 24

(1) The Regional Government together with the community and business world in an integrated manner ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth through the development of a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) Further provisions regarding the development of a Child-Friendly Regency as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING

Article 25

Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities of women's empowerment and child protection in the Region is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS WORLD PARTICIPATION

Article 26

(1) The Community and Business World may participate in the implementation of women's empowerment activities.
(2) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, community groups, community organizations and Companies.
(3) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Article 27

(1) The Community and Business World may participate in the fulfillment of children's rights including:
a. prevention efforts;
b. risk reduction and handling of child victims of violence;
c. exploitation; and
d. abuse and neglect, both through individual and institutional efforts.
(2) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (1), is realized by supporting the fulfillment of children's rights including:
a. providing information and or reporting every situation of vulnerability and violence that is known;
b. facilitating or conducting prevention and risk reduction activities;
c. providing protection services for children who become victims;
d. assisting advocacy for victims and/or the community regarding the handling of cases of violence, exploitation, abuse and child neglect;
e. assisting in the repatriation, rehabilitation and social reintegration process;
f. support in the process of fulfilling other children's rights;
g. establishment of integrated child service centers;
h. provision of education scholarships;
i. provision of health cost assistance; and
j. provision of legal aid to children experiencing legal problems.
(3) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out by individuals, families, community organizations and companies.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER X
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 28

Monitoring is carried out periodically and in an integrated manner every 6 (six) months by the OPD that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in coordination with OPDs or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection in the region.

Article 29

Evaluation of the implementation of the women's empowerment and child protection system is carried out by the OPD that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection at least 1 (one) time per year.

Article 30

Reporting on the implementation of the women's empowerment and child protection system is carried out at least 1 (one) time per year and is coordinated by the OPD or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection to the OPD that administers affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection through the OPD Secretary.

CHAPTER XI
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 31

(1) Every person who does not carry out obligations as referred to in Article (14) is subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of:
a. Oral warning;
b. Written warning;
c. Temporary suspension of activities;
d. Permanent suspension of activities;
e. Temporary revocation of permit;
f. Permanent revocation of permit;
g. Administrative fine; and/or
h. Other administrative sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Further provisions regarding administrative sanctions are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 32

Regent's Regulations as implementation of this Regional Regulation are stipulated no later than 1 (one) year after this Regional Regulation is promulgated.

Article 33

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pasuruan Regency.

Stipulated in Pasuruan
On 26 September 2018

REGENT OF PASURUAN,

signed,

M. IRSYAD YUSUF

Promulgated in Pasuruan
On 26 September 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF PASURUAN REGENCY,

signed,

AGUS SUTIADJI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PASURUAN REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 4 NOREG. REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY NUMBER 260-4/2018

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

I. GENERAL

The State as the holder of the mandate of people's sovereignty is responsible for carrying out development to achieve community welfare. This is as mandated by the constitution which has become a national consensus for the Indonesian nation. The 1945 Constitution is a fundamental legal foundation (Fundamental Norm) in formulating the direction and basis for social, political, and state legal policy making.

The State as an organization certainly always has objectives as stated in the fourth paragraph of the preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which states: "Furthermore, to form a Government of the State of the Republic of Indonesia that protects the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian bloodshed and to promote general welfare, educate the nation's life, and participate in implementing world order based on independence, lasting peace and social justice."

Paying attention to the fourth paragraph of the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, it is clearly stated that this country was formed with the aim of protecting the entire nation and all Indonesian bloodshed and improving people's welfare. This is also the objective of the formation of regional government which aims to accelerate the realization of community welfare through improvement, service, empowerment, and community participation, as well as increasing regional competitiveness by taking into account the principles of democracy, equity, justice, privileges and specificities of a region in the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.

Explicitly, the objectives of the Indonesian State reflect several national objectives of the Indonesian nation. The objectives contained in this fourth paragraph constitute the constitutional promise of the Indonesian state to all its people and at the same time become the basic rights of the community. Therefore, the State is obliged to make various efforts in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of its citizens.

One of the four objectives is to protect the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian bloodshed and promote general welfare. This means that the Indonesian nation must be free from all forms of actions that can harm its citizens, efforts to maintain this conduciveness are carried out in order to create a prosperous and beneficial social life without looking at certain groups and groups, because the meaning of the entire nation is a reflection for all Indonesian people without exception, both men, women and children.

The protection that is the responsibility of the State is not only for every person both in the individual and group sense along with the cultural identity attached to them, but this protection must also be interpreted as an effort to promote general welfare for the entire nation. So there need to be steps that must be taken by the State to achieve the above objectives by empowering its people, especially those who have been considered weak and marginalized. Based on these considerations, the Government of Pasuruan Regency needs to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as a concrete step in order to protect the entire nation and promote general welfare.

From the above description, it is clearly explained that based on article 18 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, regional governments have the authority to make regulations related to regional needs in order to accommodate regional potential and local wisdom according to their respective localistic needs. Whereas for Pasuruan Regency it has a specificity as a santri city that is thick with the values of its religious teachings. From the perspective of Islam, the empowerment of women and the protection of children is highly upheld, even when Islam was first revealed to the Prophet Muhammad SAW. The condition of the Arab nation at that time greatly looked down on the status of women. This can be proven by the habit of women as wives being able to be inherited by their children if their father died. Furthermore, for the fate of children at that time it seemed that there was absolutely no protection of the rights given, children born with female gender would be killed by being buried alive because they were considered a disgrace to their parents. Starting from this condition, it is necessary to establish a regulation that reflects the values of Women's Empowerment and child protection.

Women's empowerment and child protection is a problem that needs to receive special attention from the regional government of Pasuruan Regency to immediately create a juridical instrument to escort and ensure that there are guarantees of welfare and security for women and children.

Therefore, a legal umbrella in the form of a Regional Regulation is needed that is able to accommodate all issues related to women's empowerment and child protection, is able to provide integrated services holistically and comprehensively, and explicitly gives a mandate to institutions to coordinate policies and supervision, and a mandate to institutions to provide services. In addition, Regional Regulations can also open the involvement of non-governmental institutions and the community as well as the business world to play a broad role.

The implementation of women's empowerment and child protection in Pasuruan Regency does not yet have a strong legal basis in the form of regional regulations. Therefore, activities related to women's empowerment and child protection are carried out optimally in order to provide protection for women and children.

In connection with this, the Regional Regulation on women's empowerment and child protection is expected to be able to anticipate and overcome all problems related to women's empowerment and child protection programs and become a juridical solution for regulations in Pasuruan Regency, so that it can provide protection and services to women and children in an integrated and comprehensive manner.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights, contains the understanding that the Republic of Indonesia recognizes and upholds human rights and basic human freedoms as rights that are naturally inherent in and inseparable from humans, which must be protected, respected, and enforced for the improvement of human dignity, welfare, happiness, and intelligence as well as justice;

Letter b
What is meant by "the principle of gender equality", contains the understanding that every policy made must be based on equality of conditions and positions that describe harmonious, harmonious and balanced partnerships between men and women in access, participation, control and obtaining the same and fair benefits from development results;

Letter c
What is meant by "the principle of non-discrimination, contains the understanding that every policy made must not differentiate, limit, harass, or ostracize either directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields, and other aspects of life;

Letter d
What is meant by "the principle of justice and legal certainty, which contains the understanding that everyone has the right to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal treatment and obtains legal certainty and equal treatment before the law;

Letter e
What is meant by benefit, which contains the understanding that the regulation of women's empowerment and child protection policies must provide the greatest benefit for the welfare of society

Letter f
What is meant by participation contains the understanding that the entire process of forming and implementing policies must pay attention to the active participation of all components of society so as to obtain equal benefits in all fields of development and life;

Letter g
What is meant by the best interests of the child contains meaning which contains the understanding that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration;

Letter h
What is meant by accountability concerns that the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection must be accountable and is part of the accountability for the implementation of government.

Letter i
What is meant by gender responsive concerns policies, programs, activities and budgeting that take into account differences in the needs, experiences and aspirations of men and women.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.

Letter b what is meant by managers are managers of PUSYAN GATRA and PUSPAGA

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
The management of PPTPPA as referred to in Article 17 refers to the Regulation of the Minister of PPPA Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
The development of a Child-Friendly Regency as referred to has been regulated in Regent's Regulation Number 15 of 2015 concerning the Establishment of a Child-Friendly Regency and Regent's Decree Number 050/120/HK/424.014/2017 concerning the Establishment of the KLA Task Force, KLA Advocacy Team and Children's Forum.

Article 25
Other legal and non-binding sources can be obtained from CSR assistance, the business world or other institutions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PASURUAN REGENCY NUMBER 306