REGIONAL REGULATION
WEST BANDUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 3 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WEST BANDUNG,

Considering: a. that women and children are national assets who play a role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations and need to receive guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and protection from acts of violence and discrimination;

b. that based on Article 7 paragraph (2) letter n of Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is a government affair that must be implemented by Regional Government;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of: 1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

8. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635), as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

11. Law Number 12 Year 2007 concerning Establishment of West Bandung Regency in West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 14, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4688);

12. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

13. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12);

14. Law Number 14 Year 2009 concerning Ratification of Protocol To Prevent, Suppress And Punish Trafficking In Persons, Especially Women And Children, Supplementing The United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4990);

15. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);

16. Law Number 52 Year 2009 concerning Population Development and Family Development (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 161, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5080);

17. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

18. Law Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of Convention On The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

19. Law Number 17 Year 2014 concerning People's Consultative Assembly, House of Representatives, Regional Representative Council, and Regional House of Representatives (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 182, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5568);

20. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

21. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

22. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

23. Presidential Regulation Number 69 Year 2008 concerning Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons;

24. Presidential Regulation Number 18 Year 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 44);

25. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Improvement of Women's Quality of Life;

26. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;

27. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

28. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions, as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions;

29. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 6 Year 2009 concerning Guidelines for Establishment of Regional Action Committees, Determination of Regional Action Plans, and Community Empowerment in Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor;

30. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 01 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

31. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 Year 2011 concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;

32. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;

33. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 14 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Evaluation of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;

34. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;

35. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning Establishment of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);

36. Regional Regulation of West Bandung Regency Number 7 Year 2008 concerning Government Affairs of West Bandung Regency (Regional Gazette of West Bandung Regency Year 2008 Number 7);

37. Regional Regulation of West Bandung Regency Number 3 Year 2012 concerning Organization of Regional Apparatus of West Bandung Regency (Regional Gazette of West Bandung Regency Year 2012 Number 3 series D);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WEST BANDUNG REGENCY
and
REGENT OF WEST BANDUNG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Part One
Definitions

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Region is West Bandung Regency.

2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of Regional Government administration.

3. Regent is the Regent of West Bandung.

4. Agency for Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning, hereinafter abbreviated as BP3AKB is a regional apparatus that has the main tasks, functions, and affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning in the Region.

5. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.

6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a child still in the womb.

7. Women's Empowerment is an effort to strengthen women's basic rights, improve quality of life, and increase women's participation in development.

8. Gender Mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the region.

9. Improvement of Women's Quality of Life hereinafter abbreviated as PKHP is an effort to improve the physical and mental conditions of women in fulfilling their rights and life needs as part of human rights from various fields of development, especially education, health, economy, science and technology (IPTEK), socio-culture, politics, law and environment.

10. Protection of Women and Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and women over their rights so they can live, grow, participate, be free from all forms of violence and discrimination in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection against activities of trafficking in children and women.

11. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by social and cultural conditions of society.

12. Gender Analysis is an analysis to identify and understand the division of work/roles of men and women, access to and control over development resources, participation in the development process, and the benefits they enjoy, patterns of unequal relationships between men and women, which in its implementation takes into account other factors such as social class, race, and ethnicity.

13. Gender Responsive Budget is a budget that is responsive to the needs of women and men with the aim of realizing gender equality and justice.

14. Gender Budget Statement hereinafter abbreviated as GBS is a document that informs that an activity output has been gender responsive to existing gender issues, and/or a cost has been allocated to the activity output to address gender gap problems.

15. Focal Point PUG is an SKPD apparatus that has the ability to carry out gender mainstreaming in their respective work units.

16. Gender Mainstreaming Working Group hereinafter referred to as Pokja PUG is a consultation forum for implementers and drivers of gender mainstreaming from various agencies/institutions in the region.

17. Family Development for Toddlers hereinafter referred to as BKB is a community movement directed to increase parents' knowledge and skills in fostering the growth and development of children aged 0-5 years.

18. Love Mother Movement hereinafter referred to as GSI is a movement carried out by the community and government to improve the quality of life of women through various activities that have an impact on efforts to accelerate the reduction of maternal mortality rates (AKI) due to pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum as well as reduction of infant mortality rates (AKB).

19. Model Village for Advanced Independent Indonesian Women hereinafter referred to as Model Desa PRIMA is a pilot village to overcome poverty through economic efforts accompanied by reduction of health and education costs for poor families, by utilizing all potential/resources both natural and human.

20. Improvement of Women's Role Towards Healthy and Prosperous Families hereinafter referred to as P2WKSS is an integrated program for improving women's roles that uses a cross-sectoral development approach in a coordinated manner to improve family quality.

21. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children, hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, established by the government or community-based, which includes: referral centers, business consultation centers, reproductive health consultation centers, legal consultation centers, integrated crisis centers (PKT), integrated service centers (PPT), trauma recovery centers (trauma centers), women's crisis centers, training centers, science and technology information centers (PIPTEK), safe houses (shelters), transit houses, or other forms.

22. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons is a forum for cross-sectoral collaboration and coordination aimed at ensuring the implementation of prevention and handling of criminal acts of trafficking in persons, especially women and children in the Region.

23. Community institution is an institution formed by members of the Indonesian citizen community voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, consisting of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.

24. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.

25. Non-Governmental Organizations and/or Community Organizations and/or Community Groups are community groups formed participatively and become government partners in women's empowerment and child protection.

26. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

27. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter referred to as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of violence.

28. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for Regional Government in carrying out activities for the implementation of empowerment and protection of women and children.

29. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.

30. Violence against women is any act based on gender difference that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

31. Violence against children is any act against children that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens body integrity and degrades the dignity of children.

32. Complaint is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.

33. Health services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.

34. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so they can carry out their social functions properly.

35. Law enforcement is action by apparatus authorized by the state to implement legislation.

36. Legal assistance is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is Gender sensitive.

37. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.

38. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.

39. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a city that has a child rights-based development system through integration of government, community and business world commitments and resources that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure fulfillment of children's rights.

Part Two
Intent and Purpose

Article 2

The formulation of this Regional Regulation has the intent to provide a reference for Regional Government in implementing Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.

Article 3

The implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection has the purpose of:

a. ensuring the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection systematically, comprehensively, continuously, and in an integrated manner;

b. increasing the commitment of Regional Government in implementing policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

c. increasing the effectiveness of implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region systematically, comprehensively, continuously and in an integrated manner;

d. encouraging institutions that handle the tasks and functions of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.

Part Three
Scope

Article 4

The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:

a. Gender Mainstreaming;

b. Improvement of Women's Quality of Life;

c. Protection of Women and Children;

d. Child-Friendly Regency (KLA);

e. guidance and supervision; and

f. financing.

CHAPTER II
GENDER MAINSTREAMING (PUG)

Part One
PUG Implementation Policy

Article 5

(1) Regional Government formulates Gender Responsive development policies, programs, and activities that are set forth in:

a. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD);
b. SKPD Strategic Plan; and
c. SKPD Work Plan.

(2) The formulation of Gender Responsive development policies, programs, and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through Gender Analysis.

Article 6

(1) In conducting Gender Analysis as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2), the Gender Analysis Pathway method or other analytical methods may be used.

(2) Gender Analysis of SKPD work plans and budgets is carried out by each SKPD and may cooperate with higher education institutions or other parties that have capability in their field.

(3) The results of Gender Analysis as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) are set forth in the formulation of GBS.

(4) The results of Gender Analysis contained in GBS become the basis for SKPD in formulating activity terms of reference and constitute an inseparable part of the SKPD RKA/DPA document.

Part Two
PUG Institutional Framework

Article 7

(1) In an effort to accelerate the institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming in all SKPDs, the Regent establishes Pokja PUG which is determined by Regent's Decree.

(2) The membership of Pokja PUG as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of all heads/leaders of SKPDs.

Article 8

(1) Pokja PUG as referred to in Article 7, has the task of:

a. promoting and facilitating PUG to each SKPD;

b. carrying out socialization and advocacy of PUG to Sub-district Heads and Village Heads;

c. formulating work programs every year;

d. encouraging the realization of Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting;

e. formulating POKJA PUG work plans every year;

f. being responsible to the Regent;

g. formulating policy recommendations to the Regent;

h. formulating Regional Gender Profile;

i. monitoring the implementation of PUG in each agency;

j. establishing a technical team to conduct analysis of regional budgets;

k. formulating Regional Action Plan (RAD) for PUG in the Region; and

l. encouraging the implementation of selection and determination of Focal Points in each SKPD.

(2) The Technical Team as referred to in paragraph (1) letter j consists of apparatus who understand Gender Responsive Budget analysis.

(3) The Regional Action Plan (RAD) for PUG as referred to in paragraph (1) letter k contains:

a. PUG in legislation in the Region;

b. PUG in the development cycle in the Region;

c. strengthening PUG institutional framework in the Region; and

d. strengthening community participation in the Region.

Part Three
PUG Focal Point

Article 9

(1) The PUG Focal Point in each SKPD in the Region consists of officials and/or staff in charge of planning and/or program tasks.

(2) The PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), has the task of:

a. promoting Gender Mainstreaming in the work unit;

b. facilitating the formulation of Gender Responsive SKPD work plans and budgets;

c. carrying out training, socialization, advocacy of Gender Mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the SKPD;

d. reporting PUG implementation to SKPD leadership;

e. encouraging the implementation of Gender Analysis of policies, programs, and activities in the work unit; and

f. facilitating the formulation of gender data in each SKPD.

(3) The PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), is selected and determined by the head/leader of the SKPD.

Part Four
PUG Reporting, Monitoring, and Evaluation

Article 10

(1) Regional Government submits reports on PUG implementation to the Provincial Government periodically every 6 (six) months.

(2) The report on PUG implementation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:

a. implementation of programs and activities;

b. agencies involved in activity implementation;

c. activity targets;

d. use of budget sourced from APBD or other sources;

e. problems faced; and

f. efforts that have been made.

(3) The procedures for reporting PUG implementation in the region are further regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Article 11

(1) The Regent conducts monitoring and evaluation of PUG implementation in the Region.

(2) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in each SKPD.

(3) Monitoring and evaluation of PUG implementation is carried out before the formulation of programs or activities for the following year.

(4) Implementation of evaluation can be carried out through cooperation with Higher Education Institutions, Women's Study Centers, or Non-Governmental Organizations for Women's Empowerment and Protection.

(5) The results of evaluation of PUG implementation become input material in formulating policies, programs, and activities for the coming year.

Part Five
PUG Guidance

Article 12

The Regent provides guidance on PUG implementation which includes:

a. determination of technical guidelines for PUG implementation at Regency, Sub-district, and Village scales;

b. strengthening institutional capacity through training, consultation, advocacy, and coordination;

c. monitoring and evaluation of PUG implementation in the Region;

d. capacity building of Pokja PUG and focal points; and

e. performance achievement strategy.

CHAPTER III
IMPROVEMENT OF WOMEN'S QUALITY OF LIFE (PKHP)

Article 13

PKHP is directed to obtain opportunities and rights for women to be able to play a role and participate in the field of development especially in the fields of education, health, economy, law and human rights, politics, environment, and socio-culture in the Region.

Article 14

Regional Government implements PKHP policies, programs, and activities in various fields of development, through:

a. coordination of implementation of PKHP policies, programs, and activities among SKPDs;

b. cooperation with other Regional Governments in implementing PKHP policies, programs, and activities;

c. strengthening PUG institutional capacity for PKHP implementation;

d. facilitation of PKHP services;

e. provision of PKHP services;

f. implementation of PKHP affirmative action; and

g. formulation of PKHP data collection system.

Article 15

PKHP policies, programs, and activities are focused on:

a. implementation of affirmative action, especially in the fields of education, health, law, employment, social, politics, environment, and economy;

b. elimination of gender gaps that result in poverty and impoverishment of women, as well as ensuring respect, protection, and fulfillment of women's basic rights;

c. increasing efforts to protect women from various acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination, including prevention and mitigation efforts;

d. development of gender responsive policies, monitoring of gender-based violence, increasing budget allocation for Women's Empowerment, and for improving women's welfare in each sector and field;

e. development and improvement of PKHP regulations and policies in various fields of development;

f. implementation of communication, information, and education (KIE) for improving women's quality of life.

g. formulation of recording and reporting systems, and systems for handling and resolving cases of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women;

h. development of integrated service centers based on hospitals, and community-based in the Region, as a means of protection for women victims of violence, including women victims of domestic violence.

Article 16

Regional Government facilitates the establishment and development of PKHP development models, which include:

a. BKB;

b. GSI;

c. Desa PRIMA; and

d. P2WKSS.

Article 17

(1) Regional Government provides PKHP services in the form of:

a. basic social services especially education and health;

b. information: economy, education, health, employment, law, politics, science and technology, and others; and

c. training: skills, management, leadership, entrepreneurship, finance, and others.

(2) Provision of PKHP services is carried out through P2TP2A coordinated by BP3AKB.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities

Article 18

Obligations and responsibilities in implementing protection of women and children are the joint responsibility of:

a. Regional Government;

b. community;

c. family; and

d. parents.

Article 19

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 18 letter a, include:

a. implementing protection policies for women and children established by the government;

b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children in the Region;

c. conducting cooperation in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence;

d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence;

e. allocating budget for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and

f. guiding and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Government establishes programs and activities for protection of women and children in the Regional Action Plan as a basis for Regional Government in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is established by Regent's Regulation.

Article 20

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 18 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:

a. preventing acts of violence against women and children;

b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and

c. participating in providing assistance and/or handling of victims of acts of violence.

Article 21

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 18 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

Part Two
Tasks and Authority of Regional Government

Article 22

(1) Regional Government has the task of implementing efforts to prevent violence against women and children, including:

a. managing data and information about protection of women and child victims of acts of violence;

b. conducting socialization of legislation related to implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;

c. conducting education about anti-violence values against women and children; and

d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Regional Government in carrying out tasks as referred to in paragraph (1), has the authority to provide and organize services for victims of violence, among others:

a. providing and facilitating the establishment of integrated services for victims of acts of violence by involving institutions and community elements;

b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection of women and children; and

c. conducting community empowerment for prevention of acts of violence against women and children.

Part Three
Programs and Activities for Protection of Women and Children

Paragraph 1
Prevention

Article 23

(1) To prevent acts of violence against women and children, Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.

(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness raising as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Government conducts efforts as follows:

a. increasing the number and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;

b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income improvement and social services;

c. opening employment opportunities for women;

d. building community participation and awareness to implement prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;

e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;

f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and

g. opening complaint posts for protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(3) Prevention of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Paragraph 2
Handling

Article 24

(1) Regional Government is obliged to carry out handling of women and children who become victims of acts of violence, by providing protection services in the form of:

a. complaint services;

b. health services;

c. legal assistance;

d. repatriation;

e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;

f. identification services;

g. psychological services;

h. education and training services; and/or

i. other forms of services.

(2) Provision of protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided for:

a. women who become victims of violence, including victims of trafficking in persons, women in conflict-prone and disaster areas, women workers, elderly women, women with disabilities, women victims of sexual exploitation, women heads of households, and other vulnerable groups of women;

b. children who become victims of acts of violence, exploitation, ill-treatment, and neglect.

Article 25

(1) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are carried out by Regional Government in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Government.

(2) In implementing services as referred to in paragraph (2), Regional Government may cooperate with government agencies, provincial governments, other regency/city governments, law enforcement apparatus, and the community.

(3) Further provisions regarding procedures for services and handling of women and child victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Part Four
Institutional Framework for Protection of Women and Children

Paragraph 1
P2TP2A

Article 26

(1) In order to provide protection services for women and children from acts of violence, Regional Government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center in implementing programs and activities for protection of women and children.

(2) The establishment, Organization, and Work Procedures of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), are determined by Regent's Regulation.

Article 27

(1) P2TP2A has the main task of carrying out part of the Regional Government's tasks in organizing services quickly, precisely and in an integrated manner in efforts to Empower Women and Protect Children from acts of violence, discrimination and trafficking in persons.

(2) In carrying out tasks as referred to in paragraph (1), P2TP2A has the functions of:

a. carrying out facilitation and provision of protection services for women and children from discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, that are emergency in nature quickly covering various services namely information, medical referral, legal, psychological, psychic, safe houses (shelters), home visits and skills training as well as other forms of services that support the implementation of P2TP2A activities;

b. carrying out coordination and building work networks that synergize with Regional Apparatus, related Agencies, and/or other institutions that have tasks and functions in the field of Women's Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children; and

c. monitoring of victims after handling by P2TP2A and/or work partners.

Paragraph 2
Task Force and Regional Action Committee

Article 28

In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 26, in order to support the implementation of protection of women and children, the Regent establishes:

a. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Victims of Violence Against Women, Victims of Violence Against Children, and Trafficking in Persons;

b. Regional Action Committee for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor.

Article 29

(1) The Task Force as referred to in Article 28 letter a, consists of representatives from Regional Government, Law Enforcement, Community Organizations, Non-Governmental Organizations, Professional Organizations, and Researchers/Academics.

(2) The Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinative institution that has the task of coordinating programs and activities for prevention and handling of victims of violence against Women and Children, as well as Trafficking in Persons.

(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, organization, tasks and functions of the Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons as referred to in paragraph (1), are determined by Regent's Regulation.

Article 30

(1) The Regional Action Committee for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor as referred to in Article 28 letter b, consists of representatives from Regional Government, Law Enforcement, Community Organizations, Non-Governmental Organizations, Professional Organizations, and Researchers/Academics.

(2) Further provisions regarding the establishment, tasks and functions of the Regional Action Committee as referred to in paragraph (1), are determined by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER V
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY

Article 31

(1) To realize the Fulfillment of Children's Rights, it is carried out in an integrated and systematic manner from all sectors in a sustainable manner through the Policy for Development of KLA.

(2) The Policy for Development of KLA as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed at fulfillment of children's rights, including:

a. civil rights and freedoms;

b. family environment and alternative care;

c. basic health and welfare;

d. education, leisure time utilization, and cultural activities; and

e. special protection.

(3) The stages of Development of KLA as referred to in paragraph (1), are further regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Article 32

(1) In order to ensure effectiveness of implementation of KLA policy in the Region, a KLA Task Force is established.

(2) The establishment of KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) is determined by Regent's Decree.

(3) The KLA Task Force, consists of representatives from Regional Government, Child Representatives, and may involve related Agencies, business world, religious/community/customary leaders, and the community.

(4) Further provisions regarding the organization, tasks and functions of the KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), are determined by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 33

(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:

a. provision of guidelines and fulfillment of Minimum Service Standards for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

b. technical guidance and training;

c. provision of facilities;

d. monitoring; and

e. evaluation.

(3) Further provisions regarding guidance and supervision of implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Article 34

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 33, are carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Government.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING

Article 35

Financing for implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, is sourced from:

a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and

b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

CHAPTER VIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 36

Every person who commits a violation in the field of protection of women and children is subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of:

a. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection;

b. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence;

c. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 37

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation are established no later than 12 (twelve) months from the date of promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 38

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of West Bandung Regency.

Established in West Bandung
on date 10 April 2015

REGENT OF WEST BANDUNG,

signed.

ABUBAKAR

Promulgated in West Bandung
on date 10 April 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY
WEST BANDUNG REGENCY,

signed.

MAMAN S. SUNJAYA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST BANDUNG REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 3 SERIES E

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST BANDUNG REGENCY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE: 53/2015