KARANGANYAR REGENCY GOVERNMENT
KARANGANYAR REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION NUMBER 20 YEAR 2009
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF KARANGANYAR,

Considering: a.
b.
c.

d.

e.

that every member of society has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence in accordance with the Pancasila philosophy and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
that all forms of violence constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination that must be eliminated;
that victims of violence, the majority of whom are women and children, must receive protection from the government and/or society in order to be protected and freed from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor;
that the number of cases of violence against women and children in Karanganyar Regency still occurs, while the regulation of protection implementation for women and children victims of violence has not been optimal;
that based on the considerations as stated in letters a, b, c, and d, it is deemed necessary to regulate the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence through a Karanganyar Regency Regional Regulation;

In View of: 1.
2.

3.

4.

Law Number 13 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Regions within Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 42);
Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions for Social Welfare (State Gazette Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3039);
Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3243);
Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3668);

5. Law Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 100, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3668);
6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 regarding Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 regarding Prohibition and Immediate Action for Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3941);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4235);
10. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to State Gazette Number 4389);
11. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
12. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437): as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Domestic Violence Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Authority between Central Government, Provincial Government and Regency/City Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4739);

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF KARANGANYAR REGENCY
and
REGENT OF KARANGANYAR

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Karanganyar Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government Administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Karanganyar.
4. Regional Apparatus are supporting elements of the Regent in regional government administration consisting of Regional Secretariat, DPRD Secretariat, Regional Agencies, Regional Technical Institutions, Sub-districts and Urban Villages.
5. Implementation is the form of execution of protection for women and children victims of violence.
6. Protection of women and children victims of violence is every activity aimed at providing a sense of security for victims and protecting their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and honor and receive protection, whether medical, legal, medico-legal (forensic medicine), economic or psychological protection from all forms of violence and discriminatory actions.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those still in the womb.
8. Victim is a woman or child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
9. Violence is any act that results in or can result in suffering or hardship, whether physical, sexual, economic, social or psychological to the victim.
10. Integrated Service Center for Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT P2A, is an institution providing services to victims of violence, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
11. Commission for Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as KP2A, is a Commission that functions to formulate policy programs for protection of women and children victims of violence with Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) and Child Rights Mainstreaming (PUA) strategies.
12. Safe house is temporary housing used to provide protection to victims.
13. Social Community Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Population is Indonesian citizens and/or foreigners who enter legally and reside in Indonesian territory.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. Respect for victims' rights;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Best interests of victims.

Article 3

The implementation of protection for victims of violence aims to prevent, protect victims and provide services to women based on gender and the best interests of children that occur in the household and/or public sphere.

CHAPTER III
VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 4

Every victim has the right to receive protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions, both Regional Government and community.

Article 5

In the event of violence, every victim has the right to receive health services and assistance, both psychologically and legally, and to receive guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6

(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent violence against women and children, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about victims of violence and legislation;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values toward women and children;
c. socializing legislation related to the implementation of protection for victims of violence;
d. monitoring and evaluating the implementation of protection for victims of violence;
e. preparing reports on the implementation of protection for victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally responsible for victims.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutional

Article 7

(1) The Regent establishes KP2A with membership of at least 9 (nine) people, with organizational structure consisting of:
a. Chairperson;
b. Secretary;
c. Division Coordinators:
1. General Division;
2. Study and Training Division;
3. Network and Information Division;
4. Advocacy and Litigation Division;
5. Medical and Psychosocial Division;
6. Service and Safe House Division;
7. Rehabilitation Division.
(2) KP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the tasks of:
a. formulating various comprehensive protection efforts for victims of violence;
b. raising awareness among women and children, especially victims of violence, of the importance of fulfilling human rights, based on institutions and community;
c. providing information and developing cooperation networks needed in seeking protection for victims of violence;
d. assisting empowerment of victims of violence in their capacity as family members and as community members;
e. facilitating the availability of supporting facilities and infrastructure for optimization of protection for victims of violence;
f. implementing protection for women and children victims of violence;
g. mobilizing funding sources for the benefit of implementing protection for victims of violence;
h. carrying out protection activities for victims of violence;
i. providing services and protection to victims of violence.
(3) KP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) reports the implementation of its tasks to the Regent.
(4) Each division as referred to in paragraph (1) may be assisted by members according to needs.
(5) KP2A membership as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements from:
a. Regional Apparatus;
b. Professional Organizations;
c. Community Leaders;
d. Educational Institutions;
e. Social Community Institutions.
(6) The term of office of KP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is 3 (three) years from inauguration and may be re-elected.
(7) KP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) proposes the establishment of PPT P2A according to needs.
(8) The organizational structure chart of KP2A as stated in the attachment, which is an inseparable part of this Regional Regulation.
(9) The establishment and working procedures of KP2A and PPT P2A are stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Part Two
Handling and Mechanisms

Article 8

(1) Implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the KP2A framework.
(2) KP2A in handling medical, legal, medico-legal, psychological and economic protection, may partner with social community institutions engaged in the protection of women and children.
(3) Implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) must pay attention to religious norms, as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, or other persons legally responsible for victims.
(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented according to standard operating procedures (SOP) which will be further regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Three
Service Principles

Article 9

Implementation of services for victims is conducted free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discrimination, easily accessible, and with confidentiality guarantees.

CHAPTER VI
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION

Article 10

(1) Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Sexual violence;
c. Economic violence;
d. Psychological violence.
(2) Forms of physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a are any acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death.
(3) Forms of sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b are sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.
(4) Forms of economic violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c are neglect of family members in the form of not providing proper livelihood, care or maintenance.
(5) Forms of psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 11

(1) Every victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
(2) Protection for victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to every resident of Karanganyar Regency, whether experiencing violence within Karanganyar Regency or outside Karanganyar Regency.
(3) Protection for victims of violence in addition to being provided to residents of Karanganyar Regency as referred to in paragraph (2), also applies to non-residents of Karanganyar Regency who experience violence within Karanganyar Regency.

Article 12

(1) Forms of protection for victims of violence include:
a. medical protection;
b. legal protection;
c. medico-legal protection (forensic medicine);
d. economic protection;
e. psychological protection.
(2) Forms of medical protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a are treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
(3) Forms of legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b are services and assistance to help victims go through legal and judicial processes.
(4) Forms of medico-legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c are medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field.
(5) Forms of economic protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d are services for skills and providing economic access so that victims of violence can be independent.
(6) Forms of psychological protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e are assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in problem resolution.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 13

(1) The Regional Government in implementing protection for victims of violence may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community institutions.

Article 14

(1) Social community institutions that participate in implementing protection for victims of violence as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) are given guidance by the Regional Government through Regional Apparatus according to their main tasks and functions.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING SOURCES

Article 15

(1) Funding sources for implementing protection for victims of violence come from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(2) In addition to funding sources as referred to in paragraph (1), they may also come from other legitimate sources.
(3) Implementation funding sources from other legitimate sources as referred to in paragraph (2) are supervised in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

CHAPTER IX
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 16

Institutions that violate service principles may be subject to administrative sanctions in accordance with applicable legislation.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 17

Other matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation shall be further regulated by the Regent.

Article 18

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Karanganyar Regency.

Established in Karanganyar
on [date] December 2009

REGENT OF KARANGANYAR,

Hj. RINA IRIANI SRI RATNANINGSIH

Promulgated in Karanganyar
on [date] December 2009

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KARANGANYAR REGENCY,

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KARANGANYAR REGENCY YEAR 2009 NUMBER [number]


ELUCIDATION
OF
KARANGANYAR REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER [number] YEAR 2009
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

The Government has an obligation to provide a sense of security and freedom for every member of society from all forms of violence in the form of threats and actions that can disturb or damage mental, physical, sexual or economic security, as mandated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution, which protects the entire nation and all Indonesian territory.

The Indonesian Government has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; consequently, the Indonesian Government must comply with these provisions. Likewise in the fourth amendment to the 1945 Constitution, Chapter XV of the 1945 Constitution concerning Human Rights, states that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the Government.

To realize the achievement of enforcement and fulfillment of human rights, the government is obligated to provide protection and security for women and children as outlined in a policy both at the national and regional levels.

In the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women Year 1999, it is stated that Women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by Almighty God, therefore they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class in community, national and state life.

From the series of policy provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children, whether in the form of policies applicable at the national or regional level.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1: Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Letter a: Respect for victims' rights is intended to ensure the fulfillment of victims' rights.
Letter b: Gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women; Gender equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and national security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter c: Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d: Best interests of victims means that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
Article 3: Sufficiently clear.
Article 4: What is meant by "gender-based violence" is action based on gender relations that place women subordinate to men.
What is meant by "receiving protection" is receiving protection from individuals, groups or institutions, both government and non-government. Receiving information about the location of complaint centers, PPT and matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and being involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and development of case handling.
Article 5: What is meant by "integrated services" is services that include medical, medico-legal, psychosocial and legal services.
What is meant by "continuous handling" is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until victims can resume their lives in society including restoration of their good name.
What is meant by "receiving psychological and legal assistance" is receiving psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process.
Article 6: Sufficiently clear.
Article 7: Sufficiently clear.
Article 8: Sufficiently clear.
Article 9: Sufficiently clear.
Article 10: Sufficiently clear.
Article 11: Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Paragraph (1): Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2): Medical protection is limited to initial treatment and recovery of physical injuries due to violence. Further treatment is the responsibility of the family.
Paragraph (3): Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4): Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5): Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (6): Sufficiently clear.
Article 13: Sufficiently clear.
Article 14: Sufficiently clear.
Article 16: Sufficiently clear.
Article 17: Sufficiently clear.
Article 18: Sufficiently clear