LUMAJANG REGENCY GOVERNMENT
LUMAJANG REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 48 YEAR 2007
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN LUMAJANG REGENCY
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF LUMAJANG
Considering: a. that until now cases of violence against women and children still frequently occur, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
b. that in connection with the consideration referred to in letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence in Lumajang Regency which is stipulated by Regional Regulation.
In View of: 1. Law Number 12 Year 1950, concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number
19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9);
2. Law Number 6 Year 1974, concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979, concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number
32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
3143);
4. Law Number 7 Year 1984, concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
5. Law Number 23 Year 1992, concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 100);
6. Law Number 20 Year 1999, concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 5 Year 1998, concerning Convention Against Torture and Cruel Punishment
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783); 8. Law Number 39 Year 1999, concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
9. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2002, concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4235);
11. Law Number 10 Year 2004, concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
12. Law Number 23 Year 2004, concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
13. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended by Law Number 8 Year 2005 State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 108, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic
of Indonesia Number 4548);
14. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance between Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4422);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4737);
16. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
17. Presidential Decree Number 181 Year 1998, concerning National Commission on Violence Against Women;
18. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
19. Presidential Decree Number 61 Year 2003 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 1999 – 2003; 20. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 9 Year 2005, concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.
With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
OF LUMAJANG REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF LUMAJANG
HAS DECIDED:
To Stipulate: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF
VIOLENCE IN LUMAJANG REGENCY.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Government of Lumajang Regency;
2. Regent is the Regent of Lumajang;
3. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb;
4. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or physical, sexual,
economic, psychological suffering to the victim;
5. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death;
6. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and severe psychological suffering
in a person;
7. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and certain purposes;
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence;
9. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against the victim;
10. Companion is a person who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence;
11. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in
the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services;
12. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards;
13. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations;
14. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father with his children, and mother and her children;
15. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins, and so on)
and non-relatives (servants, drivers, and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The principles of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. Respect for the rights of victims;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Best interests of the victim;
e. Respect for the rights of women and children. Article 3
The objective of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence that are gender-based and in the best interests of victims occurring in households and/or public.
CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling by individuals, groups or institutions both Regency Government and non-government.
Article 5
In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain assistance both psychologically and legally and to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as
a member of society.
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
(1) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to carry out efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about the values and meaning of violence and legislation;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values toward women and children;
c. socializing legislation related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regency Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. improving the quality of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regency Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally responsible for the victim.
CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional
Article 8
(1) Implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework.
(2) The PPT of Lumajang Regency can receive case referrals in Sub-districts within the Lumajang Regency Area.
(3) Provisions concerning PPT will be further regulated in Regent Regulations and or Regent Decrees.
Part Two
Forms and Mechanisms of Service
Article 9
(1) Forms of services to victims organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including provision of safe houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims
have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to standard operational procedures which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation;
Part Three
Service Principles
Article 10
Implementation of services to victims is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discrimination, easily accessible, and with guaranteed confidentiality.
Article 11
PPT managers are obligated to organize services in accordance with service principles as referred to in article 10.
CHAPTER VII
ASSISTANCE
Article 12
Assistance is carried out by parents or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT.
CHAPTER VIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 13
(1) Any person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, and or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as regulated in applicable legislation.
(2) Officials appointed to implement protection who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities shall be subject to administrative action or sanctions.
(3) PPT managers who carry out service duties that violate service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with PPT internal mechanisms.
CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 14
This Regional Regulation shall come into force from the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Lumajang Regency.
Stipulated in Lumajang
On the date of 9 November 2007
REGENT OF LUMAJANG
signed
ACHMAD FAUZI
ELUCIDATION
OF
LUMAJANG REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION NUMBER 48 YEAR 2007
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN LUMAJANG REGENCY
I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION
that the State has an obligation to provide security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual or economic security, this is philosophically stated in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution, that the first purpose of the establishment of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and all of Indonesia's territory.
that the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1948 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women), and is therefore obligated to comply with these provisions. Likewise in the 1945 Constitution fourth amendment Chapter XA of the 1945 Constitution concerning Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the government.
furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women Year 1999 it is stated that Women as Mothers of the Nation, and Children as successors of the nation are creatures created by Almighty God and therefore must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect maintained properly and proportionally, both legally, economically, politically,
socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.
that from the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically, and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE ELUCIDATION
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear
Article 2
- respect for the rights of victims is intended to guarantee the fulfillment of victims' rights;
- gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women;
- gender equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities in enjoying development results;
- non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion, between groups;
- best interests of the victim means all actions concerning victims carried out by government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, then the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.
Article 3
what is meant by gender-based violence is action based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men
Article 4
what is meant by obtaining protection is obtaining protection from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government;
obtaining information about the existence of complaint centers, PPT, and matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and involvement in every decision-making process related to assistance and development of case handling;
what is meant by integrated services are services that include medical, medico legal, psychosocial and legal;
what is meant by continuous handling is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume their life in society including restoration of their good name.
Article 5
what is meant by obtaining psychological and legal assistance is psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process.
Article 6 through article 14
Sufficiently Clear
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF LUMAJANG REGENCY YEAR 2007 NUMBER