CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR
VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN,

Considering: a. that all forms of violence, especially gender-based violence and violence against children are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination;
b. that victims of gender-based violence and children must receive protection, both from the Regional Government, related agencies and/or the community, so that the community is protected and free from violence and/or threats of violence in the household and community;
c. that based on Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government, related agencies, and/or the community are obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of gender-based violence and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 16 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Large City Regions Within East Java, Central Java, West Java Provinces and the Special Region of Djogjakarta, as amended by Law Number 13 Year 1954 concerning Merger of Laws Number 16 and 17 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Large Cities and Small Cities in Java
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1954 Number 40, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 551);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as last amended by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58 Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Government Regulation Number 21 Year 1988 concerning Amendment to Regional Boundaries of Level II Municipality of Pekalongan, Level II Regency of Pekalongan and Level II Regency of Batang (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 42, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3381);
7. Regional Regulation of Pekalongan City Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Pekalongan City year 2011 Number 11);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PEKALONGAN CITY and
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN
HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pekalongan City.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Pekalongan.
4. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution of Pekalongan City which is positioned as an element of regional government administration.
5. Regional Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is an assistant element to the Mayor and DPRD in administering Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a child still in the womb.
7. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
8. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Implementation of Protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the relevant SKPD.
11. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering both physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
12. Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights, the consequences of which include but are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
13. Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children, the consequences of which include but are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological, and economic violence.
14. Victims of Gender-Based Violence are people who because of their gender experience physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
15. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
16. Psychological Violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
17. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, whether unnatural or unwanted with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
18. Victims of Acts of Violence are individuals or groups of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
21. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance.
22. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
24. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
25. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
26. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection for victims of gender-based violence and children.
27. Safe House is temporary housing, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
28. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
29. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
30. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Part One
Principles
Article 2
Protection of victims of gender-based violence and children is based on Pancasila and founded on the 1945 Constitution, as well as basic principles that include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. best interests of victims;
c. justice and gender equality;
d. victim protection;
e. survival, and child development;
f. respect for children's opinions;
g. openness;
h. integration;
i. empowerment; and
j. victim confidentiality.
Article 3
(1) The objectives of implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children are:
a. to prevent all forms of gender-based violence and violence against children, occurring within the scope of the household and/or community;
b. to provide protection;
c. to provide legal assistance;
d. to seek recovery and social reintegration; and/or
e. to increase community participation.
(2) The objectives of implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1), include aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.
CHAPTER III
VICTIMS' RIGHTS
Article 4
Every victim of gender-based violence and child victim of violence has the right to receive:
a. protection for personal, family, and property security, and freedom from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
b. participation in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. information regarding case developments and court decisions;
d. fast, appropriate, comfortable, and needs-based services;
e. recovery and social reintegration;
f. legal, psychological, spiritual, economic, social assistance and interpreters.
Article 5
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 4, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. right to respect;
b. right to basic services;
c. right to equal protection;
d. right to be free from various stigma; and
e. right to obtain freedom
f. full right to survival, growth and development.
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
Obligations and responsibilities in implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children in the Region are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family and/or parents.
Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 6 letter a, include:
a. implementing protection policies against gender-based violence and children established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection against gender-based violence and children;
c. conducting cooperation in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementing protection against gender-based violence and children;
e. allocating budget for implementing protection against gender-based violence and children according to regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and children.
(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government establishes action programs and activities for protection of gender and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD in implementing protection against gender-based violence and children.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.
Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of gender-based violence and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of gender-based violence and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and/or
c. participating in providing assistance, protection or handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Article 9
The obligations and responsibilities of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c are to prevent all forms of violence and protect victims of gender-based violence and children as family members according to their respective roles.
CHAPTER V
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 10
(1) The Regional Government has the duty to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of gender-based violence and children, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about acts of gender-based violence and children, and laws and regulations;
b. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based violence and children;
c. conducting education about anti-violence values toward gender and children; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) The Regional Government in anticipating the occurrence of acts of gender-based violence and children, has the authority to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. providing and facilitating the formation of integrated services for victims of acts of violence by involving institutions and community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims; and
c. conducting community empowerment for prevention of acts of violence.
d. actively undertaking handling efforts for victims of gender-based violence and children.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives, or other persons who are legally responsible for victims.
CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional
Article 11
In order to provide services and protection for acts of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government establishes the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution (LP PAR) as an integrated service center for victims of gender-based violence and children.
Part Two
Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention
Article 12
Forms of prevention of acts of gender-based violence and children carried out by the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution, can be implemented through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community; and
b. training of members of the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution related to the implementation of their duties in preventing acts of gender-based violence and children.
Article 13
(1) The Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution in carrying out its duties and functions can coordinate with the Sub-district Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution and competent parties in making efforts to prevent the occurrence of criminal acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.
Part Three
Prevention of Acts of Violence
Article 14
(1) The Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling to prevent the occurrence of criminal acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government undertakes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities;
d. building community participation and awareness to implement prevention and protection against acts of gender-based violence and children;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building cooperative networks with law enforcement officers, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about gender and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for protection against acts of gender-based violence and children.
Article 15
(1) Efforts to prevent the occurrence of acts of gender-based violence and children as referred to in Article 14, are implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. public order and security; and
g. planning.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan.
Part Four
Service and Assistance
Article 16
Forms of service and assistance for victims of acts of gender-based violence and children organized by the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution, include:
a. medical;
b. medicolegal;
c. psychosocial;
d. legal;
e. economic independence
Part Five
Principles of Service and Assistance
Article 17
Implementation of service and assistance for victims of acts of gender-based violence and children, is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.
Part Six
Service for Victims of Acts of Violence
Article 18
(1) Forms of service are implemented according to minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. gender-based empowerment and child protection;
d. welfare;
e. education;
f. population;
g. manpower.
(2) In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with Government agencies, Provincial Government, other Regency/City Governments, and the community.
Article 19
The Regional Government and/or community can establish recovery houses or safe houses.
Part Seven
Reunification
Article 20
(1) Forms of Reunification provided to victims of gender-based violence and children are as follows:
a. repatriation;
b. social reintegration.
(2) Repatriation services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a include:
a. implementing coordination with related agencies;
b. implementing the victim repatriation process; and
c. providing protection to the victim's destination.
(3) Social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. assistance in the process of reunification with the victim's family;
b. providing information to the local community for reunification of victims with their environment;
c. providing assurance that the family and community are ready to accept the victim back; and
d. implementing economic empowerment.
Part Eight
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence
Article 21
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to empower victims of acts of violence.
(2) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented by the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution.
(3) In empowering victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government prepares empowerment programs in the economic field, which include:
a. providing the necessary needs for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic businesses;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of victims of acts of violence;
e. seeking facilitation of capital provision for victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding information access and promoting products of victims of acts of violence.
(4) In empowering victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government can establish cooperation with job training institutions organized by the private sector.
Article 22
(1) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 21, is carried out by providing training to increase capability, skills, and independence.
(2) Training as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through:
a. on-the-job training;
b. pre-placement training; and
c. job-ready training.
Article 23
Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution and the implementation of protection for victims of acts of gender-based violence and children are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.
CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation
Article 24
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of implementing protection for acts of gender-based violence and children as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. Government;
b. Provincial Government;
c. other regency/city governments; and
d. community.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up in accordance with applicable law.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) is implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.
Part Two
Partnership
Article 25
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with stakeholders in implementing protection against acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through:
a. notification of job opportunity information for victims of acts of gender-based violence and children;
b. education and training for victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for victims of acts of violence who are deprived of their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnership as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), is set forth in the form of an agreement.
CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 26
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. minimum service standards (SPM);
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for guidance and supervision by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are regulated by Mayoral Regulation.
Article 27
The community can conduct supervision of the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based violence and children organized by the Regional Government through the mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Mayor or DPRD.
CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 28
(1) The community can participate in efforts to implement protection against acts of gender-based violence and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), can be carried out by individuals or organizations.
(3) Community participation in implementing protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children can be carried out through:
a. providing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children;
b. providing emergency assistance;
c. providing advocacy to victims and/or the community regarding handling cases of gender-based violence and children;
d. assisting the process of submitting applications for protection determination;
e. conveying information to authorized officers related to cases of gender-based violence and children;
f. fostering local wisdom with the principles of non-discrimination and best interests of victims in handling gender-based violence and children;
g. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling gender-based violence and children;
h. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to gender-based violence and children.
CHAPTER X
REPORTING
Article 29
(1) SKPD is obligated to report the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based violence and children to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. service; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports on recapitulation of reported cases is implemented at least once every 3 (three) months.
CHAPTER XI
FUNDING SOURCES
Article 30
Funds for implementing protection against acts of gender-based violence and children, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pekalongan City.

Established in Pekalongan
on June 16, 2015
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN,

Seal.
signed-
MOHAMAD BASYIR AHMAD
Promulgated in Pekalongan
on June 16, 2015
REGIONAL SECRETARY,
DWI ARIE PUTRANTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PEKALONGAN CITY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 5

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE: (5/2015)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR
VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The state has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb and damage psychological, physical, sexual and economic security. This is philosophically stated in the preamble to the 1945 Constitution, that the purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire Nation and Indonesian Territory. Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it is obligated to fulfill these provisions.
Human Rights state that, the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the State, especially the Government. Through Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, the government recognizes the existence of children's rights. The inherent rights of children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, Right to Growth and Development, Right to Protection and Right to Participation. To fulfill the Right to life, children need adequate, healthy and nutritious food, as well as optimal health access. Protection from violence that threatens their safety and health must be provided from an early age. Protection is needed to prevent physical, mental and sexual violence and exploitation. To fulfill the right to growth and development, children need space to play, exercise, and education appropriate to their physical and psychological development.
In fulfilling children's rights, every government administrator, community and parents must understand and care about children's rights. The existence of legal instruments and legal apparatus that defend children's interests is needed for this protection effort. Laws and regulations that are principled on defending the best interests of the child are needed to realize protection that is legal in nature. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to find cases of women and children experiencing problems of physical, psychological, sexual and social violence. For example, women and children who are victims of persecution, neglect, eviction and abuse by parents or others. For women and children experiencing such problems, the government must provide Safe Houses (children protection homes) or Integrated Service Centers (PPT) for women and children victims of acts of violence. Safe Houses or PPT are safe and friendly places for women and children. The PPT is equipped with assistants from educators, doctors, psychologists, clerics/religious leaders and networked with lawyers for women and children as well as RPK Units at the Police.
The fate of women and children victims of acts of violence must be given attention by the government. The large number of cases of acts of violence against women and children are often caused by factors that develop in society, such as low economic levels, education, environments in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of acts of violence like this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights. For empowerment of victims of acts of violence, the regional government can establish an Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) as a center for empowerment of women victims of acts of violence that specifically has the main duties and functions for empowerment of women and children victims of acts of violence. From the above framework, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children. From these various efforts, a legal framework will be realized in implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear
Article 2
Sufficiently clear
Article 3
Sufficiently clear
Article 4
Sufficiently clear
Article 5
Sufficiently clear
Article 6
Sufficiently clear
Article 7
Sufficiently clear
Article 8
Sufficiently clear
Article 9
Sufficiently clear
Article 10
Sufficiently clear
Article 11
Sufficiently clear
Article 12
Sufficiently clear
Article 13
Paragraph (1)
If based on urgency and assessment it is possible, then the Women, Children and Youth Protection Institution can be established up to the Village level.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear
Article 14
Sufficiently clear
Article 15
Sufficiently clear
Article 16
In addition to victims of acts of gender-based violence and children, forms of service and assistance organized by LP-PAR are also provided to Children in Conflict with the Law. In legal literature, ABH states that Children in conflict with the law are children who have reached the age of 12 (twelve) years but have not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years and are not married:
a. Who are suspected, accused, charged, or sentenced for committing a criminal act;
b. Who become victims of a criminal act or who see and/or hear directly the occurrence of a criminal act.
Children in conflict with the law can also be said to be children who are forced to contact the criminal justice system because:
a. They are suspected, charged, or proven guilty of violating the law
b. They have become victims as a result of acts of law violations committed by persons/groups of persons/institutions/states against them; or
c. They have seen, heard, felt, or known of an event of law violation.
There are two categories of child behavior that make them have to face the law:
a. Status Offence
Namely child delinquency behavior that if done by adults is not considered a crime
for example: skipping school, running away from home, etc.
b. Juvenile Delinquency
Namely child delinquency behavior that if done by adults is considered a crime or criminal for example; robbery, rape, sexual harassment, etc.
Therefore, if viewed from its scope, children in conflict with the law can be divided into:
a. Perpetrators or suspects of criminal acts;
b. Victims of criminal acts;
c. Witnesses to a criminal act
As a child, legal mechanisms and the community's sense of justice must be placed in a framework that constructively encourages their physical and psychological development.
Forms of service and assistance organized by LP-PAR are also provided to women in conflict with the law.
Legal protection for women's interests in playing their position in society needs to be carried out by preparing various laws and regulations, and their consistent enforcement, as well as socialization activities to raise awareness of their rights and obligations. In addition, non-legal support is needed, because law is only one means of social control. Action agendas from various components of society in an integrative manner need and must be immediately realized.
In addition, in the context of empowerment and protection of women, there needs to be legal, psychological, social and economic assistance when women are faced with legal processes.
Article 17
Sufficiently clear
Article 18
Sufficiently clear
Article 19
Sufficiently clear
Article 20
Sufficiently clear
Article 21
Sufficiently clear
Article 22
Sufficiently clear
Article 23
Sufficiently clear
Article 24
Sufficiently clear
Article 25
Sufficiently clear
Article 26
Sufficiently clear
Article 27
Sufficiently clear
Article 28
Sufficiently clear
Article 29
Sufficiently clear
Article 30
Sufficiently clear
Article 31
Sufficiently clear