COPY

REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY NUMBER 2 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WONOSOBO,

Considering: a. that social problems of women and children in Wonosobo Regency continue to increase and become increasingly complex, thus requiring comprehensive, integrated and sustainable mitigation efforts organized by the Regional Government, community and business sector;
b. that the implementation of social protection for women and children still has gaps in its handling so it needs to receive priority according to what is needed;
c. that social affairs is a mandatory function that is the duty and responsibility of the Regional Government, thus requiring regulation regarding social protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency concerning Social Protection for Women and Children;

In view of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas Within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette Year 1950);
3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
5. Law No 7 year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
6. Law Number 8 Year 1985 concerning Social Organizations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1985 Number 44, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3298);
7. Law Number 3 Year 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
8. Law Number 4 Year 1997 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 9, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3670);
9. Law Number 19 Year 1999 concerning Ratification... (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
10. Law Number 20 Year 1999
11. Law Number 39 Year 1999
12. Law Number 1 Year 2000
13. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
14. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
15. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
16. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended by Law Number 8 Year 2005 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 3 Year 2005 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4468) most recently Law Number 12 Year 2008;
17. Law Number 24 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
18. Law Number 40 Year 2004 concerning National Social Security System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 150, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4456);
19. Law Number 23 Year 2006
20. Law Number 21 Year 2007
21. Law Number 44 Year 2008
22. Law Number 11 Year 2009
23. Law Number 12 Year 2011
24. Government Regulation Number 31 Year 1980 concerning Mitigation of Vagrancy and Begging (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1980 Number 51, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3177);
25. Government Regulation Number 42 Year 1981 concerning Social Welfare Services for the Poor (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3206);
26. Government Regulation Number 2 Year 1988 concerning Child Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3367);
27. Government Regulation Number 43 Year 1998 concerning Efforts to Improve Social Welfare of Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 70, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3952);
28. Government Regulation Number 43 Year 2004 concerning Implementation of Efforts to Improve Welfare of the Elderly (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4451);
29. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
30. Government Regulation Number 31 Year 2006 concerning National Job Training System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 67, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4637);
31. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
32. Government Regulation Number Number 9 Year 2008
33. Presidential Regulation Number 1 Year 2007 concerning Ratification, Promulgation and Dissemination of Legislation;
34. Presidential Decree Number Number 59 Year 2002
35. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 9 Year 2007
36. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 Year 2009
37. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 5 Year 2009
38. Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency Number 12 Year 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures
39. Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency Number 14 Year 2008

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF WONOSOBO REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF WONOSOBO

DECIDE:

To Stipulate: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
1. Region is Wonosobo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Wonosobo
4. Vice Regent is the Vice Regent of Wonosobo
5. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Council of Wonosobo Regency.
6. Regional Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Apparatus of Wonosobo Regency tasked in the field of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children
7. Regional Work Unit Section hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD is part of SKPD
8. Social welfare is a condition of fulfillment of material, spiritual, and social needs of citizens so they can live properly and are able to develop themselves, so they can carry out their social functions.
9. Implementation of social welfare for women and children is a directed, integrated, and sustainable effort carried out by the Government, Regional Government and community in the form of social services to meet the basic needs of every citizen, especially women and children, which includes social rehabilitation, social security, social empowerment, and social protection.
10. Social problems
11. Social rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out their social functions properly in community life.
12. Social empowerment is all efforts directed to make citizens experiencing social problems have power, so they are able to meet their basic needs.
13. Social security is an institutionalized scheme to ensure all people can meet their basic life needs properly.
14. Social protection is all efforts directed to prevent and handle risks from social problems.
15. Special protection is
16. Social outreach is a series of activities to pick up women and children who are in parks, markets, streets and public places that can cause social problems, so that these women and children receive social welfare implementation services.
17. Social organization is a social association formed by the community that is legally incorporated or not legally incorporated that functions as a means of community participation in carrying out social welfare efforts.
18. Social Institution is an institution or work unit established by the community and/or government that provides social welfare services
19. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (Eighteen) years old including a child still in the womb.
20. Child in emergency situation is
21. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled both physically, mentally, spiritually and socially.
22. Child with disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles so that their growth and development is disrupted properly.
23. Child welfare is a child's life that can guarantee their growth and development properly both physically, spiritually and socially.
24. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or blood relatives in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
25. Poor family is a family that has no source of livelihood and has no ability to meet basic needs proper for humanity or people who have a source of livelihood but cannot meet proper basic needs.
26. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the household scope.
27. Human trafficking is
28. Victim is
29. Person with disability is every person who has physical and/or mental abnormalities that can disturb or constitute obstacles and barriers for them to perform properly consisting of persons with physical and mental disabilities
30. Social deviant is a person whose life does not conform to religious norms, moral norms, legal norms, and/or community norms.
31. Care is various efforts given to children who have no parents and are neglected, neglected children, and children experiencing behavioral problems, which are temporary in nature as a substitute for parents or family so they can grow and develop properly both spiritually, physically, and socially.
32. Social assistance is assistance that is not permanent or temporary and given within a certain period to social welfare beneficiaries who are unable so they can improve their social welfare level and are able to carry out their social functions properly in community life both spiritually, physically, and socially.
33. Community members are residents of Wonosobo Regency and foreign citizens residing in Wonosobo Regency.
34. Community is a group of community members who have interest and role in the field of social welfare.
35. Violence against children is

CHAPTER II
SCOPE

Article 2
The scope of social protection includes: women and children with social problems.

Article 3
Women and children with social problems as referred to in Article 2, include:
a. Neglected children;
b. Children who are victims of gender-based violence and/or mistreated;
c. Delinquent children;
d. Street children;
e. Children with disabilities;
f. Women with socio-economic vulnerability;
g. Women who are victims of gender-based violence and/or mistreated;
h. women and children victims of human trafficking
i. children with special needs
j. children in emergency situations

Article 4
Social protection for women and children in the form of:
a. Social assistance;
b. Social advocacy; and/or
c. Legal assistance.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES, FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES

Article 5
Social protection for women and children is based on:
a. humanity;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children;
e. non-discrimination;
f. participation;
g. professionalism; and
h. partnership.

Article 6
Social protection for women and children functions to:
a. prevent the emergence, growth and development of social welfare problems.
b. restore social functions in achieving independence.
c. increase community social resilience in preventing and handling social welfare problems.
d. develop social potential.
e. empower social resources.
f. prevent social vulnerability.

Article 7
Social protection for women and children aims to:
a. eliminate all forms of violence against women and children
b. protect, provide security for women and children
c. improve welfare level, quality, and survival.
d. restore social functions in order to achieve independence.
e. increase community social resilience in preventing and handling social welfare problems.
f. increase awareness, capability, concern and social responsibility of the business sector in implementing social welfare in an institutionalized and sustainable manner.
g. increase awareness, capability, concern and social responsibility of the business sector and community.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION

Part One
General

Article 8
(1) Social protection for women and children is a joint obligation between the Regional Government, community, social organizations and business sector implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner.
(2) Social protection for women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) is prioritized for women and children who have lives that are not proper for humanity and have social problem criteria:
a. poverty
b. neglect;
c. disability
d. social deviance and behavioral deviation; and/or
e. victims of gender-based violence against children and/or mistreated, as well as victims of human trafficking;
f. victims of social conflict.
(3) Social protection for women and children, as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. prevention efforts;
b. handling efforts;
c. recovery efforts;
d. protection and support efforts.

Article 9
Prevention Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter a, can be carried out among others through efforts:
a. counseling and social guidance;
b. Social assistance;
c. improvement of health and education levels;
d. increased ease of access to resources;
e. empowerment.

Article 10
(1) Handling Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter b, can be carried out among others through efforts:
a. outreach (raid operations);
b. identification;
c. selection;
d. social motivation;
e. social guidance and assistance.
(2) In the framework of handling efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), further actions can be taken consisting of:
a. referral to Temporary Shelter;
b. referral to Social Rehabilitation Institution/Center;
c. return to parents/guardians/family/place of origin;
d. provision of health services.

Article 11
(1) Recovery Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter c, can be carried out among others through efforts:
a. Initial motivation from outreach results (raid operations);
b. Identification;
c. Selection;
d. Social motivation;
e. Distribution/referral to rehabilitation institutions;
f. Return to place of origin;
g. Social guidance and Skills training;
h. Stimulus assistance;
i. Supervision.
(2) Handling of rehabilitative efforts can be carried out in institutions within and outside the region.
(3) In implementing rehabilitative efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), can be provided through guidance, education, training both physical, mental, social, medical rehabilitation, work skills according to their talents and abilities, social assistance, distribution and follow-up guidance.

Article 12
Protection and support efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter d, can be carried out through efforts to provide facilities including:
a. Child Care Social Institution that can receive referrals from private institutions and equipped with workshop facilities;
b. Women's Work Center;
c. Provision of facilities/accessibility for persons with disabilities in buildings and public facilities.

Article 13
Technical implementation of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (2) is further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Social Protection and Implementation
of Social Welfare for Women

Article 14
Every Woman has the right to obtain social protection in the form of equal treatment and opportunities in education and training, work protection for safety and/or health related to women's reproductive functions according to proper life norms and livelihood.

Article 15
Every woman is obliged to maintain the dignity of herself and her family as well as her nature as a woman by paying attention to her function and role in family and/or community life according to her ability.

Article 16
(1) Regional Government and/or community provide social protection and implementation of social welfare to women who are unable, neglected, exploited, trafficked and prostitutes.
(2) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (1), through:
a. education and training services;
b. work and business opportunities;
c. physical, religious, mental, and social guidance;
d. health services;
e. legal assistance;
f. other special social protection.
(3) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (2) is the responsibility of SKPD/UKPD according to their duties and functions.
(4) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (2), can be organized by the community, social organizations, and business sector.

Article 17
Every institution, both government and private, that organizes public services or employs women must provide adequate facilities for women's interests.

Part Three
Social Protection And
Implementation of Social Welfare for Children

Article 18
(1) Every child has the right to receive social protection and implementation of social welfare from parents, family, community, and regional government to grow and develop properly.
(2) Every child has the right to receive social protection and implementation of social welfare to develop their abilities and social life according to the culture and personality of the nation to become good and useful community members.
(3) Every child has the right to receive maintenance of child welfare level and protection from environments that endanger and/or hinder their growth and development properly.
(4) Every child has the right to receive first aid, assistance and protection in dangerous situations. every child has the right to receive protection from parents against all forms of physical and mental violence, neglect, mistreatment, exploitation and sexual abuse, as well as the right to care, religious guidance, and mental social.

Article 19
(1) Everyone is prohibited from neglecting, committing violence and/or exploitation against children.
(2) Everyone is prohibited from employing children under working age as regulated in the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 20
Regional government and/or community can carry out social protection and implementation of social welfare for children for the purpose of improving child welfare carried out according to statutory provisions.

Article 21
(1) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in Article 18, in the form of:
a. Care and custody
b. Health services and nutritional improvement;
c. Education and recreation services;
d. Religious, mental and social guidance;
e. Social rehabilitation;
f. Social assistance;
g. Family reunification;
h. Population administration and civil registration services;
i. Funeral services
j. Legal assistance services;
k. Maintenance of social welfare level
l. Provision of childcare facilities at workplaces
m. Other special social protection.
(2) For children with disabilities in addition to receiving social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), also receive accessibility services.
(3) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), is the responsibility of SKPD/UKPD according to their duties and functions.
(4) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1) can be organized by the community, social organizations and business sector.
(5) Further provisions regarding forms of social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY
AND COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Part One
Regional Government Responsibility

Article 22
(1) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children is the responsibility of the Regional Government.
(2) Regional Government responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. planning, implementation, development, guidance and supervision of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children;
b. application of service standards for social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children;
c. provision and/or provision of facilities and infrastructure;
d. provision of facilities for social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children;
e. development of institutional capacity and social resources according to the development of science and technology;
f. facilitating participation from the community, social organizations and/or business sector in social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(3) Responsibility as referred to in paragraph (2), can be delegated to SKPD/UKPD related to social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.

Article 23
(1) In carrying out responsibilities as referred to in Article 21 paragraph (3), SKPD/UKPD prepares a plan for social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) In preparing the plan as referred to in paragraph (2), guided by the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJM) and Regional Long-Term Development Plan (RPJP).
(3) Social welfare implementation plan as referred to in paragraph (2) is regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Community Participation

Article 24
(1) Community can participate in social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children
(2) Role as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by:
a. Individuals;
b. Family;
c. Religious organizations;
d. Community social organizations;
e. Non-governmental organizations;
f. Professional organizations;
g. Business entities;
h. Social welfare institutions; and
g. Foreign social welfare institutions.

Article 25
Professional organizations as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) letter f include:
a. professional social worker associations;
b. social work education institutions; and
c. social welfare institutions.

Article 26
Role of business entities as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) letter g in social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children is carried out as part of social and environmental responsibility according to statutory provisions.

Article 27
Regional government can give awards to the community, social organizations and business entities that play a role in social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.

Article 28
(1) Community can form a social organization to optimize participation in coordinating social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children
(2) Regional government facilitates the formation of social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) according to applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Social organization as referred to in paragraph (1) is formed at the regency level and can have representatives in every sub-district and/or village.
(4) Social organization as referred to in paragraph (1) is open, autonomous and is not an institution that has a hierarchical relationship with the regional government structure.
(5) Social organization as referred to in paragraph (1) must meet the requirements:
a. not for profit/non-profit;
b. in institutional form;
c. oriented to public interest;
d. managed professionally;
(6) Social organization as referred to in paragraph (1) must obtain permission from the Regent through the head of SKPD/UKPD responsible in the field of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(7) Further provisions regarding licensing procedures as referred to in paragraph (6) refer to applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
COOPERATION

Article 29
(1) Regional government can cooperate with other regional governments to carry out social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) Form of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), can be in the form of:
a. repatriation and follow-up guidance;
b. social counseling
c. health services
d. provision of employment opportunities
e. education and training
f. research and development of science and technology
g. funding
h. procurement of facilities and infrastructure.
(3) Procedures for cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are implemented according to applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Part One
Guidance

Article 30
Regional Government conducts guidance for social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children, including:
a. Coordination;
b. Determination of guidelines and standards;
c. Provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation;
d. Research, monitoring, and evaluation.

Article 31
(1) Coordination as referred to in Article 30 letter a, starts from the planning, implementation and evaluation stages.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented at the regency, sub-district and village levels by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 32
(1) Determination of guidelines and standards as referred to in Article 30 letter b, covers planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control and supervision.
(2) Determination of guidelines and standards as referred to in paragraph (1), is prepared by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 33
(1) Provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation as referred to in Article 30 letter c, covers planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control and supervision.
(2) Counseling and/or guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to the community, social organizations and business entities.
(3) Provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 34
(1) Research, monitoring and evaluation as referred to in Article 30 letter d, is carried out in the framework of evaluating social impacts of development, policy development and achievement of social welfare effort objectives.
(2) Research, monitoring, and evaluation is implemented periodically or according to needs by SKPD/UKPD according to their functions and authorities.

Part Two
Supervision

Article 35
(1) Regional government conducts supervision of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children according to their duties, functions, and authorities.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the principles of transparency and accountability.

Article 36
(1) Functional supervision of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children is implemented by functional supervisory apparatus.
(2) Technical operational supervision of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children organized by social organizations and community is carried out by SKPD/UKPD.
(3) Further provisions regarding implementation of supervision are regulated by Regent Regulation according to applicable laws and regulations.

Article 37
(1) Social organizations and/or community can participate in conducting supervision of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out according to laws and regulations

CHAPTER VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 38
(1) Every social organization that has obtained permission in implementing social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children, which deliberately does not provide social services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (5), can be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Every social organization that implements social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children without permission as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (6), can be subject to administrative sanctions.
(3) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1), can be in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning;
c. revocation of permission.

CHAPTER IX
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 39
(1) Everyone who neglects, commits violence and/or exploitation against children as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) is subject to criminal sanctions as regulated in Article 77 letter b, Article 80, Article 81, Article 82, and Article 88 of Law No. 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection.
(2) Everyone who employs children under working age as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) is subject to criminal sanctions as regulated in Article 185 paragraph (1) of Law No 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower.

CHAPTER X
INVESTIGATION

Article 40
Investigation can be implemented by Civil Servant Investigators (PPNS) within the Regional Government.

Article 41
In carrying out investigation duties, Civil Servant Investigators are authorized to:
a. receive, search for, collect and examine information or reports related to criminal acts;
b. examine, search for and collect information about individuals or entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts;
c. request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. examine books, records and other documents related to criminal acts;
e. conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, recording and other documents and conduct seizures of such evidence;
f. request assistance from experts in the framework of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and examine the identity of persons and/or documents carried as referred to in letter e of this Article;
h. take fingerprints and photograph someone related to criminal acts;
i. summon people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. stop the investigation after receiving instructions from the POLRI investigator that there is insufficient evidence or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the POLRI investigator notify this to the public prosecutor, suspect or their family;
k. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts, according to law that can be accounted for.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 42
All provisions related to social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children that existed before the promulgation of this Regional Regulation, remain valid as long as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 43
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation

So that everyone can know it, orders the promulgation of this Regional regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Wonosobo Regency.

Stipulated in Wonosobo
on date 26 March 2012

REGENT OF WONOSOBO,

Seal.signature
H.A. KHOLIQ ARIF

Promulgated in Wonosobo
on date 27 March 2012
REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF WONOSOBO REGENCY,

Seal. Signature
EKO SUTRISNO WIBOWO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOSOBO REGENCY YEAR 2012 NO 7
Copy in accordance with the original

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE (1 / 2012)
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION
The targets of development in the field of social welfare regulated in this Regional Regulation are directed to Women and Children. Especially programs to improve quality of life and protection of women and children. This is adjusted to the objectives and functions of a Regional Regulation to regulate certain matters according to the conditions and needs of a region.

This Regional Regulation on Social Protection for Women and Children aims to provide a legal basis for Social Protection Efforts for Women and Children and provide studies within the philosophical, sociological and juridical framework regarding the need for a Regional Regulation that becomes the legal foundation to handle social problems in Wonosobo Regency especially related to Women and Children.

Substantively, that in efforts to overcome problems of Women and Children in Wonosobo Regency, it is necessary to prepare a Regional Regulation on Social Protection for Women and Children which essentially is an action that is rooted or has a strong foundation, namely in good governance, and so that it is prepared with correct principles.

Regulation in the field of Social Protection for Women and Children must pay attention to environmental and social aspects, so that the social conditions of the community are controlled. Regulation of Social Protection for Women and Children through Regional Regulations can be viewed as a solution as well as an effort to prevent negative impacts that potentially harm community interests.

The absence of a Regional Regulation that specifically regulates Social Protection for Women and Children in Wonosobo Regency, makes the urgency of this Regional Regulation indeed needed as a legal umbrella for the creation of legal certainty in the matter of Social Protection for Women and Children, which is an obligation of the Regional Government especially the Wonosobo Regional Government to provide Social Protection for Women and Children of Wonosobo Regency.

II. ELUCIDATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
a. Neglected child is a child aged 0-18 years who due to certain reasons (poor/unable, one or both parents/guardians sick or deceased, family not harmonious), so that their basic needs cannot be properly fulfilled both physically, spiritually and socially.
b. Child who is a victim of gender-based violence or mistreated is a child aged 0-18 years who is threatened physically and non-physically due to violence, mistreated or improperly treated in the family environment or closest social environment, so that their basic needs are not properly fulfilled both physically, spiritually and socially.
c. Delinquent child is a child aged 0-18 years who behaves deviating from norms and customs prevailing in society, their environment so as to harm themselves, their family and others, will disturb public order, but due to age cannot yet be prosecuted legally.
d. Street child is a child aged 0-18 years who spends most of their time seeking livelihood and/or wandering on the streets or in public places.
e. Child with disability is a child aged 0-18 years who has physical and/or mental abnormalities, which can disturb or constitute obstacles and barriers for them to perform activities properly, consisting of persons with physical disabilities, persons with mental disabilities, persons with physical and mental disabilities.
f. Woman with socio-economic vulnerability is an adult woman aged 18-59 years, unmarried or widowed who does not have sufficient income to meet daily basic needs.
g. Woman who is a victim of gender-based violence and/or mistreated is a woman aged 18-59 years who is threatened physically or non-physically (psychologically) due to violence, mistreated or improperly treated in the family environment or closest social environment.
h. Trafficking of women and children is the transfer, transportation, mobilization, sending of children and women within a country or abroad illegally and against the law, with or without the consent of the person concerned, to then be employed exploitatively, especially in the prostitution environment

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
a. What is meant by "principle of solidarity" is that in implementing social welfare it must be based on social concern to help people who need help with empathy and compassion.
b. What is meant by "principle of justice" is that in implementing social welfare it must emphasize aspects of equity, non-discrimination and balance between rights and obligations.
c. What is meant by "principle of benefit" is that in implementing social welfare it must provide benefits for improving the quality of life of citizens.
d. What is meant by "principle of integration" is that in implementing social welfare it must integrate various related components so they can run in a coordinated and synergistic manner.
e. What is meant by "principle of partnership" is that in handling social welfare problems, partnership is needed between the Government and the community, the Government as responsible party and the community as the Government's partner in handling social welfare problems and improving social welfare.
f. What is meant by "principle of openness" is providing the widest possible access to the community to obtain information related to the implementation of social welfare.
g. What is meant by "principle of accountability" is that in every implementation of social welfare it must be accountable according to statutory provisions.
h. What is meant by "principle of participation" is that in every implementation of social welfare it must involve all components of society
i. What is meant by "principle of professionalism" is that in every implementation of social welfare to the community it should be based on professionalism according to their scope of duties and implemented as optimally as possible.
j. What is meant by "principle of sustainability" is that in implementing social welfare it is carried out continuously, so that independence is achieved.
k. What is meant by "principle of non-discrimination" is treatment that does not differentiate ethnicity, religion, race, group, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of children, birth order of children, and physical and mental conditions.
l. What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as humans, so they are able to play a role and participate in political, legal, economic, socio-cultural, educational and national defense and security (hankamnas) activities, as well as equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1)
To obtain optimal results, in the framework of program implementation it must be integrated and cross-sectoral with a comprehensive approach both between professions and between agencies by developing active participation from the community.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (3)
a. What is meant by preventive is efforts in the framework of preventing the emergence of complex social problems in society, which are directed both to individuals and groups of people who are predicted to become sources of social welfare problem bearers.
b. What is meant by repressive is efforts in the form of supervision, with the aim of reducing and/or controlling the number of social welfare problem bearers directed to a person or group of people with social welfare problems.
c. What is meant by rehabilitative is care, vocational, accessibility and empowerment efforts aimed at changing the mental attitude of social welfare problem bearers from a non-productive state to a productive state.
d. Sufficiently Clear;

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (2)
Guidance through institutions can be carried out at Child Care Social Institutions, Child Retreat Social Institutions and Youth Development Social Institutions, while outside institutions through child adoption, child care in their own family or substitute family.

The outside institution system for handling street children can be in the form of: transit houses, child friend mobiles, Islamic boarding schools, and so on. Such a system functions to become a center for child welfare services in development, protection, recovery and prevention, also as an information center for data collection and problem solving, as well as a center for skills development and creativity development.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently Clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Paragraph (1)
Social organizations include community organizations, non-governmental organizations, social rehabilitation institutions for persons with disabilities organized by social bodies, social organizations that can organize care efforts for neglected children

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (6)
For legal and social order, Social Organizations must be legally incorporated because they have important duties and functions and their existence and work programs must be accountable. The Regent as regional head who is responsible for social problems has authority in the field of licensing.

Paragraph 7
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently Clear

Paragraph (2) letter h.
What is meant by facilities and infrastructure in this regulation is all facilities funded and obtained from the Regional Budget and/or State Budget to support social welfare functions. Among others: Regional Hospitals, Shelters, Transit Houses, Social Transport Vehicles, Facilities at Nursing Homes, Orphanages, Foundations, etc.

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently Clear

Article 35
Sufficiently Clear

Article 36
Sufficiently Clear

Article 37
Sufficiently Clear

Article 38
Sufficiently Clear

Article 39
Sufficiently Clear

Article 40
Sufficiently Clear

Article 41
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOSOBO REGENCY NO 7