REGENT OF BARITO TIMUR
CENTRAL KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BARITO TIMUR,

Considering: a. that women and children with their dignity have the right to be protected from various acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination that marginalize and degrade their dignity as human beings;

b. that negative behavior and actions that can result in women and children being in a pressured position or powerlessness in the social community scope, or in the legal process scope should be given special treatment that maintains the stability of their soul and spirit to remain able to carry out their lives in social interaction;

c. that the Regional Government is obliged to provide protection for women and children;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

3. Law Number 5 Year 2002 concerning the Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and Barito Timur Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 18, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Law Number 44 Year 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);

9. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

10. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);

11. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

12. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

13. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

14. Government Regulation Number 65 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for the Preparation and Implementation of Minimum Service Standards (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 150, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4585);

15. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery for Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

16. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

17. Government Regulation Number 12 Year 2019 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 42, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6322);

18. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 Year 2011 concerning the Second Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);

19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);

20. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);

With Mutual Approval
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF BARITO TIMUR

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of Barito Timur Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government Administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Barito Timur.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives Institution which is positioned as an element of Government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus of Barito Timur Regency is an assistant element to the Regent and Regional House of Representatives of Barito Timur Regency in the Administration of government affairs that are the authority of Barito Timur Regency.
6. Agency is the Regional Apparatus that handles government affairs in the field of women and children.
7. Technical Service Unit is the Regional Technical Service Unit that handles the affairs of protection of women and children.
8. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
9. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a Woman.
10. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
11. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
12. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and hardship whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
13. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
14. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
15. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
16. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
17. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights violations (HAM), or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
18. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
19. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
20. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution that has the expertise to provide assistance.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
22. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
23. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
24. Institution is an agency/office/body within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
25. Regional Action Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RAD is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
26. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
27. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
28. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line up or down and sideways up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
29. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
30. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and stipulated by Regional Regulation.
31. Gender Equality is the view that all people should receive equal treatment and not be discriminated against based on their gender identity.
32. Medicolegal Service is a form of health service performed by medical personnel using medical science and technology based on the authority possessed for legal purposes and to implement applicable regulations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

(1) The implementation of protection for women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children;
d. the best interests of women and children; and
e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience acts of violence or neglect.

(2) The objectives of implementing protection for women and children include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing security for women and children;
d. providing services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitating and mediating domestic disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity; and
f. seeking compensation/compensation for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE

Article 3

(1) Protection of women and children in the region includes prevention, services, and empowerment of victims of physical violence, psychological violence, sexual violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons, and domestic neglect including child deviant behavior.

(2) The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence is the obligation and shared responsibility of the Regional Government, community, family, and parents.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical, psychological violence, exploitation or trafficking in persons has the right to receive protection and services.

(2) Protection, assistance, and services to victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. complaints or requests for protection from the person concerned and/or other parties;
c. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose whereabouts are kept secret to avoid intimidation and threats;
d. medical services/health care in the form of treatment and recovery of injuries or physical condition of victims by medical and paramedical personnel;
e. medicolegal services for legal evidence;
f. protection by law enforcement officers;
g. provision of information about legal rights and obligations to victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;
h. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
i. recovery of physical, psychological or sexual health according to the suffering experienced by victims of violence;
j. psychological assistance to restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore victims' self-confidence;
k. legal assistance and obtaining compensation or compensation rights;
l. spiritual guidance services;
m. determining their own decisions;
n. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
o. guarantee of rights related to status as family members and community members (social reintegration); and
p. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

(3) In the case that the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), they also receive special rights including:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas;
e. the right to obtain freedom; and
f. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 5

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection for women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. institutions;
d. family; and
e. parents.

Article 6

The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include:
a. implementing protection obligations for women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing Safe Houses for women and children victims of violence;
f. allocating budget for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
h. establishing regional technical implementation units for the protection of women and children based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 7

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties, and/or related Agencies through UPTD PPA; and
e. participating in handling victims of acts of violence.

(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 8

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL

Article 9

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to establish a Technical Service Unit for the protection of women and children.

(2) The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) is established based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

(3) The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) is established after this Regional Regulation comes into force and is regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT

Part One
General

Article 10

The Regional Government through the Agency or technical service unit and Regional Apparatus, implements prevention and service efforts for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of Children and Women up to empowering victims to be able to return to carrying out their lives in accordance with the dignity they possess.

Part Two
Prevention of Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect of Women and Children

Article 11

(1) Forms of prevention as referred to in Article 10 are carried out through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children and Women to the wider community in the region;
b. dissemination activities of information on the protection of women and children to be known by everyone in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or notice boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the worst level;
c. training for members who are able to disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;
d. opening of community complaint channels by the Regional Government or Agency through the Technical Service Unit in each area through community networks;
e. strengthening coordination channels with Sub-district, Village/Sub-district Government;
f. immediate handling of community complaints throughout the region and securing subjects of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons or neglect; and/or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of public awareness up to the smallest community groups (families) especially parents to protect women and children.

(2) The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD conducts data collection on areas of acts of violence based on incident rates and conducts research and studies on the level of vulnerability of areas to find solutions for reduction to cessation of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.

Part Three
Services for Women and Children Who Experience Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 12

(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons or neglect are implemented in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3).

(2) To support the operations of UPTD, the Regent orders the Agency related to services as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government.

Article 13

The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD is obliged to prepare standard operating procedures for assistance to victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect at every stage of fulfilling victims' rights.

Article 14

The implementation of services and assistance to victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. fast, safe, and empathetic;
c. coordination between government agencies;
d. guarantee of confidentiality;
e. easily accessible; and
f. no fees charged.

Article 15

Forms of services for the rights of women and children from acts of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal aid; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Part Four
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 16

(1) The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD is obliged to carry out economic empowerment for victims of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect.

(2) Forms of empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. seeking the needs required for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic businesses;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of victims of acts of violence;
e. seeking the provision of capital for victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding information access and promoting products of victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 17

(1) Cooperation is carried out to strengthen the role of the Agency/UPTD in achieving the objectives of protecting women and children in the regional area.

(2) Cooperation is carried out with:
a. government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions; and
e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. victim rehabilitation;
c. repatriation and reintegration;
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 18

(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business world to support the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area.

(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1), are carried out through:
a. notification of job opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who are deprived of their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.

(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), are set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 19

(1) In implementing protection for women and children, the community can:
a. form family partners at the village/sub-district level by the community;
b. form women and child protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
d. provide first aid to victims; and
e. report to the authorized agency if violence against victims occurs in their environment.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER X
REGIONAL ACTION PLAN

Article 20

(1) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as a basis for implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence.

(2) RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

(3) Further provisions regarding RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 21

(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence.

(2) The Regent may appoint the Head of the Agency to conduct guidance and supervision.

Article 22

The community can conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or DPRD.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION

Article 23

(1) In addition to general investigating officers, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation, can also be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with laws and regulations.

(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. receive reports or complaints from someone about the existence of criminal acts of violence against Women and children;
b. take first action at that time at the scene and conduct an examination;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identity;
d. seize goods and/or letters;
e. take fingerprints and photograph someone;
f. summon people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in expert witnesses needed in connection with case examination;
h. stop the investigation after receiving instructions from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this to the public prosecutor, suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.

(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (2), notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Police Officer Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Law.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 24

(1) Anyone who intentionally does not provide protection for women and children resulting in acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, is subject to sanctions as stipulated in Laws and Regulations.

(2) If officials appointed to implement protection do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they are subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

(3) Officials who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence, violating service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with internal organizational mechanisms.

CHAPTER XIV
OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 25

(1) Handling of legal cases in the investigation process by law enforcement officers must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.

(2) Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are:
a. in cases of investigation for women or female children victims of violence must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in letter a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardian along with the advocacy and psychology team from P3A who have the same gender;
c. in cases of investigation for male children victims of violence can be carried out by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and implemented as referred to in letter b; and
d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 26

In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be presented at the trial, except in circumstances that are very compelling while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in different trial processes.

Article 27

In the case that the perpetrator of a criminal act is a child, the following applies:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by viewing the child as still having hope for their future;
b. The investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases;
c. Investigation is carried out in a closed room and attended only by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardian;
d. in the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but entrusted to their family with supervision and guarding;
e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court room; and
f. the child's punishment process is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that can be accompanied by their parents.

Article 28

News media are not permitted to expose news for cases involving child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and their future life prospects except if the victim loses their life as a result of the violence.

CHAPTER XV
FINANCING

Article 29

Budget allocation for protection of women and children victims of violence carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, and/or other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

The establishment of UPT as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (3) must be implemented at the latest 1 (one) year after this Regional Regulation is stipulated.

Article 31

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Barito Timur Regency.

Stipulated in Tamiang Layang
on date 24 April 2019

REGENT OF BARITO TIMUR,

Promulgated in Tamiang Layang
on date 24 April 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY,

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 60
NOREG REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY,
CENTRAL KALIMANTAN: (04.50/2019)

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

The role of women is very important because they are the mothers of the nation who are the pillars of the family to build the future of human resources in various fields including family economic empowerment, likewise with children who are the nation's generation who will play a role in filling development in the future.

Children and Women must receive protection from violent treatment, exploitation, trafficking in persons and neglect by responsible parties. Protection is intended to create a peaceful and prosperous atmosphere for all levels of society in fostering life and togetherness in the regional area.

Violence cannot be avoided just like that, but must be prevented as early as possible from spreading to a level that is detrimental to all parties. Protection efforts are prioritized on prevention efforts and minimizing incidents.

Acts of violence against Children and Women are violations of human rights so their dignity must be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and nature without discrimination. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Children and Women victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so institutional and regulatory support is needed that can guarantee their implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims, especially in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of Children and Women victims of violence in Kotabaru Regency. As one of the protection efforts for Children and Women, it is carried out through guidance, training and assistance to victims and families of victims of violence. Economic empowerment is also carried out for the prevention of women as victims, which can be done by fostering and developing micro and small businesses in accordance with local potential. To foster micro and small businesses, it is necessary to increase the capacity and capability of women through assistance and guidance so that women can develop their businesses.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
Respect for the rights of Children and Women is respect for the fulfillment of basic rights for women and children.

Letter b
What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a situation where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to obtain opportunities (access), as well as welfare; Gender equality is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Letter c
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment towards victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d
What is meant by "the best interests of the victim" is all the best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, so the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Letter e
What is meant by restoration of social economic rights is increasing understanding, awareness, responsibility, commitment, participation, ability and independence in order to improve the economy and quality of women or target groups so as to avoid problems.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.

What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

What is meant by "exploitation" includes:
a. actions that exploit a child economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. actions with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, physical, sexual, reproductive organ exploitation, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or obscenity activities.

What is meant by "trafficking in persons" is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring, or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person who holds control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:
a. actions that result in the non-fulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. actions of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as they should;
c. actions that neglect a person within their household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. actions that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

What is meant by deviant child behavior such as the use of glue that can cause children to feel addicted or intoxicated because they are invited by their friends, and deviations towards free sex behavior or the use of illegal goods.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear

Letter b
Sufficiently clear

Letter c
Sufficiently clear

Letter d
Stigma especially for cases of child rape, victims have the right not to receive exposure through media coverage including mention of family background, location/residence and those related to the child's future interests.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear

Letter f
Compensation or compensation is currently not yet formally institutionalized juridically but in customary rules (adat) it is already institutionalized, it is possible to have legal remedies in terms of loss claims as developed in developed countries today.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BARITO TIMUR REGENCY NUMBER