REGENT OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY NUMBER 1 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA,

Considering
a. that acts of violence against women constitute a violation of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature without discrimination;

b. that to prevent and overcome violence against women, legal protection needs to be provided for women victims of violence;

c. that Penajam Paser Utara Regency does not yet have a regulatory basis regarding the implementation of protection for women victims of violence;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women Victims of Violence;

Noting
1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 7 of 2002 concerning the Establishment of Penajam Paser Utara Regency in East Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2001 Number 20, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4182);

3. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95);

4. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);

5. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for Women and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY
and
REGENT OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA

DECIDES:

To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Penajam Paser Utara Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region of Penajam Paser Utara Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Penajam Paser Utara.
4. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
5. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and in a collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of the woman.
6. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

7. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
8. Prevention is all actions or efforts undertaken to eliminate various factors that cause acts of violence against women.
9. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
10. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
12. Victim is a Woman who experiences acts of violence.
13. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims of human trafficking from health disorders they suffer.
14. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.
15. Repatriation is an effort to return Women Victims of Violence to the Family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
16. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with the Family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
17. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to conduct the process of accompanying sanctions and/or Victims of Violence against Women and children that are gender sensitive.
18. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a regional technical implementation unit established by the regional government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
19. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to Victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

Article 2

Protection of Women Victims of Women aims to:
a. protect Women Victims of Violence;
b. provide Services to Women Victims of acts of Violence; and
c. empower Women Victims of Violence;
d. increase the capacity of women victims of violence in women's empowerment through related Regional Apparatus Organizations, Private Parties, Business World and others.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 3

Victims have the right to receive:
a. Protection from:
1. Family;
2. police;
3. prosecutor's office;
4. court;
5. advocate; and
6. social institutions, or other parties either temporarily or based on a court Protection order.
b. Health services according to medical needs;
c. special handling related to the confidentiality of Victims;
d. accompaniment by social workers and Legal Aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
e. Religious guidance Services; and
f. Victims have the right to determine their own decisions regarding which choices will be implemented.

CHAPTER III
AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY

Article 4

(1) The Regional Government has the authority and responsibility for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence.
(2) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. Service activities for Women Victims of Violence;
b. monitoring, strengthening of victims of Violence; and
c. capacity building of apparatus and other stakeholders.

CHAPTER IV
INSTITUTIONS

Article 5

(1) The Regent establishes UPTD PPA.
(2) Further provisions regarding the procedures for establishing UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 6

(1) UPTD PPA Services include:
a. providing Services and handling as quickly as possible to Victims;
b. providing convenience, comfort, safety, and free of charge for Victims;
c. maintaining the confidentiality of Victims; and
d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for Victims.
(2) Further provisions regarding the procedures for UPTD PPA Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 7

The operation of UPTD PPA requires:
a. adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure;
b. implementing officers; and
c. functional officers.

Article 8

(1) UPTD PPA is tasked with carrying out technical operational activities in its working area in providing services for women and children who experience problems of violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
(2) UPTD PPA in carrying out its duties as referred to in paragraph (1) performs service functions:
a. public complaints;
b. victim outreach;
c. case management;
d. temporary shelter;
e. mediation; and
f. victim accompaniment.
(3) UPTD PPA in performing functions as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted for basic Services in 1 (one) Regency.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION AND HANDLING

Article 9

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to organize Prevention of Violence against Women quickly, in an integrated and integrated manner.
(2) The organization of Prevention of acts of Violence against Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through the fields of:
a. Education;
b. Public facilities and infrastructure;
c. Government and institutional governance
d. Economy and employment;
e. Social welfare;
f. Culture;
g. Information technology;
h. Religion; and
i. Family

Article 10

Handling of women victims of violence is by providing services in an integrated and integrated manner including:
a. coverage of Women Victims of Violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated Service units;
b. coverage of Women Victims of Violence who receive health services by trained health workers at health centers and hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Women Victims of Violence in integrated Service units;
d. coverage of religious guidance services provided by trained religious guidance officers for Women Victims of Violence in integrated Service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of Violence Against Women;
f. coverage of Women Victims of Violence who receive Legal Aid services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women Victims of Violence; and
h. coverage of Social Reintegration services for Women Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER VI
SOCIAL PROTECTION HOUSE

Article 11

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to establish a social protection house and/or Safe House or other designation.
(2) The social protection house and/or Safe House as referred to in paragraph (1) guarantees the implementation of Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, and Social Reintegration Services.
(3) For the implementation of Services as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may utilize social Protection houses and/or Safe Houses owned by the community or other social Service institutions.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 12

(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated steps in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence in the Region.

Article 13

(1) Monitoring is carried out through coordination and direct monitoring of related regional apparatus periodically.
(2) Monitoring is carried out from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence for the current year.

Article 14

(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women Protection is carried out at the end of each fiscal year or if needed according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Women Protection are used as input material for the preparation of policies, programs, and activities for Women Protection for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING

Article 15

(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports on the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence and submitting them to the Governor with copies submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out annually.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures and form of reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 16

(1) The Regent conducts guidance on the development of UPTD PPA.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing implementation instructions;
b. guidance;
c. supervision; and
d. monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Services for Women Victims of Violence, apparatus and the community.

Article 17

The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence in the Region.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 18

(1) In organizing Protection for Women Victims of Violence, the community can:
a. form Family partners at the sub-district/Village level;
b. form Women Protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct socialization of Women's rights independently;
d. provide first aid to Victims; and
e. report to the competent authority if violence against Victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, community social institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING

Article 19

Funding in the implementation of Protection for Women Victims of Violence, is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 20

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Penajam Paser Utara Regency.

Enacted in Penajam
on April 11, 2023

REGENT OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA,

Signed

HAMDAM

Promulgated in Penajam
on April 11, 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY,

Signed

TOHAR

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 1.

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY, EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: 64.09 / II / 12 / 3 / 2023.

Copy in accordance with the original
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT
PENAJAM PASER UTARA
Legal Division,

S.H.,M.H
0117 200604 1 008

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY NUMBER 1 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Violence against Women is one form of action that violates human rights. As is known, the human rights of Women have been guaranteed and regulated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and the Law on Human Rights. Therefore, protection of Women's rights from violence should be respected, enforced and enhanced in human dignity without discrimination, welfare and justice for Women.

Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against children that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and mistreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of children. The existence of Women victims of violence has not received adequate services so that minimum services are needed for victims of violence.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against Women in Penajam Paser Utara Regency so as to avoid violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for Women victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for Women victims of violence, especially in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of Women victims of violence in Penajam Paser Utara Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
What is meant by Accompaniment is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and religious guidance, for strengthening the victim of violence to resolve the problems faced.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Letter a
What is meant by adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure is adjusted to the applicable minimum service standards and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration.
Letter b
What is meant by implementing officers or functional officers includes health workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers provided by relevant agencies or institutions.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PENAJAM PASER UTARA REGENCY NUMBER 39.

Copy in accordance with the original
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT
PENAJAM PASER UTARA
Legal Division,

S.H.,M.H.
17 200604 1 008