REGENT OF NUNUKAN
PROVINCE OF NORTH KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF NUNUKAN REGENCY
NUMBER 17 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF NUNUKAN,

Considering: Bearing in mind:
a.
that the right of every citizen to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b.
that all forms of acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c.
that laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not yet regulated protection efforts in the Region so that institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee their implementation;
d.
that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Nunukan Regency concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;
1.
Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2.
Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3.
Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women [Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women] (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4.
Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age FOR Admission to Employment [ILO Convention Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment] (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
5.
Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6.
Law Number 47 Year 1999 concerning the Establishment of Nunukan Regency, Malinau Regency, West Kutai Regency, East Kutai Regency and Bontang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3896) as amended by Law Number 7 Year 2000 concerning Amendment to Law Number 47 Year 1999 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3962);
7.
Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action For the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour [ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour] (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
8.
Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 208, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
9.
Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10.
Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11.
Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12.
Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
13.
Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
14.
Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Laws and Regulations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
15.
Law Number 10 Year 2012 concerning Ratification of the Optional Protocol To The Convention On The Rights Of The Child On The Sale Of Children, Child Prostitution And Child Pornography [Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography] (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
16.
Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
17.
Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601);

18. 19.
20.
Government Regulation Number 2 Year 1988 concerning Social Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3367);
Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation in the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
Regional Regulation of Nunukan Regency Number 15 Year 2008 concerning Regional Government Affairs (Regional Gazette of Nunukan Regency Year 2008 Number 15 Series D Number 04);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF NUNUKAN REGENCY and
REGENT OF NUNUKAN
DECIDE:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION OF NUNUKAN REGENCY CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of Nunukan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of Nunukan Regency. 3. Regent is the Regent of Nunukan.
4. Regional Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the implementation of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Technical Regional Work Unit hereinafter referred to as technical SKPD is a Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the affairs of Women's Empowerment and/or Child Protection.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge, and skills capabilities so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Fulfillment of Children's Rights is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate, optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
11. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the territory of Nunukan Regency.
12. Protection is all preventive, service and empowerment actions to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence.

13. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children. 14. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against victims.
15. Empowerment is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
16. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of victims including physical, psychological and social health so that victims can carry out their roles again properly and reasonably both in the family and in society.
17. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
18. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional territory to their region of origin.
19. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
20. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence and is integrated with PPT that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of: a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Child;
e. right to life, survival, and development; f. empowerment; and
g. legal certainty.
Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
b. maintain the integrity of the household to realize a harmonious family;
c. prevent violence against women and children;
d. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children; e. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence;
f. provide protection to reporters and witnesses; and g. empower women victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
Women's Empowerment
Paragraph 1
Rights and Obligations of Women
Article 4
Every Woman has the right:
a to live and the right to maintain life and livelihood;
b to form a family and continue offspring through lawful marriage;
c to develop themselves through the fulfillment of their basic needs; d to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, to improve their quality of life and for the welfare of humanity;
e to advance themselves in fighting for their rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion; j to protection of self, family, honor, dignity and property under their control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from fear to do or not do something that is a basic right;
k to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;
l to live prosperously physically and mentally, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m to social security that enables their full development as dignified human beings;
n to equality of position in law and government;
o to work and a livelihood worthy of humanity; p in the defense of the state;
q to communicate and obtain information to develop their personal and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all available channels;
r to embrace their respective religions and to worship according to their religion and beliefs; and
s to obtain education.

Paragraph 2
Forms of Women's Empowerment
Article 5
(1) In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life, women must be empowered.
(2) Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in economic, socio-cultural, political, and legal activities.
Article 6
(1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible in efforts to empower women.
(2) Women's empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Article 7
Implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a provision of skills and job training;
b facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups; c facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d facilitation and capital assistance; and
e facilitation of marketing network development.
Article 8
Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) is carried out through: a increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;
b increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts especially in the field of reproductive health.
c increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 9
(1) Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes: a involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c participation in general elections; and
d self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Article 10
(1) Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes: a increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and b facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Article 11
(1) To implement Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government organizes gender mainstreaming including:
a establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;

h organizing the protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i facilitating the integration of protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j coordinating the protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of institutions or community organizations and the business world for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l developing gender-based information systems; and m providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
(2) Further provisions regarding forms of women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.
Paragraph 3
Community Participation
Article 12
(1) To empower women as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, Social Community Institutions, religious institutions and/or other legitimate institutions.
Part Two
Child Protection
Paragraph 1
Rights and Obligations of Children
Article 13
Every child has the right to obtain:
a. birth registration;
b. health;
c. education; and
d. social welfare.

Article 14
Every child has the obligation to:
a. respect parents, guardians and teachers;
b. love family, community and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship according to their religion and beliefs; e. study and develop themselves according to their abilities and talents, interests; and
f. have noble character.
Paragraph 2
Birth Registration
Article 15
Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the field of birth registration, as referred to in Article 13 letter a, the Regional Government is obliged to organize birth registration of children with the issuance of birth certificates in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Paragraph 3
Health
Article 16
(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the health field as referred to in Article 13 letter b, the Regional Government is obliged to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb which is carried out in stages adjusted to the regional financial capacity and supported by community participation.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b exemption from cost burdens for malnourished children, children undergoing dialysis due to kidney failure, children with thalassemia major, children with disabilities, children with special needs, street children, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, children victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (NAPZA) abuse, children who become victims of violence, such as neglect, economically and sexually exploited and victims of trafficking in persons.
(3) Children as referred to in paragraph (2) are children from poor families except as otherwise regulated in accordance with the health financing program established by the government.

Article 17
The Regional Government, community, family and parents are obliged to ensure that children born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.
Paragraph 4
Education
Article 18
(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the field of education as referred to in Article 13 letter c, the Regional Government guarantees the implementation of a 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program for all children.
(2) Every organizer of an education unit is obliged to provide opportunities for children to obtain educational services without discrimination.
Article 19
Every organizer of an education unit is prohibited from expelling children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the child's education.
Article 20
Every organizer of an education unit is obliged to coordinate with relevant child protection agencies if they find children dropping out of school because they are victims of acts of violence.
Article 21
Children with disabilities and children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including special and inclusive education.
Article 22
Early Childhood Education for children aged 0 (zero) to 3 (three) years and 4 (four) to 6 (six) years can be organized by Posyandu institutions, Taman Posyandu, Early Childhood Education Posts and similar Early Childhood Education unit institutions.

Article 23
For children who do not pursue formal education, they can pursue education through non-formal education units including:
a For children aged 14 (fourteen) years and above who do not pursue formal elementary school or equivalent education can pursue non-formal Package A education or equivalent to Elementary School (SD)/Madrasah Ibtidaiyah (MI);
b For children aged 17 (seventeen) years and above who do not pursue formal junior high school or equivalent education can pursue non-formal Package B education or equivalent to Junior High School (SMP)/Madrasah Tsanawiyah (MTs); or
c For children aged 21 (twenty-one) years and above who do not pursue formal junior high school or equivalent education can pursue non-formal Package C education or equivalent to Senior High School (SMA)/Vocational High School (SMK)/Madrasah Aliyah/Madrasah Aliyah Kejuruan (MAK);
Paragraph 5
Social Welfare
Article 24
(1) Implementation of Protection and empowerment of children in the field of social welfare as referred to in Article 13 letter d, the Regional Government is obliged to organize social welfare for:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. child victims of violence who are economically and sexually exploited, neglected children, child victims of kidnapping and child victims of trafficking in persons;
c. child victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (NAPZA) abuse;
d. children infected with HIV/AIDS;
e. children who do not have parents and are cared for by other parties or families who are unable;
f. street children;
g. child victims of natural disasters or social disasters;
h. children with disabilities;
i. children of migrant worker families;
j. children living in or around prostitution locations; and
k. child victims of other maltreatment.
(2) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of service provision:
a health;
b education;
c legal aid;
d assistance;
e social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f social rehabilitation;
g empowerment;
h social assistance; and/or
i reintegration.

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to protect the fulfillment of the rights of child workers in the informal sector.
(2) Child Workers in the informal sector as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a domestic workers;
b shoe shiners;
c street vendors;
d scavengers;
e parking attendants;
f children working in agriculture, livestock and plantations;
g children working in mining; and
h other informal sector work that employs children.
(3) Every person who employs children in the informal sector is obliged to pay attention to the requirements:
a minimum age of 15 (fifteen) years, except for the category of Worst Forms of Child Labor minimum 18 (eighteen) years;
b obtain written approval from the parents/guardian of the child worker;
c have a written employment agreement between the employer and the parents/guardian of the child worker and obtain validation from the authorized agency;
d not employed at night;
e working time of at most 3 (three) hours per day;
f not employed in places or environments that can interfere with the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health;
g provide opportunities to obtain education according to their talents and interests;
h employ for light types of work; and
i provide one day off per week.
Article 26
Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 25 in the form of:
a counseling to stakeholders about children's rights;
b assistance with psychological, medical and legal services and socio-economic reintegration;
c empowering families through training, business capital stimulus and assistance;
d scholarships to continue formal education to higher levels; and
e non-formal education and skills training for those who do not pursue formal education.
Part Three
Forms of Violence
Article 27
Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.
Article 28
Physical violence as referred to in Article 27 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or defects to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.
Article 29
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 27 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Article 30
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 27 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
Article 31
Neglect as referred to in Article 27 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;

c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Article 32
Exploitation as referred to in Article 27 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent including prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or indecency activities.
Article 33
Other violence as referred to in Article 27 letter f is caused by:
a. threats of violence include: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.
Part Four
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children Article 34
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government and coordinated by the technical SKPD.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. conducting guidance towards a harmonious household integrity;
b. forming work networks in efforts to prevent violence; c. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
d. forming a violence prevention system;

e. socializing laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence; and
f. providing critical education regarding the rights of women and children to the community.
Article 35
In addition to the Regional Government, prevention efforts as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions; and
d. Non-Governmental Organizations.
Part Five
Handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence Article 36
Implementation of Handling of women and children victims of violence is carried out with:
a. speed;
b. safety and comfort;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
Article 37
Forms of handling of women and children victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. medical rehabilitation services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services; and
f. social reintegration services.
Article 38
Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 37 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims;
b. case identification; and
c. consent to take action.

Article 39
Assistance services as referred to in Article 37 letter b include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
c. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media; e. providing a sense of security to victims; and
f. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
Article 40
Medical rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to health services.
Article 41
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter d are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) through social support.
(3) Social support as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.
Article 42
Legal services as referred to in Article 37 letter e are to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by: a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 43
(1) Social reintegration services as referred to in Article 37 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with: a. relevant government and non-government agencies and institutions; and
b. village community institutions and/or local community leaders.
CHAPTER IV
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER
Article 44
(1) Implementation of services for women and children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is an integrated part and constitutes one unit with PPT that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons.
(3) Implementation of services for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. providing fast and free services to victims; b. organizing protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance;
c. cooperating with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for victims;
d. networking with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperating with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or government-owned trauma centers, community or other institutions for victim health recovery;
e. providing convenience, comfort and safety for victims;
f. maintaining victim confidentiality; and
g. providing fulfillment of legal assistance for victims.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures and mechanisms for organizing PPT are regulated by Regent Regulation.
CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE Article 45
Every Woman and Child victim of violence receives the following rights:
a. right to complaint handling;
b. right to be respected for their dignity as human beings;

c. right to obtain protection from family, community, regional government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on court protection orders;
d. right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
e. right to determine their own decisions;
f. right to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
g. right to obtain information;
h. right to identity confidentiality;
i. right to social rehabilitation;
j. right to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with laws and regulations; and
k. right to spiritual guidance services.
Article 46
Women and children victims of violence in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 45, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. right to survival;
b. right to grow and develop;
c. right to obtain equal protection; and d. right to participate in community life.
CHAPTER VI
PROHIBITIONS
Article 47
(1) Every business operation whose activities can interfere with the growth and development of children is prohibited from accepting child visitors.
(2) Business operations as referred to in paragraph (1) include: a discotheques;
b nightclubs;
c bars;
d adult karaoke;
e pubs;
f massage parlors;
g steam bath/sauna parlors; and
h other similar business fields.
Article 48
Every organizer of hotels, motels, lodging houses, tourism guesthouse businesses and similar business activities is prohibited from renting rooms to children without being accompanied by parents or adult family members or supervising teachers/persons in charge in the context of carrying out school activities or other activities.

Article 49
(1) Every organizer of internet services, play stations and types of children's games based on information and communication technology and others is obliged to manage and design child-friendly places.
(2) Every business organizer as referred to in paragraph (1) is obliged to:
a arrange rooms/cubicles with adequate lighting and not closed;
b not accept children wearing uniforms and/or during school hours;
c locally block sites containing pornographic and pornoaction elements; and
d limit visiting hours and supervise the use of existing facilities.
CHAPTER VII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 50
(1) To ensure synergy, balance and effectiveness of integrated steps in the implementation of policies, programs, activities, protection of Women and children, the Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Technical SKPD and PPT.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women and children.
(4) Monitoring is carried out periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of SKPDs that implement policies, activities for the protection of Women and children victims of violence.
(5) Monitoring is carried out starting from planning to implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children every year.
Article 51
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women and children victims of violence is carried out at the end of each Budget year or if necessary according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of Women and children victims of violence are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of Women and children victims of violence for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
FINANCING
Article 52
Funding for the implementation of Protection of Women and children, sourced from:
a. Regional revenue and expenditure budget; and/or
b. Other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 53
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of this regional regulation.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include providing implementation instructions, guidance, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 54
(1) In the implementation of Protection of Women and children, the community can:
a. form family partners at the Village/Kelurahan level by the community;
b. conduct socialization of women's and children's rights independently; c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to the authorized agency if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector and/or mass media.
CHAPTER XI
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 55
(1) Every person or business entity that violates the provisions as referred to in Article 47, Article 48, Article 49 is subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a Written warning;
b License suspension;
c Administrative fine; and
d License revocation.
(2) Written warning as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is given 3 (three) times with a grace period between one warning and another of at least 1 (one) month.

(3) License Suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is imposed if written warnings have been given as referred to in paragraph (2).
(4) License Suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b can be withdrawn if the person or business entity committing the violation pays an administrative fine of Rp. 30,000,000,- (thirty million rupiah).
(5) If within the period specified in the license suspension, the administrative fine is not paid, then license revocation will be carried out.
CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 56
At the latest 1 (one) year, calculated from the enactment of this Regional Regulation, the Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation must have been established.
Article 57
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Nunukan Regency.
Established in Nunukan
on 30 December 2015
REGENT OF NUNUKAN,
ttd
BASRI
Promulgated in Nunukan
on 30 December 2015
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF NUNUKAN REGENCY,
ttd
TOMMY HARUN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NUNUKAN REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 17
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF NUNUKAN REGENCY, NORTH KALIMANTAN: 16/2015