REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER 12 YEAR
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU,

Considering: a. that Women and Children have the right to receive protection from torture, threats, pressure, and have the right to receive equal treatment and opportunities to obtain justice and welfare in accordance with the mandate of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that Women's Empowerment and protecting Children's rights are obligations of the Regional Government and the Community in the Region;

c. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b and letter H Division of Government Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Appendix to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law, the Regional Government has the authority to implement Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

Noting: 1. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 102, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 1 of 2023 concerning the Criminal Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6842);

5. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

6. Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 7, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5495) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

8. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);

9. Law Number 17 of 2023 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 105, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6887);

10. Presidential Regulation Number 25 of 2021 concerning Child-Friendly Regency/City Policy (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2021 Number 96);

11. Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 19 of 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2016 Number 19) as has been amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 5 of 2021 concerning Second Amendment to Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 19 of 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2021 Number 5);

12. Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 11 of 2021 concerning Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2021 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 126);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY
and
REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Tanah Bumbu Regency.
2. Regional Government is the head of the Region as an element of the Regional Government organizer who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous Region.
3. Head of Region hereinafter referred to as Regent is the Regent of Tanah Bumbu Regency.
4. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the people's representative institution of Tanah Bumbu Regency Region.
5. Agency is the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
6. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in organizing government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
7. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economy, politics, social, culture, so that Women can organize themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
8. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into men and Women.
9. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person recognized by law as a Woman.
10. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a Child who is still in the womb.
11. Child in conflict with the law (ABH) is a Child in conflict with the law, a Child who is a victim of a criminal act and a Child who is a witness to a criminal act.
12. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
13. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting Women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
14. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from Violence and discrimination.
15. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security.
16. Toddler is a Child aged 0 (zero) to 5 (five) years, in the early stages of human development.
17. School-Age Child is a Child aged 6 (six) to 18 (eighteen) years.
18. Neglected Child is a Child whose needs for mental and religious guidance and services for clothing, food, shelter, health, education, physical, and social are not properly fulfilled.
19. Child who is a victim of Violence is a Child who experiences mistreatment such as being abused, insulted, which endangers the Child physically, mentally and socially.
20. Child maltreatment is all forms of violence against children committed by those who should be responsible and/or those who have power over the child, who should be trusted, namely parents, close family, teachers, supervisors, law enforcement officers, caregivers and companions (World Health Organization).
21. Child in emergency situation is a Child in a situation and condition that endangers him/herself such as a Child victim of riots, a Child who becomes a refugee, a Child victim of natural disasters and a Child in armed conflict.
22. Child in conflict with the law is a Child in conflict with the law, a Child victim of a criminal act, and a Child who is a witness to a criminal act.
23. Child of isolated indigenous community is a Child who lives in a situation of isolation where they cannot access basic needs.
24. Economically exploited Child is a Child who is forced and/or deceived to be employed by parents or others without being paid or being paid.
25. Sexually exploited Child is the use of a Child for sexual purposes with payment in cash or in other forms between the Child, the buyer of sexual services, intermediaries or agents and other parties who profit from the trade in the sexuality of the Child.
26. Child who is a victim of Napza abuse is a Child who suffers from dependence on Napza caused by Napza abuse, either of his/her own will or because of encouragement or coercion from others.
27. Child with special needs is a Child who experiences physical and/or mental disabilities that interfere with growth and development in accordance with the stages of Child development.
28. Child victim of maltreatment is a Child who receives treatment that is not in accordance with Children's rights.
29. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries that has the authority to regulate and manage Government affairs, the interests of the local Community, based on Community initiative, rights of origin, and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the Government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
30. Child in need of Special Protection is a Child in an emergency situation, a Child in conflict with the law, a Child from an isolated indigenous community, a Child who is economically and/or sexually exploited, a Child victim of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropics and other active substances (Napza), a Child victim of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, a Child victim of physical and/or psychological Violence, a Child with special needs, and a Child victim of maltreatment and neglect.
31. Child Trafficking is a criminal act or act that meets one or more elements of recruitment, transfer, handover of a Child using Violence or threat of violence, fraud, kidnapping, confinement, abuse of power, exploitation of a position of vulnerability or debt bondage for the purpose and/or resulting in exploitation of the Child.
32. Child's Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, Community, government/Regional Government, and the state.
33. Child's Obligations are everything that must be carried out by the Child in accordance with the function and role of the Child.
34. Social Organization hereinafter referred to as Orsos is an institution/foundation/social association formed by the Community either legally or not legally which functions as a means of Community participation in carrying out Social Welfare Efforts (UKS).
35. Non-Governmental Organization hereinafter abbreviated as LSM is an organization/institution formed by members of the Indonesian citizen Community, voluntarily of their own will and interested and engaged in the field of social welfare efforts determined by the organization/institution, as a manifestation of Community participation in efforts to improve the standard of living and welfare of the Community that emphasizes voluntary service.
36. Napza are chemical substances that when introduced into the body either orally (drunk, inhaled, inhaled and sucked) or injected, can affect thoughts, moods, feelings and behavior of a person. This can cause social disturbances characterized by negative indications, long usage time and excessive use.
37. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection hereinafter referred to as UPTD PPA is the Regional technical implementation unit for Women and Child Protection at the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Agency that provides services for Women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, Special Protection, and other problems.
38. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, INTENT AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Women's Empowerment and Child Protection are implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. best interests of the Child;
h. accountability; and
i. gender responsive.

Article 3

The intent of establishing this Regional Regulation is as a guideline in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 4

The regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of every Woman and Child to survival, growth and development;
b. improve the quality of life of Women, Children and family quality;
c. increase the institutional capacity of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region, including the development of gender and Child data systems; and
d. provide protection for Women's rights and fulfillment of Children's Rights including Special Protection for Children from various forms of Violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article 5

(1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection regulated in this Regional Regulation is an inseparable part of regional development planning in the regional long-term development plan, regional medium-term development plan, and Regional Government work plan whose material content concerns Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.

(2) Regional development planning as referred to in paragraph (1), is outlined in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection programs and activities by referring to the classification, codification, and nomenclature of development planning.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE

Article 6

The scope of regulation for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection includes:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. Women's Protection;
c. Child Protection;
d. safe house;
e. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by village government;
f. family quality;
g. cooperation;
h. awards;
i. Community participation;
j. financing;
k. prohibitions;
l. investigation provisions; and
m. criminal provisions.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Article 7

(1) The Regional Government is responsible for Women's Empowerment.

(2) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Agency.

(3) In implementing the implementation of Women's Empowerment, the Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) involves:
a. Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the fields of:
1. population administration;
2. education;
3. village government;
4. regional development planning;
b. national commission on women.

Article 8

The Regional Government has the authority to:
a. institutionalize Gender Mainstreaming;
b. carry out Women's Empowerment in the political, legal, social and economic fields in community organizations; and
c. strengthen and develop institutions providing Women's Empowerment services.

Article 9

(1) The Regional Government in implementing Women's Empowerment forms a Gender Mainstreaming institution.
(2) The Gender Mainstreaming institution as referred to in paragraph (1) is the responsibility of the Regent.

Article 10

Further provisions regarding the Gender Mainstreaming institution as referred to in Article 9 are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
WOMEN'S PROTECTION

Part One
General

Article 11

(1) The Regional Government is responsible for providing efforts to protect Women including:
a. establishing and implementing policies, programs and activities for Women's Protection;
b. making efforts to prevent acts of Violence against Women;
c. making efforts to prevent criminal acts of human trafficking;
d. increasing the effectiveness of services for Women and Children victims of violence;
e. increasing protection efforts for Women workers;
f. strengthening and developing institutions providing protection services for Women workers;
g. strengthening and developing institutions providing Women's Protection services;
h. cooperating with the government, Regional Government, other Regional Governments, the private sector, business world, and/or non-governmental organizations in efforts to prevent acts of Violence against Women; and
i. involving the active role of families, religious leaders, the Community and institutions in the field of Women's Protection.

(2) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out by the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in accordance with its duties and functions.

Article 12

The Regional Government provides Women's Protection in the form of:
a. prevention of Violence against Women;
b. provision of services for Women victims of Violence that require regional level coordination; and
c. strengthening and developing institutions providing Women's Protection services.

Part Two
Protection of Women's Rights

Article 13

(1) The Regional Government guarantees protection of Women's rights.

(2) Women's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) include the fields of:
a. education;
b. health;
c. employment;
d. politics;
e. law; and
f. economic, cultural and social.

Article 14

Women's rights in the field of education as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter a include:
a. making policies to facilitate Women's access and revoking discriminatory policies that hinder the fulfillment of Women's rights to education; and
b. getting equal opportunities with men to obtain education and teaching in all types and levels of education pathways.

Article 15

Women's rights in the field of health as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b include:
a. getting education about reproductive health;
b. getting health services;
c. getting family planning services;
d. getting services for pregnant mothers; and
e. delivery and post-delivery services.

Article 16

Women's rights in the field of employment as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter c include:
a. empowerment of Women entrepreneurs;
b. getting decent work; and
c. getting protection from criminal acts of human trafficking.

Article 17

Women's rights in the political field as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter d include:
a. facilitating increased political participation of Women in the legislative institution;
b. providing facilities and infrastructure for Women's organizations whose vision and mission is to fight for the fulfillment of rights and protection of Women;
c. implementing socialization in order to increase awareness of Women's rights in the political field; and
d. encouraging the formation of Women's forum organizations.

Article 18

Women's rights in the legal field as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter e include:
a. facilitating increased legal knowledge and awareness for Women; and
b. encouraging the formation of organizations that provide free legal services for Women.

Article 19

Women's rights in the economic, cultural and social fields as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter f include:
a. facilitating Women in improving family economy;
b. encouraging Women's activities as agents of change;
c. facilitating Women in increasing social activities; and
d. getting capital assistance.

Article 20

Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing the fulfillment of Women's rights as referred to in Article 13 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
CHILD PROTECTION

Part One
General

Article 21

(1) The Regional Government carries out Child Protection in the Region.

(2) Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is through Protection of Children's Rights.

(3) Children's Rights as referred to in paragraph (2) are guided by the provisions of Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 11 of 2021 concerning Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2021 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 126).

Part Two
Implementation of Child Protection

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government, LSM/Orsos, Community and parents/family are obliged to provide Child Protection consisting of:
a. Child in the womb;
b. Toddler;
c. School-Age Child;
d. Neglected and street Children; and
e. Children in need of Special Protection.

(2) The implementation of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. policies, programs, and mechanisms concerning:
1. prevention, supervision, complaints/reporting, and development of Child data information systems;
2. integrated handling for Children who are victims of violence, maltreatment, exploitation and neglect;
3. guarantee of fulfillment of the rights of every Child who is a victim of crime, violence, maltreatment, exploitation and neglect including:
a) recovery and health maintenance services;
b) continuity of education services;
c) psychosocial services; and
d) legal assistance services.
4. implementation of family support including:
a) counseling;
b) child rearing education;
c) family mediation; and
d) economic support.
b. increasing public awareness and attitudes through socialization, education, and information regarding:
1. Children's Rights, Child Protection, prevention of child marriage and Child rearing; and
2. adverse effects of violence, maltreatment, exploitation, and Child neglect.
c. increasing the capacity of Child Protection services which includes developing institutional capacity and service provider personnel.
d. service provider personnel as referred to in letter c include:
1. health;
2. education;
3. psychosocial;
4. care; and
5. legal assistance.
e. increasing the ability of Children to recognize risks and dangers from situations or actions that can cause violence, exploitation, maltreatment, and neglect.

(3) The implementation of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (2) letters a through e is carried out and/or coordinated by the SKPD that handles Child Protection affairs.

Part Three
Handling

Article 23

(1) Targets for handling Children include:
a. Children outside the care of parents;
b. Children in disaster emergency situations;
c. Children in conflict with the law;
d. Child victims of physical, mental and/or sexual Violence;
e. Child victims of maltreatment and neglect;
f. Child victims of economic exploitation;
g. Children who are victims of criminal acts of human trafficking;
h. Children who are victims of gambling, abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropics and other addictive substances (Napza); and
i. Children who are in situations where the nature and condition of the workplace can endanger the health, safety, and morals of the Child.

(2) Handling as referred to in paragraph (1) must be carried out immediately including:
a. identifying and receiving complaints/reports;
b. rescue actions;
c. placement of Children in temporary shelters;
d. rehabilitation including:
1. health recovery services;
2. psychosocial recovery services; and
3. legal assistance/expert witness assistance.
e. social reintegration in the form of post-rehabilitation service support.

Article 24

(1) Identification and receipt of complaints/reports as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a include:
a. ensuring the readiness of complaint services for Child Protection issues;
b. following up on information or complaints/reports received regarding Child Protection issues; and
c. identifying the type of problem, needs, and handling plan.

(2) The SKPD that handles Child Protection affairs must identify problems and receive complaints/reports.

Article 25

(1) Rescue actions as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b are carried out if based on the results of identification it is known that the Child's safety is threatened.

(2) The actions as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by moving the Child from threatening situations and environments.

(3) The SKPD that handles Child Protection affairs must carry out rescue actions and coordinate with the Police/Civil Service Police Unit.

Article 26

(1) Placement of Children in temporary shelters as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c is carried out if based on the results of identification it is known that:
a. the Child's safety is threatened;
b. the Child does not have a family/caregiver or guardian; and
c. the Child cannot be reunited with family/caregiver/guardian and/or the Community.

(2) Placement as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out for a certain time while the Child receives recovery services and/or until the family/caregiver/guardian is deemed to have the readiness to care for and protect the Child.

(3) Placement as referred to in paragraph (2), the Child receives basic needs fulfillment services and psychosocial assistance.

(4) The SKPD that handles social affairs must provide temporary shelters.

Article 27

(1) Health recovery services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 1 include:
a. emergency services;
b. providing visum et repertum or visum psikiatricum at the request or statement of the police;
c. follow-up services in the form of outpatient and/or inpatient care in accordance with medical provisions; and
d. providing further referrals in accordance with the circumstances and conditions of the victim.

(2) The SKPD that handles health affairs must provide health recovery services.

Article 28

(1) Psychosocial recovery services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 2 include:
a. counseling;
b. psychosocial therapy;
c. mental and spiritual guidance; and
d. assistance.

(2) The SKPD that handles social affairs must provide psychosocial recovery services.

Article 29

Legal assistance/expert witness services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 3 include:
a. ensuring the Child is accompanied by legal counsel; and
b. facilitating assistance to Child victims of violence, both in the examination process at court hearings and outside court hearings.

Article 30

(1) Social reintegration in the form of post-rehabilitation service support as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter e includes:
a. tracing family members;
b. reuniting the Child victim and family members/substitute family and/or the Community;
c. facilitating the provision of psychosocial assistance for families;
d. support for access to further education or health services; and
e. monitoring and evaluation.

(2) The SKPD that handles social affairs organizes social reintegration.

Article 31

(1) Handling as referred to in Articles 23 through 30 is carried out synergistically.

(2) The implementation of handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the SKPD that handles Child Protection affairs.

Part Four
Protection of Children in the Womb

Article 32

Protection of Children in the womb as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through:
a. provision of facilities and facilities for examination of Children in the womb;
b. provision of nutritious food and immunization for pregnant mothers;
c. provision of abortion prevention services;
d. provision of appropriate and fast delivery process services;
e. provision of the best health services for mothers and Children during the delivery process and post-delivery; and
f. implementation of Protection of Children in the womb for pregnant mothers with problems.

Part Five
Protection of Toddlers

Article 33

(1) Protection of Toddlers as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter b is carried out through:
a. provision of complete breastfeeding;
b. provision of nutritious food and complete basic immunization;
c. provision of Child growth and development programs and Child rearing patterns;
d. provision of childcare facilities;
e. provision of playgrounds; and
f. provision of special breastfeeding rooms in certain places.

(2) Protection of Toddlers can be implemented through the PSTPA model and playgroups.

(3) PSTPA and/or playgroups as referred to in paragraph (2) must meet the following requirements:
a. have been registered and received recommendations from relevant SKPD within the Regional Government;
b. have adequate human resources and funding sources to manage PSTPA and/or playgroups; and
c. have facilities and infrastructure in accordance with service guidelines at PSTPA and/or playgroups.

(4) Protection of Toddlers can be implemented if in special or urgent conditions.

Part Six
Protection of School-Age Children

Article 34

(1) Protection of School-Age Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. receiving attention and guidance from teachers and/or supervisors without discrimination;
b. receiving attention and affection from family;
c. receiving religious guidance at school and in the Community environment;
d. receiving prevention, care and health rehabilitation services;
e. receiving compulsory education for at least 9 (nine) years and being able to complete senior high school supported by a friendly and conducive environment;
f. receiving education guarantees;
g. receiving guidance and counseling; and
h. providing adequate playgrounds and sports facilities.

(2) Every person and/or any party is obliged to protect School-Age Children from acts of violence, sexual harassment and food containing hazardous substances in the family, school, Agency/institution/institution and Community environment.

(3) Every person and/or any party is obliged to protect School-Age Children from acts of stopping and/or expelling Children from school and/or causing Children to drop out of school.

Part Seven
Protection of Neglected Children

Article 35

(1) Protection of Neglected Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter d, namely Children whose parents do not have the ability to care for Children, is implemented through institutional and non-institutional forms of service;

(2) The institutional form of service as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by Child Protection Houses or PSAA both owned by the Regional Government and the Community.

(3) The non-institutional form of service as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in a family or Community environment that is not in the form of an institution.

(4) Child Protection Houses or PSAA owned by the Community as referred to in paragraph (2) must meet the following requirements:
a. have been registered and received recommendations from relevant SKPD within the Regional Government and/or regency/city government;
b. have adequate human resources and funding sources to manage Child Protection Houses or PSAA; and
c. have facilities and infrastructure as determined in the Child Protection House or PSAA service guidelines.

Part Eight
Protection of Children in Need of Special Protection

Article 36

Children in need of Special Protection as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter e consist of:
a. Children in emergency situations and conflict areas;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from isolated indigenous communities;
d. Children who are economically and/or sexually exploited;
e. Child victims of Napza abuse including aromatic glue that can cause hallucinogenic effects and the like;
f. Child victims of kidnapping, sale, and trafficking;
g. Child victims of physical and/or psychological Violence;
h. Children with special needs; and
i. Child victims of maltreatment and neglect.

Paragraph 1
Children in Emergency Situations and Conflict Areas

Article 37

Special Protection for Children in emergency situations and conflict areas as referred to in Article 36 letter a is in the form of fulfillment of basic needs consisting of:
a. basic social services;
b. education;
c. religious guidance;
d. health services;
e. psychological counseling and/or psychotherapy;
f. legal assistance; and
g. recreational and educational activities.

Paragraph 2
Children in Conflict with the Law

Article 38

(1) Special Protection for Children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 36 letter b includes Children in conflict with the law and Child victims of criminal acts, is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government, Police, Prosecutor's Office, Court, Parents, Family and Community.

(2) Handling of Children in conflict with the legal process and implementation of Judge's decisions must continue to prioritize Children's Rights.

(3) Special Protection for Children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. treatment of Children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and Rights of the Child;
b. provision of special child assistance officers from an early age;
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the Child;
e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of Children in conflict with the law;
f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
g. protection from identity reporting through mass media and to avoid labeling.

(4) In the case of a Child in conflict with the law, law enforcement officers do not conduct justicia Child examinations without the knowledge of parents or guardians, and are carried out by:
a. rehabilitation efforts through special institutions for the best interests of the Child;
b. protection efforts from identity reporting through mass media and to avoid labeling;
c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, both physical, mental and social; and
d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Paragraph 3
Children from Isolated Indigenous Communities

Article 39

(1) Special Protection for Children from isolated indigenous communities as referred to in Article 36 letter c is carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, recognize and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from preventing Children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, recognizing and practicing their religion, and using their own language without neglecting access to Community and cultural development.

Paragraph 4
Children Who Are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited

Article 40

(1) Special Protection for Children who are economically and/or sexually exploited as referred to in Article 36 letter d is carried out through:
a. prevention and supervision of Children who are used by certain parties as objects of exploitation;
b. disseminating and/or socializing laws and regulations related to the Protection of Children who are economically and/or sexually exploited;
c. monitoring, reporting and imposing sanctions; and
d. involving various government agencies, companies, labor unions, NGOs, and the Community in eliminating exploitation of Children.

(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from economically and/or sexually exploiting Children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Paragraph 5
Child Victims of Napza Abuse Including Aromatic Glue and the Like that Can Cause Hallucinogenic Effects and the Like

Article 41

(1) Special Protection for Child victims of Napza abuse including aromatic glue and the like that can cause hallucinogenic effects and the like as referred to in Article 36 letter e, and involved in the use, production and distribution, is carried out through supervision, prevention, care, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the Community.

(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Children in the abuse, production and distribution of Napza, aromatic glue and the like as referred to in paragraph (1).

Paragraph 6
Child Victims of Kidnapping, Sale and Trafficking

Article 42

(1) Special Protection for Child victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking as referred to in Article 36 letter f is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts by the Regional Government and the Community.

(2) To implement prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government together with the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Court, Community, NGOs and Orsos take steps in the form of:
a. implementing socialization and/or campaigns on prevention, mitigation and elimination of Child Trafficking practices;
b. implementing cooperation with other Regions and with other countries through bilateral or multilateral cooperation in accordance with laws and regulations.

(3) Protection for Child victims of Child Trafficking is implemented through Transit Houses and/or other Child Protection Institutions, through referrals from government or Community institutions.

(4) Every Child victim of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, has the right to receive care and rehabilitation both physically, psychologically and reintegration in the family and Community environment.

Paragraph 7
Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence

Article 43

(1) Every Child victim of physical and/or psychological Violence as referred to in Article 36 letter g receives rehabilitation services both physically and psychosocially.

(2) The form of protection for Child victims of acts of Violence is in the form of basic social services, education, religious guidance, health services, psychologist counseling and/or psychotherapy, legal assistance, recreational, educational activities and empowerment of parents of Child victims of violence.

(3) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from committing acts of Violence against Children.

Paragraph 8
Children with Special Needs

Article 44

(1) Special Protection for Children with special needs as referred to in Article 36 letter h is carried out through efforts to:
a. treat Children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and Rights of the Child;
b. fulfill special needs; and
c. receive the same treatment as other Children to achieve full social integration and individual development.

(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from treating children with special needs in a discriminatory manner, by ignoring their views including labeling and equalization in education for Children with special needs.

Paragraph 9
Child Victims of Maltreatment and Neglect

Article 45

(1) Special Protection for Child victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 36 letter i is carried out through supervision, prevention, care and rehabilitation.

(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Children in situations of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

CHAPTER VII
SAFE HOUSE

Article 46

(1) Women and Children victims of Violence who need continuous handling have the right to stay in a safe house.

(2) The safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) provides a safe place or temporary shelter for victims of Violence until their rights are restored.

(3) The implementation and management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regional Apparatus that organizes functions in the field of Women's Empowerment and Children.

(4) Further provisions regarding the implementation of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION BY VILLAGE GOVERNMENT

Article 47

(1) The Village Government implements Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Village.

(2) The implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection regulated in this Regional Regulation, applies mutatis mutandis in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(3) Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) is charged to the village revenue and expenditure budget.

(4) Further provisions regarding the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FAMILY QUALITY

Article 48

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to improve family quality in the form of:
a. improving family quality in realizing gender equality and Children's Rights.
b. strengthening and developing institutions providing services for improving family quality in realizing gender equality and Children's Rights whose working area is in the Region.
c. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and Children's Rights whose working area is in the Region.

(2) Provisions regarding procedures for improving family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
COOPERATION

Article 49

(1) In efforts to implement Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, the Regional Government can cooperate.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with:
a. government;
b. provincial government;
c. other Regional Governments;
d. vertical agencies;
e. advocates;
f. social workers;
g. volunteer assistants;
h. spiritual advisors; and
i. non-governmental organizations engaged in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

(3) Forms of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal assistance;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation; and
g. spiritual guidance.

(4) Procedures for implementing cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) are in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
AWARDS

Article 50

(1) The Regent may give awards for the participation of every person and/or entity that contributes to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.

(2) Forms of awards as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. plaques/certificates of appreciation;
b. grants; and/or
c. Regional incentives.

(3) Regional incentives as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c are in the form of:
a. Regional fiscal incentives; and/or
b. Regional non-fiscal incentives.

(4) Forms of Regional fiscal incentives as referred to in paragraph (3) letter a, are in the form of:
a. reduction and/or exemption of Regional taxes; and/or
b. reduction of Regional levies.

(5) Forms of Regional non-fiscal incentives as referred to in paragraph (3) letter b, are in the form of ease of business licensing in the Region.

(6) Procedures for granting awards as referred to in paragraph (1) are guided by the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 51

(1) The Regional Government has an obligation to strengthen Community participation in the development of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. advocacy;
c. counseling;
d. guidance;
e. supervision;
f. facilitation;
g. services;
h. studies;
i. training;
j. capital; and
k. provision of infrastructure.

(3) Strengthening Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by:
a. strengthening cooperation;
b. strengthening the institutional capacity of prevention and services from the Community, Islamic boarding schools and the business world; and
c. financing support.

Article 52

(1) The business world has responsibility in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

(2) Forms of business world responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in the form of:
a. financial assistance to service institutions;
b. empowerment;
c. capacity building;
d. publication and information media;
e. provision of infrastructure;
f. formation of special institutions for prevention and violence complaint services; and
g. social assistance that is not binding.

CHAPTER XIII
FINANCING

Article 53

Financing for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in this Regional Regulation is charged to the regional revenue and expenditure budget and other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations taking into account the fiscal capacity of the Region.

CHAPTER XIV
PROHIBITIONS

Article 54

Every person is prohibited from:
a. treating Women and Children in a discriminatory manner that results in Women and Children experiencing losses, both material and moral, thus hindering their social function;
b. treating Women and Children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Children in situations of maltreatment and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing Violence against Women and Children;
e. committing Violence or threat of Violence forcing Women and Children to have intercourse with him or with others;
f. committing Violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing fraud, committing a series of lies, or persuading Women and Children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of Women and Children;
h. preventing Women and Children from enjoying their own culture, recognizing and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to Community and cultural development;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of Women and Children;
j. intentionally placing, allowing, involving Women and Children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropics; and/or
k. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Women and Children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

CHAPTER XV
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS

Article 55

(1) Civil Servant Investigators within the Regional Government are given special authority to conduct investigations of criminal acts as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.

(2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. receiving, seeking, collecting and examining information or reports concerning criminal acts;
b. examining, seeking and collecting information or reports concerning criminal acts;
c. requesting information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. examining books, records and other documents concerning criminal acts;
e. conducting searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, recording and other documents and seizing such evidence;
f. requesting the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. ordering to stop, prohibiting someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and examining the identity of the person and or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. photographing someone related to a criminal act;
i. summoning people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. stopping the investigation;
k. taking other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts according to applicable law and can be accounted for.

(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Police Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia in accordance with the provisions regulated in the Criminal Procedure Law.

CHAPTER XVI
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 56

(1) Every person who violates the provisions as referred to in Article 34 paragraphs (2) and (3), Article 39 paragraph (2), Article 40 paragraph (2), Article 41 paragraph (2), Article 43 paragraph (3), Article 44 paragraph (2) and Article 54, shall be punished with imprisonment of a maximum of 6 months or a fine of a maximum of Rp50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).

(2) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) is a violation.

CHAPTER XVII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 57

At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, existing Regional policies regarding Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region remain in force, as long as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

Article 58

At the time the provisions of Article 624 of Law Number 1 of 2023 concerning the Criminal Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6842) come into force, then:
a. imprisonment as referred to in Article 56 paragraph (1) is replaced with a fine of a maximum of category I; and
b. category I fine as referred to in letter a is Rp1,000,000.00 (one million rupiah).

CHAPTER XVIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 59

Regent Regulations as implementation of this Regional Regulation, are established at the latest 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 60

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency.

Established in Batulicin
on 28 December 2923
REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU,

H. M. ZAIRULLAH AZHAR

Promulgated in Batulicin
on 28 December 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY,

H. AMBO SAKKA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 12

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY, SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (12-116/2023)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER 12 OF 2023
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION

I. GENERAL

In order to realize Women who are capable physically, mentally, spiritually, socially, in knowledge, and skills so that they are ready to be utilized, as well as efforts to protect Women and Children from all acts of Violence in order to achieve welfare goals through a Regional regulation that can be a reference for all parties related to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

The drafting of a Regional regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection has the intent and purpose as the implementation of the widest possible regional autonomy, so the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection sector is one sector that is quite important to be managed and regulated in order to realize Women who are capable physically, mentally, spiritually, socially, in knowledge, and skills so that they are ready to be utilized, as well as efforts to protect Women and Children from all acts of Violence in order to achieve welfare goals through a draft Regional regulation that can be a reference for all parties related to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

The formation of this Regional regulation is based on the principles of forming good laws and regulations and the principles of material content of laws and regulations.

The implementation of government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to increase efforts to protect Women's rights, fulfill Children's Rights and Special Protection for Children and increase the role of Regional Government and the business world, media and the Community in efforts to empower Women and protect Children. The main material contained in the body of the Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children includes:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. Women's Protection;
c. Child Protection;
d. safe house;
e. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by village government;
f. family quality;
g. cooperation;
h. awards;
i. Community participation;
j. financing;
k. prohibitions;
l. investigation provisions; and
m. criminal provisions.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by "respect for human rights" is that the protection and empowerment of women is carried out as a manifestation of respect for women's rights as part of Human Rights.

Letter b
What is meant by "gender equality" is one of human rights, the right to live with dignity, free from fear and free to determine life choices is not only for men, women also have the same rights in essence.

Letter c
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment towards Children by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups, and the condition of the Child.

Letter d
What is meant by "justice and legal certainty" is that in implementing the protection and empowerment of women it is based on justice and legal certainty of equality between men and women.

Letter e
What is meant by "benefit" is providing the widest possible benefits for children and women for the interests of society, nation and state.

Letter f
What is meant by "participatory" is that every member of society is encouraged to play an active role in the decision-making process and implementation of child protection and women's empowerment, either directly or indirectly.

Letter g
What is meant by "the best interests of the Child" is that in all actions concerning Children carried out by the Regional Government, parents/family, and the Community, the best interests of the Child must be a primary consideration.

Article 3
Letter h
What is meant by "accountability" is a principle that requires that every activity and final result of state administration activities must be accountable to the community and the people as holders of the highest sovereignty of the state in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Letter i
What is meant by "gender responsive" is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers to achieve gender equality.

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Letter a
Number 1
Sufficiently clear.

Number 2
What is meant by maltreatment includes:
a. Exploitative treatment, for example actions or acts of exploiting, utilizing, or extorting Children to obtain personal, family, or group benefits.
b. Neglectful treatment, for example actions or acts of deliberately neglecting the obligation to maintain, care for, or take care of Children as they should be.

Number 3
Sufficiently clear.

Number 4
Sufficiently clear.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

Article 50
Sufficiently clear.

Article 51
Sufficiently clear.

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear.

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear.

Article 56
Sufficiently clear.

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear.

Article 59
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER 156