REGENT OF SINTANG
PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINTANG REGENCY
NUMBER 8 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF SINTANG,

Considering: a. that all forms of acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;

b. that in addition to protection efforts, prevention, services, and empowerment are needed for women and children victims of violence, so as to achieve the fulfillment, advancement, enforcement and protection of human rights universally and fundamentally;

c. that in connection with the intention in letter b and in an effort to provide a legal foundation for its implementation in Sintang Regency, it is necessary to regulate the protection of women and children victims of violence;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of: 1. Law Number 27 Year 1959 concerning Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 Year 1953 Concerning Establishment of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1953 Number 9, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 352) as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 72, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1820);

2. Law...

2. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

4. Law Number 8 Year 1981 concerning Criminal Procedure Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);

5. Law Number 8 Year 1999 concerning Consumer Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 42, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3821);

6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age For Admission To Employment (ILO Convention Concerning Minimum Age For Admission To Employment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition And Immediate Action For The Elimination Of The Worst Forms Of Child Labour (ILO Convention No. 182 concerning Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

10. Law...

10. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

11. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

12. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

13. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

14. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

15. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153);

16. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended by Law Number 9 Year 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

17. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

18. Government Regulation...

18. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

19. Government Regulation Number 41 Year 2007 concerning Regional Apparatus Organization (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 89, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4741);

20. Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency Number 1 Year 2008 concerning Government Affairs of Sintang Regency (Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Year 2008 Number 1, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Number 1);

21. Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Organizational Structure of Regional Apparatus of Sintang Regency (Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Year 2008 Number 2, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Number 2) as amended by Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency Number 5 Year 2013 (Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Year 2013 Number 5, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Number 5);

22. Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency Number 8 Year 2006 concerning Civil Servant Investigators within the Government of Sintang Regency (Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Year 2006 Number 9);

23. Regional Regulation of Sintang Regency Number 10 Year 2010 concerning Public Order (Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Year 2010 Number 10, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency Number 10);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SINTANG REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF SINTANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I...

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Sintang Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Sintang.
4. Woman is a person of female gender.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including those in the womb (who are not yet married).
6. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
7. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
8. Violence against children is any action that results in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
9. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
10. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
11. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Protection...

13. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
14. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is or has occurred.
16. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Judicial body is a general court that has the authority to receive, examine, and adjudicate, as well as resolve every case submitted to it, to realize law enforcement and justice.
18. Prosecution is the action of the public prosecutor to transfer a case to the competent district court in the manner and according to the procedure regulated in the law with a request that it be examined and decided by a judge in a court session.
19. Lawsuit is a notification accompanied by a request by an interested party to a judge to take action according to law against a person who has harmed them civilly.
20. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an institution providing services to victims of violence based at the Regional General Hospital managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medicolegal), psychosocial and legal services.
21. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the accompaniment process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
22. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is a standard operational procedure that serves as a reference for service actions established by Regent Regulation.
23. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
24. Family...

24. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, and mother and children.
25. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nephews/nieces, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins, etc.) and non-relatives (servants, drivers, etc.) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.
26. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Sintang Regency.
27. Prosecutor's Office is the Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Indonesia, which is a government institution that exercises state power in the field of prosecution and other authorities based on law.
28. Police is everything related to the functions and institutions of the police in accordance with legislation.
29. Advocate is a person who carries out activities related to facilitating and fighting for the rights and obligations of clients/persons based on applicable regulations.
30. Social Worker is a profession whose main field is engaged in organized social service activities, where these activities aim to provide facilities and strengthen relations, especially in mutual and mutually beneficial adjustment between individuals and their social environment through the use of social work methods.
31. Psychiatrist is a specialist doctor profession who has specialization in the diagnosis and treatment of emotional disorders.
32. Visum et Repertum is a statement given by a Doctor about matters required to clarify a criminal and civil case for the purposes of examination.
33. Visum et Repertum Psikiatrikum is a statement given by a Psychiatric Medicine Expert Doctor about the mental health condition of a person required to clarify a criminal and civil case for the purposes of examination.

CHAPTER II...

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES, AND SERVICE PRINCIPLES

Article 2

Protection of women and children victims of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. Respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Best interests of the victim.

Article 3

(1) The purpose of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is to provide protection and services for the best interests of women and children victims of violence occurring in the domestic and/or public sphere.
(2) Forms of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) include among others:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence; and/or
c. psychological violence.

Article 4

The provision of services to victims is carried out with principles including free of charge, fast, safe, empathetic, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and confidential.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF VICTIMS

Article 5

Every victim has the right to:
a. receive protection from the community and government as well as non-governmental institutions at local, national and international levels;
b. receive information about the location of complaint centers.
c. receive integrated services in accordance with service principles;
d. make legal claims and/or lawsuits through judicial bodies and/or courts outside the court;
e. receive information about legislation that protects victims;
f. receive confidential handling;
g. receive...

g. receive information and be involved in every decision-making process related to accompaniment and development of case handling;
h. receive guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother or child, family member, household member, and community member.
i. receive accompaniment at every level of examination and during the judicial process.
j. receive continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
k. receive protection from identity disclosure through mass media.

Article 6

Every victim has the obligation to:
a. not take revenge against the perpetrator of violence;
b. become a witness if it does not endanger oneself and if there is a security guarantee for the victim;
c. give the perpetrator an opportunity to provide compensation to the victim in addition to the punishment determined by the Court;
d. be willing to receive accompaniment;
e. together with the community prevent the increase of other victims of violence.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 7

(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement prevention efforts against the occurrence of violence in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children who are victims of violence and legislation related to women and children who are victims of violence;
b. implementing education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. implementing socialization of legislation related to the protection of women and children victims of violence;
d. implementing monitoring and evaluation of the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The Regional Government...

(2) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and ensuring the operation of integrated service institutions for victims involving community elements;
b. facilitating the formation of service institutions;
c. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to ensure the implementation of protection for victims with due regard to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally.
(4) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to supervise the provision of services to victims, with service standards involving the community.
(5) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide funds for the protection of women and children victims of violence through the APBD and other legal and non-binding sources.
(6) The Regent appoints Officials to carry out the obligations and responsibilities of organizing protection for women and children victims of violence.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment

Article 8

The Manager of Protection of Women and Children implemented by P2TP2A has the obligation to organize services in accordance with service principles as regulated in this Regional Regulation.

Part Three
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 9

The obligations and responsibilities of the community are as follows:
a. make efforts to provide support for the development of violence prevention programs;
b. formulate proposals regarding the formulation and policies on protection;
c. make...

c. make efforts to provide protection and moral or material support to victims;
d. conduct supervision and reporting of acts of violence to the competent authorities.

CHAPTER V
ORGANIZATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutional

Article 10

(1) The organization of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the P2TP2A.
(2) P2TP2A of Sintang Regency receives case referrals from Service Institutions in the Sintang Regency area.
(3) Provisions concerning P2TP2A are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Principles of Organization

Article 11

(1) The principle of organizing services to victims is not charged any fees whatsoever.
(2) The organization of services to victims is carried out quickly, safely, empathetically, and non-discriminatorily.
(3) Services to victims regarding everything reported are guaranteed confidentiality.

Part Three
Forms and Mechanisms of Service

Article 12

Forms of services to victims include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel;
b. medicolegal services, is a form of medical service for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psychosocial...

c. psychosocial services, are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. Legal services, are services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. Economic independence services, in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent;
f. Information Services (Informed Consent), related to services and accompaniment.

Article 13

Service mechanisms are organized in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) whose guidelines will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
ACCOMPANIMENT

Article 14

(1) Accompaniment of victims is carried out among others by:
a. Police;
b. Prosecutor's Office;
c. Advocates; and
d. Social Workers.

(2) Accompaniment by the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Advocates as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, letter b, and letter c, is in accordance with the provisions of applicable legislation.
(3) The duties of social workers as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d as companions are as follows:
a. provide sufficient information to victims about their rights;
b. provide psychosocial services to victims so that victims feel safe and comfortable;
c. accompany victims during the examination and medical recovery process;
d. accompany victims during the medicolegal process;
e. accompany victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
f. monitor...

f. monitor the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
g. maintain the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
h. coordinate with other companions;
i. provide continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

CHAPTER VII
FUNDING

Article 15

(1) Funding for the organization of protection for women and children victims of violence includes:
a. medical services, which include doctor's examinations, action costs, hospital costs, and medication costs;
b. medicolegal services, which include examinations for Visum et Repertum and Visum et Psikiatrikum;
c. psychosocial services, consisting of counseling and psychological therapy as well as safe houses (shelter);
d. legal services;
e. economic strengthening, in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access.
(2) Funding management is carried out through technical institutions appointed by the Regional Government carried out transparently and accounted for in accordance with applicable legislation.
(3) Sources of funds in the organization of protection of women and children are sourced from the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget, Provincial Revenue and Expenditure Budget, APBD of Sintang Regency and other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER VIII
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPERVISION

Article 16

(1) Development of the organization of protection of women and children is carried out by relevant Agencies in accordance with their respective main duties and functions.
(2) Development as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of providing guidelines that include technical organization of protection of women and children.
(3) Supervision...

(3) Supervision of the organization of protection of Women and Children is carried out by relevant Agencies together with internal government supervisory apparatus in accordance with applicable legislation.

CHAPTER IX
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 17

(1) Officials or Officers appointed by authorized institutions/agencies who do not carry out obligations and responsibilities as regulated in Article 7 and Article 8, are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning from the competent official; and/or
b. fine of at most Rp.50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).
(2) Further provisions regarding the procedure for imposing administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are stipulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
INVESTIGATION

Article 18

(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are given special authority as investigators to conduct investigations of criminal acts in the field of protection of women and children as referred to in the Criminal Procedure Law.
(2) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government appointed by competent Officials in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
(3) The authority of Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is:
a. receive reports or complaints from someone regarding the existence of a criminal act;
b. take first action and examination at the scene;
c. order someone to stop and examine the identity of the suspect;
d. seize objects and letters;
e. take fingerprints and photograph someone;
f. summon...

f. summon people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in experts needed in connection with case examination;
h. conduct cessation of investigation after receiving instructions from the investigator of the Indonesian National Police that there is insufficient evidence or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the investigator notify this to the Public Prosecutor, suspect or their family.

CHAPTER XI
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 19

Every criminal act relating to the protection of women and children is subject to criminal sanctions as regulated in applicable legislation.

Article 20

(1) Every person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and/or children so as to cause violence as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (2), allows violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be punished with imprisonment of at most 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp.50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).
(2) Every person who commits acts of obstructing officers or P2TP2A institutions or any party in making efforts to protect and provide services for women and/or children victims of violence as referred to in Article 3 paragraph (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of at most 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp.50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).
(3) Criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) are violations.

CHAPTER XII
OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 21

Further provisions regarding the organization of protection of women and children victims of violence are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XIII...

CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 22

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sintang Regency.

Established in Sintang
on 20 April 2015

REGENT OF SINTANG,

SGD

MILTON CROSBY

Promulgated in Sintang
on 20 April 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SINTANG REGENCY,

SGD

YOSEPHA HASNAH

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINTANG REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 8

Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,

HERKOLANUS RONI, SH., M.Si
Pembina
NIP. 19750403 200312 1 005

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINTANG REGENCY PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN: (8/2015)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINTANG REGENCY
NUMBER 8 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

The State has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual and economic security, this philosophy is stated in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution that the purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, the first is to protect the entire nation and all of Indonesia's territory.

Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women Year 1999 it is stated that Women as mothers of the nation and children as assets and successors of the nation are creatures created by Almighty God so that their honor, dignity and self-respect must be protected and maintained properly and proportionally, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter a
Respect for the rights of victims is intended to ensure the fulfillment of victims' rights as referred to in Article 5.

Letter b...

Letter b
Gender justice is a state where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to obtain opportunities (access), as well as welfare.

Gender equality is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Letter c
Non-Discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d
The best interests of the victim is all the best actions concerning victims carried out by the government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, so the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
What is meant by gender-based violence is actions based on gender relations that place women subordinate to men.

Domestic sphere means the space where interpersonal relations occur.

Public sphere means the space where relations occur that concern public interests.

Service and accompaniment institutions must also be able to provide education and awareness to the community about gender-based acts of violence.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9...

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINTANG REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 8