COPY
REGENT OF BANGKA SELATAN
BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKA SELATAN REGENCY NUMBER 9 OF 2018
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BANGKA SELATAN,

Considering: a. that women and men have equal rights to participate in various fields of life;
b. that women are a national asset who play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations, therefore they need to receive protection guarantees from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
4. Law Number 13 of 1998 concerning Elderly Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 190, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3796);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 27 of 2000 concerning Establishment of Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 217, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4033);
7. Law Number 5 of 2003 concerning Establishment of South Bangka Regency, Central Bangka Regency, West Bangka Regency and East Belitung Regency in Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 25, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4268);
8. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
12. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
13. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
14. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Improving the Quality of Life of Women;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Protection of Women;

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANGKA SELATAN REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF BANGKA SELATAN

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Bangka Selatan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the regional government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regent is the Regent of Bangka Selatan.
5. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bangka Selatan Regency.
6. Human Rights are a set of rights inherent in the nature and existence of humans as creatures of God Almighty and are His gift which must be respected, upheld and protected by the state, law, government, and every person for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity and worth.
7. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge and skills capacity so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
8. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
9. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on differentiation of humans on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
10. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in families, society and community culture where we live including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
11. Gender Equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as humans so they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social cultural, defense and security activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
12. Violence against women is any action that violates, hinders, eliminates enjoyment and ignores the human rights of women.
13. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
14. Society is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children.
16. Labor is every person who is capable of doing work to produce goods and/or services either to meet their own needs or for society.
17. Worker/laborer is every person who works by receiving wages or remuneration in other forms.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE

Article 2

The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. Principles and objectives;
b. Rights of women;
c. Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government;
d. Women's Empowerment;
e. Protection of Women;
f. Strategy for Empowerment and Protection of Women;
g. Mechanism for Implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women;
h. Community Participation;
i. Funding; and
j. Guidance and Supervision.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 3

Empowerment and Protection of Women is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.

Article 4

Empowerment and Protection of Women aims to:
a. increase women's participation in the development process;
b. improve the quality of life of women;
c. provide guarantees to women in fulfilling their rights as humans; and
d. provide a sense of security by increasing protection for women from various acts of violence.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN

Article 5

(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue offspring;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
g. obtain protection of self, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
h. obtain welfare and a decent life;
i. participate in politics;
j. perform legal acts; and
k. freely choose a partner in marriage.
(2) Every wife during the marriage bond has equal rights and responsibilities with her husband over all matters relating to their married life, relations with their children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) After dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities with her former husband over all matters relating to children with due regard to the best interests of the child.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 6

(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible for the empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services; and
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) Efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Article 7

Women's empowerment is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as humans to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy;
b. social culture;
c. politics and government;
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
d. law;
e. education;
f. health;
g. employment; and
h. social security.

Part One
Economic Field

Article 8

Women's empowerment in the economic field is implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation and capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Part Two
Social Cultural Field

Article 9

Women's empowerment in the social cultural field is implemented through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, especially in the field of reproductive health;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

Part Three
Political and Governmental Field

Article 10

(1) Women's empowerment in the political and governmental field includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Women's empowerment in the political and governmental field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) The Regional Government provides guarantees to women to have the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable laws and regulations.
(4) The Regional Government provides opportunities for women to be appointed as regional government officials and occupy strategic positions in regional government; and
(5) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties are responsible for providing political education for women.

Part Four
Legal Field

Article 11

(1) Women's empowerment in the legal field includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

Part Five
Education Field

Article 12

Women's empowerment in the education field through:
a. provision of formal and non-formal education for women in Bangka Selatan Regency.
b. Non-formal education aimed at improving women's capabilities.
c. Non-formal education as referred to in letter b, includes women's empowerment education, skills education and job training.
d. Formal and non-formal education as referred to in letter a, is regulated by a separate Regional Regulation.

Part Six
Health Field

Article 13

(1) Women have the right to obtain health services to undergo reproductive life and sexual life that is healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. Health Services for Pre-Pregnancy, Pregnancy, Childbirth and Postpartum Periods;
a. Pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health; and
b. Reproductive health services.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Part Seven
Employment Field

Article 14

(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
(2) Employers who employ female workers must provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.

Part Eight
Social Security Field

Article 15

(1) The Regional Government is responsible for providing guidance facilities for women with social problems.
(2) The Regional Government provides the right to social security for women with social problems.
(3) The responsibility for providing guidance facilities for women with social problems is under the regional apparatus organization that handles women's empowerment affairs.

CHAPTER VII
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 16

Implementation of protection of women is provided to:
a. female workers/laborers;
b. elderly women;
c. women with disabilities;
d. homeless women;
e. domestic workers;
f. women as family economic supporters;
g. women former inmates of correctional institutions;
h. women disaster victims;
i. commercial sex workers; and
j. women victims of violence.

Part One
Female Workers/Laborers

Article 17

(1) Implementation of protection for female workers/laborers to provide protection from acts of economic exploitation and cruel, inhumane treatment and to seek proper appreciation for work.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
(2) Female workers/laborers as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection over:
a. Recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. Health insurance and employment social security;
c. Access to information and legal consultation services;
d. Opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve status;

Part Two
Elderly Women

Article 18

(1) Implementation of protection for elderly women in order to extend life expectancy so they can carry out their social functions and play an active role naturally in their social life.
(2) Elderly women as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection rights over:
a. guarantee of continuity and personal self-development:
b. participation in the fields of education, health, work, politics, arts and culture and utilization of information and communication technology:
c. accessibility to information, legal assistance, mobility, social services; and
d. early intervention efforts including treatment and rehabilitation to improve their function and capacity.

Part Three
Women with Disabilities

Article 19

(1) Implementation of Protection for women with disabilities in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination including freedom from cruel, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity and freedom from exploitation;
(2) Women with disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection rights over:
a. guarantee of continuity and personal self-development;
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
b. participation in the fields of education, health, work, politics, sports, arts and culture and utilization of information and communication technology;
c. accessibility to information, legal assistance, mobility, social services; and
d. early intervention efforts including treatment and rehabilitation to improve their function and capacity.

Part Four
Homeless Women

Article 20

(1) Implementation of protection for homeless women in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the absence of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection rights over:
a. decent housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration registration;
d. opportunities to obtain skills to improve economic status; and
e. access to information and legal consultation services.

Part Five
Domestic Workers

Article 21

(1) Implementation of Protection for domestic workers in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity, and exploitation in employment relations.
(2) Domestic workers as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection over:
a. recognition of rights, wages, and decent working conditions;
b. health insurance and employment social security;
c. access to information and legal consultation services; and
d. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

Part Six
Women as Family Economic Supporters

Article 22

(1) Implementation of protection for women as family economic supporters in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, negative stigma and economic empowerment for women as family economic supporters.
(2) Women as family economic supporters as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection rights over:
a. discriminatory actions and efforts to weaken women's function as family economic supporters;
b. strengthening capabilities and recognition as family economic supporters in their environment; and
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.

Part Seven
Women Former Inmates of Correctional Institutions

Article 23

(1) Implementation of Protection for women former inmates of Correctional Institutions in order to provide protection from obstacles to adjusting to life in society, so they can carry out life normally.
(2) Women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection over:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
b. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Part Eight
Women Disaster Victims

Article 24

(1) Implementation of Protection for women disaster victims in order to provide protection during disasters and post-disaster.
(2) Women disaster victims as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection over:
a. access to decent housing;
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
b. health services;
c. access to information and legal consultation services; and
d. post-disaster recovery.

Part Nine
Commercial Sex Workers

Article 25

(1) Implementation of Protection for commercial sex workers in order to provide health protection and improvement of life skills as capital to improve social status.
(2) Protection for commercial sex workers as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing life skills capabilities;
b. facilitating reproductive health services; and
c. preventing trafficking in persons.

Part Ten
Women Victims of Violence

Article 26

(1) Implementation of Protection for women victims of violence in order to provide legal protection and/or health recovery
(2) Protection for women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. legal assistance;
b. assistance after the occurrence of acts of violence;
c. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
d. health services.

CHAPTER VIII
STRATEGY FOR EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Article 27

(1) Empowerment and protection of women is implemented by integrating gender mainstreaming and gender-disaggregated data in an integrated manner based on applicable laws and regulations.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
(2) In the empowerment and protection of women, a Working Group and Integrated Services are formed as determined by Regent's Decree.
(3) Empowerment and protection of women is coordinated by the Agency that handles Women's Empowerment.

CHAPTER IX
MECHANISM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Article 28

The mechanism for implementation of empowerment and protection of women is carried out through stages:
a. formulation of policy planning for programs and activities;
b. budgeting for programs and activities
c. implementation of programs and activities; and
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Article 29

(1) Formulation of policy planning for programs and activities as referred to in Article 28 letter a, is implemented through:
a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of data;
b. coordination and synchronization of planning preparation for programs and activities with related OPDs; and
c. determination of programs and activities in planning documents.
(2) Formulation of policy planning for programs and activities is further regulated in minimum service standards and standard operating procedures.
(3) Formulation of policy planning for programs and activities for implementation of empowerment and protection of women is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that handles planning affairs.
(4) Budgeting for programs and activities as referred to in Article 28 letter b, is implemented through general budget policies set forth in the APBD.
(5) Implementation of programs and activities as referred to in Article 28 letter c, is implemented through:
a. implementation of programs and activities contained in the regional apparatus budget documents;
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id
b. coordination and synchronization of implementation of program activities with related OPDs.
(6) Implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as referred to in Article 28 letter d, is implemented through:
a. conducting periodic monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs and activities that have been carried out;
b. making periodic reports; and
c. evaluation results as input material for formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 30

(1) The community can participate in the implementation of empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is realized by:
a. actions to provide information and/or report violence against women to law enforcement or authorized parties, or participate in handling acts of violence against women.
b. provision of communication, information and education media about empowerment and prevention of violence against women within families, communities, educational institutions and public spaces.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING

Article 31

Funding for implementation of policies, programs and activities for empowerment and protection of women is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Bangka Selatan Regency and other legal and non-binding funding sources.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

CHAPTER XII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 32

(1) The Regent or OPD that handles women's empowerment conducts guidance and supervision over empowerment and protection of women;
(2) Forms of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows:
a. providing socialization to the community and business world regarding policies on empowerment and protection of women;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding empowerment and protection of women, and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitation of capacity building for institutions implementing empowerment and protection of women;
d. facilitation of women's participation forums and women's organizations;
e. facilitation of rehabilitation and reintegration services for women disaster victims and victims of violence;
f. coordinating the participation of the business world and other institutions, including international assistance for empowerment and protection of women; and
g. providing awards to the community and business world both individually and institutionally who have made efforts to empower and protect women.
(3) Forms of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities over empowerment and protection of women.

CHAPTER XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 33

At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all implementing provisions related to the implementation of empowerment and protection of women are declared to remain in force as long as they do not conflict with the provisions in this Regional Regulation.
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 34

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the Promulgation of this Regional Regulation, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Bangka Selatan Regency.

Enacted in Toboali
on July 31, 2018

REGENT OF BANGKA SELATAN,

signed

JUSTIAR NOER

Promulgated in Toboali
on July 31, 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF BANGKA SELATAN REGENCY,

signed

SUWANDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANGKA SELATAN REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 9

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKA SELATAN REGENCY BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE: (6.9/2018).
www.jdih.bangkaselatankab.go.id