REGENT OF PESAWARAN
LAMPUNG PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY
NUMBER 1 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF PESAWARAN,

Considering: a. that the Republic of Indonesia is a State that upholds the dignity and worth of every human being, provides guarantees for the rights and security of women and children and freedom from all forms of violence, mistreatment, exploitation, trafficking and neglect;
b. that in order for efforts to protect children and children to obtain optimal results, there needs to be concrete action from the regional government and it is necessary to increase the broad participation of the community;
c. that based on Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection are governmental affairs that must be implemented by the Regional Government;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
4. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 33 Year 2007 concerning the Establishment of Pesawaran Regency in Lampung Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4749);
7. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
8. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
11. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2011 concerning Policy on Fulfillment of Children's Education Rights (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 65);
12. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 10 Year 2011 concerning Policy on Handling Children with Special Needs (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 857);
13. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 170);
14. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036);

With Mutual Approval
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PESAWARAN REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF PESAWARAN

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pesawaran Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government organizer who leads the implementation of government which is the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pesawaran.
4. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Council of Pesawaran Regency.
5. Sub-district is part of the Regency area led by a sub-district head.
6. Village is part of the Regency area led by a Village Head;
7. Village Government is the village government in Pesawaran Regency.
8. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife and children, or father and children or mother and children or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward sideways to the third degree.
10. Parents are biological father and/or mother or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
11. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
12. Woman is a human being who can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth and breastfeed.
13. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old, including a baby still in the womb.
14. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
15. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
16. Protection of women is all efforts made to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
17. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge, and skills abilities so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
18. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, and develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
19. Child with Disability is a Child who has physical, mental, intellectual, or sensory limitations for a long period of time who in interacting with the environment and community attitudes can encounter obstacles that make it difficult to participate fully and effectively based on equal rights.
20. Child with Excellence is a Child who has extraordinary intelligence or has special potential and/or talent not limited to intellectual ability, but also in other fields.
21. Adopted Child is a Child whose rights are transferred from the environment of the authority of the Family of Parents, legal Guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the Child into the environment of the Family of adoptive Parents based on a court decision or determination.
22. Foster Child is a Child who is cared for by a person or institution to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health because the Parents or one of the Parents is unable to guarantee the proper growth and development of the Child.
23. Custody is the power of Parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop the Child in accordance with the religion professed and in accordance with abilities, talents, and interests.
24. Child's Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by Parents, Family, community, state, government, and regional government.
25. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
26. Violence is any act unlawfully, which results in suffering or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom.
27. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
28. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and mistreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
29. Child-Friendly Regency is a Regency that has a Development system and public Services from the Regency Government with support from parents, families, communities, private sector and Children's forums for the fulfillment of children's rights through the integration of planned commitments and resources comprehensively and sustainably through policies, programs, activities and budgeting for child welfare.
30. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a cooperative network that organizes integrated social service functions.
31. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is a cooperative network that organizes integrated protection service functions for women and children.
32. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
33. Family Welfare Consultation Institution hereinafter abbreviated as LK3 is an integrated social service unit that implements psychosocial problem handling for families to realize family resilience.
34. Regional Child Protection Commission hereinafter abbreviated as KPAD is an integrated social service unit that implements child protection services to realize the fulfillment of children's rights.
35. Children's Forum is a Social Organization that represents the voice and participation of children that is independent and not affiliated with political organizations where the formation and preparation of its activities are determined in the Regent's Regulation.
36. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
37. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment, or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
38. Safe House (Shelter) is a protection house for women and children including families and witnesses of victims of violence.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE

Article 2

The Scope of this Regional Regulation consists of:
a. implementation of women's protection;
b. implementation of child protection;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. institutions;
e. child-friendly regency;
f. child-friendly regency task force;
g. special development planning deliberation for women and children;
h. financing.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES, PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 3

The implementation of women's protection is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia including:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. the best interests of women;
f. respect for women's opinions;
g. legal certainty; and
h. women's empowerment.

Article 4

The basic principles of the convention on the rights of the child include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the child's opinion.

Article 5

The objectives of implementing the protection of women and children are:
a. to ensure the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
b. to protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
c. to maintain household integrity so that a harmonious and prosperous family is realized;
d. to ensure the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
e. to provide services to women and children victims of violence;
f. to provide protection to reporters and witnesses;
g. to realize children who are quality, noble, and prosperous;
h. to empower women victims of violence.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S PROTECTION

Part One
Women's Rights

Article 6

Women's rights are as follows:
a. to live, maintain life and improve their standard of living;
b. to live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and mentally;
c. to enjoy a good and healthy living environment;
d. to live in a family and continue offspring in a legal marriage bond based on the provisions of laws and regulations;
e. to obtain work according to ability, appropriate and fair conditions and wages;
f. especially for women with disabilities, the right to get facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. to play an active role in the political and governmental fields in accordance with the potential and abilities they possess;
h. to obtain legal information and services;
i. to obtain services to increase their income; and
j. to obtain other rights in accordance with their human dignity and based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
Women's Empowerment

Article 7

(1) In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life, women must be empowered.
(2) Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so they are able to play a role and participate in activities:
a. economic;
b. socio-cultural;
c. political; and
d. legal.

Article 8

The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter a, is carried out through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation of capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 9

Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter b, is carried out through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts especially in the field of reproductive health;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for women's advancement.

Article 10

(1) The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter c, includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 11

(1) The implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter d, includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) The implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12

(1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible for efforts to empower women.
(2) Women's empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 13

(1) To implement women's empowerment as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (1), the Regional Government organizes gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of women's lives related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of women's lives related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation of women related to the fields of health, economy, law, human rights and politics; improving the quality of life of development, education, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. organizing the protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i. facilitating the integration of women's protection especially against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating the protection of women especially against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business world for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l. developing a gender-based information system;
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
(2) Forms of women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part Three
Prevention of Violence and Participation in Prevention

Paragraph 1
Prevention of Violence

Article 14

(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the agency that has the task and function of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), are carried out through the following means:
a. forming a work network in efforts to prevent violence;
b. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership work patterns between Regional Government institutions and the community;
c. building an integrated security system in areas prone to cases of violence against women;
d. building complaint and service units regarding violence against women at the sub-district, urban village and/or Village levels; and
e. awareness campaigns, socialization and education to the community about the protection and empowerment of women.

Paragraph 2
Participation in Prevention

Article 15

Participation in prevention efforts as referred to in Article 14, the Regional Government is obliged to involve:
a. family;
b. community; and
c. women's observer institutions.

Part Four
Protection of Women

Article 16

(1) Protection of women includes:
a. protection of the personal security of victims or witnesses;
b. physical and psychological threats;
c. confidentiality of the identity of victims and witnesses;
d. provision of testimony during the ongoing legal process regulated through a protection mechanism.
(2) Protection of women victims also includes the provision of safe houses as temporary shelter to obtain a sense of security during the judicial process and/or outside the judicial process.
(3) The implementation of protection and safe houses is carried out by the Regional Government.
(4) Further provisions on the mechanism for protecting women as referred to in paragraph (2), and the implementation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (3), will be regulated in a Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF CHILD PROTECTION

Part One
Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 17

Every child has the right to live, grow, develop, and participate properly in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.

Article 18

Every child has the right to a name as a personal identity and citizenship status.

Article 19

Every Child has the right to worship according to their religion, think, and express themselves according to their level of intelligence and age under the guidance of Parents or Guardians.

Article 20

(1) Every child has the right to know their parents, be raised, and cared for by their own parents.
(2) In the event that for some reason the parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development, or the child is in a neglected state, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 21

Every child has the right to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs.

Article 22

(1) Every Child has the right to obtain education and teaching in the context of personal development and level of intelligence according to interests and talents.
(2) Every Child has the right to receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and Violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.
(3) In addition to obtaining Child Rights as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), Children with Disabilities have the right to obtain special education and Children who have excellence have the right to receive special education.

Article 23

Every child has the right to express and be heard their opinion, receive, seek, and provide information according to their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with the values of decency and propriety.

Article 24

Every child has the right to rest and use leisure time, socialize with peers, play, recreate, and create according to interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development.

Article 25

Every Child with Disability has the right to obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards.

Article 26

(1) Every child while in the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care, has the right to receive protection from treatment:
a. discrimination;
b. exploitation, both economic and sexual;
c. neglect;
d. cruelty, violence, and persecution;
e. injustice; and
f. other mistreatment.
(2) In the event that parents, guardians or child caregivers commit any form of treatment as referred to in paragraph (1), the perpetrator is subject to aggravated punishment.

Article 27

(1) Every Child has the right to be cared for by their own Parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules showing that the separation is in the best interests of the Child and is a last consideration.
(2) In the event of separation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Child still has the right:
a. to meet directly and have regular personal contact with both Parents;
b. to receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both Parents according to abilities, talents and interests;
c. to obtain living expenses from both Parents; and
d. to obtain other Child Rights.

Article 28

Every child has the right to obtain protection from:
a. abuse in political activities;
b. involvement in armed conflict;
c. involvement in social unrest;
d. involvement in events containing elements of violence; and
e. involvement in warfare.

Article 29

(1) Every child has the right to obtain protection from being the target of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhuman punishment.
(2) Every child has the right to obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
(3) Arrest, detention, or criminal imprisonment of children is only carried out if in accordance with applicable law and can only be carried out as a last resort.

Article 30

(1) Every child who is deprived of freedom has the right to:
a. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
b. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal efforts; and
c. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a closed session for the public.
(2) Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.

Article 31

Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act has the right to receive legal assistance and other assistance.

Article 32

Every child is obliged to:
a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, community, and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation, and state;
d. perform worship according to the teachings of their religion; and
e. implement noble ethics and morals.

Article 33

The regional government, family, and parents are obliged to ensure that children born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Article 34

Every Person is prohibited from performing abortion on a Child still in the womb, except for reasons and procedures justified in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 35

(1) The Regional Government, Community, and Parents are obliged to protect Children from acts that disturb the health and growth and development of Children.
(2) In carrying out their obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government, Community, and Parents must carry out activities that protect Children.

Part Two
Prevention

Article 36

(1) Efforts to prevent violence against children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the agency that has the task and function of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through the following means:
a. forming a work network in efforts to prevent violence;
b. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership work patterns between regional government institutions and the community;
c. building an integrated security system in areas prone to cases of violence against children;
d. including local content material about children's rights and the elimination of violence against children as teaching material in teaching and learning activities in early childhood education institutions up to the level of Senior High School;
e. building complaint and service units regarding violence against children at the sub-district, urban village and/or village levels, as well as schools;
f. awareness campaigns, socialization and education to the community about child protection.

Part Three
Child Protection

Article 37

(1) Every child receives protection from treatment of violence, exploitation, trafficking, discrimination, mistreatment and neglect.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is described in various fields of life, including:
a. in the field of health;
b. in the field of religion;
c. in the field of education;
d. in the social field; and
e. special protection.

Article 38

(1) Protection in the field of health as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter a, is carried out by the government through the provision of health facilities and seeking comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains the optimal degree of health from the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
(3) Comprehensive health service efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented by the Regional Government free of charge for families who are unable.

Article 39

(1) Parents and families provide protection to maintain children's health starting from examination of children's growth and development from the womb.
(2) In the event that parents and families are unable to carry out protection as referred to in paragraph (1), then the Regional Government is obliged to fulfill it.
(3) The Regional Government provides free assistance and services for underprivileged communities as referred to in paragraph (2), and its implementation is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40

(1) Every Child has the right to be cared for by their own Parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules showing that the separation is in the best interests of the Child and is a last consideration.
(2) In the event of separation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Child still has the right:
a. to meet directly and have regular personal contact with both Parents;
b. to receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both Parents according to abilities, talents, and interests;
c. to obtain living expenses from both Parents; and
d. to obtain other Child Rights.

Article 41

(1) Every child receives protection in the field of religion as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter b, to worship according to their religion.
(2) Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes fostering, guiding, and practicing good religious teachings for children.

Article 42

(1) Every child receives protection in the field of education as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter c, to obtain education.
(2) The Regional Government, parents, and families must provide the widest possible opportunity for children to obtain education from an early age.
(3) The Regional Government provides adequate facilities and infrastructure to support the teaching and learning process for children.
(4) Non-governmental institutions may provide teaching and learning facilities and infrastructure for children, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 43

Education as referred to in Article 42 paragraph (1), is intended and directed to:
a. development of personality abilities, mental, talent, and physical of children optimally;
b. development of respect for parents, and fellow human beings;
c. development of understanding of cultural and customary values in the place where children grow and develop;
d. preparation of children for a responsible life; and
e. development of respect and love for the nation and state.

Article 44

(1) The Regional Government provides protection for children with disabilities, to get opportunities and accessibility to obtain inclusive education and/or special education.
(2) Children who have excellence are given the opportunity to receive special education.

Article 45

The Regional Government provides education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children in remote areas.

Article 46

(1) Protection in the field of education as referred to in Article 37 letter c applies within and around educational units.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of protection from physical violence, psychological violence, sexual crimes, and other crimes.
(3) Protection within and outside educational units can be carried out by educators, education personnel, regional government officials, and/or the community.

Article 47

Special services as referred to in Article 33, in addition to assistance in the form of money, school equipment, can also be in the form of providing school shuttle buses whose procurement is in accordance with regional financial capacity.

Article 48

(1) Child protection in the Social field as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter d, includes maintenance and care of neglected children.
(2) Maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of clothing, food, shelter, education, health, security guarantees, freedom to worship according to their religion and equal treatment with other children to achieve optimal social integration; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities.
(3) Maintenance of neglected children as referred to in paragraph (1), can also be carried out by individuals and non-governmental institutions or community institutions.
(4) Regional government institutions, and/or individuals, and/or community institutions in providing services as referred to in paragraph (2), can cooperate with various related service units.
(5) Supervision of the implementation of maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out by regional apparatus organizations (OPD) that organize affairs in the social field in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 49

Special protection as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter e, is given specifically to:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. children from minority and isolated groups;
c. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
d. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
e. children who are victims of pornography;
f. children with HIV/AIDS;
g. children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
h. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
i. children victims of sexual crimes;
j. children victims of terrorism networks;
k. children with disabilities;
l. children victims of mistreatment and neglect;
m. children with deviant social behavior; and
n. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Article 50

(1) Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 37 letter a, consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children victims of unrest;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.
(2) Special protection for children in emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 51

(1) The regional government and community provide special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 49 letter a, which includes children in conflict with the law and children victims of criminal acts.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. humane treatment taking into account needs according to age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment, or other treatment that is cruel, inhuman and degrades dignity and degree;
f. avoidance of imposition of death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention or imprisonment, except as a last resort and for the shortest possible time;
h. provision of justice before an objective, impartial Juvenile court, and in a closed session for the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity;
j. provision of accompaniment by Parents/Guardians and persons trusted by the Child;
k. provision of social advocacy;
l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility, especially for Children with Disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 52

Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 49 letter b, is carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and implement the teachings of their own religion, and use their own language.

Article 53

Special Protection for Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 51 paragraph (2) letter d is carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of laws and regulations related to the Protection of Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the Community in eliminating exploitation of Children economically and/or sexually.

Article 54

Special protection for Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse as referred to in Article 49 letter d and Children involved in their production and distribution is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 55

Every Person is obliged to protect Children from the influence of pornography and prevent Children's access to information containing pornographic elements.

Article 56

(1) Special Protection for Children who are victims of pornography as referred to in Article 49 letter e is implemented through fostering, accompanying, and social, physical and mental health recovery efforts.
(2) Fostering, accompanying, and social, physical and mental health recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 57

Special Protection for Children with HIV/AIDS as referred to in Article 49 letter f is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 58

The Regional Government provides special protection for child victims of trafficking as referred to in Article 37 letter e and child victims of kidnapping as referred to in Article 49 letter g which is carried out through efforts:
a. supervision;
b. protection;
c. prevention;
d. care; and
e. rehabilitation.

Article 59

Special Protection for Children with Disabilities as referred to in Article 49 letter k is carried out through efforts:
a. treatment of Children humanely in accordance with the dignity and Rights of Children;
b. fulfillment of special needs;
c. equal treatment with other Children to achieve full social integration and individual development; and
d. social accompaniment.

Article 60

Special Protection for Children victims of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 49 letter l is carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation, and social accompaniment efforts.

Article 61

Special Protection for Children with deviant social behavior as referred to in Article 49 letter m is carried out through guidance on religious and social values, counseling, social rehabilitation, and social accompaniment.

Article 62

Special protection for Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to the condition of Parents as referred to in Article 49 letter n is carried out through counseling, social rehabilitation, and social accompaniment.

Article 63

Further provisions regarding special protection for children as referred to in Articles 37 through 62 are implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
General

Article 64

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence and discrimination are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Village Government;
c. Community; and
d. Parents and Family.

Part Two
Regional Government

Article 65

The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 64 letter a, include:
a. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
b. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
c. cooperating with other parties in organizing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for organizing the protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity;
f. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
g. providing recovery and social reintegration services;
h. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
i. providing human resources in the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination.

Article 66

(1) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 65 letter a, the Regent establishes programs and activities for the protection of women and children in the regional action plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination.
(2) The regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (1), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Three
Village Government

Article 67

The obligations and responsibilities of the Village Government as referred to in Article 64 letter b, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination established by the Regional Government;
b. cooperating with other parties in organizing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
d. allocating budget for organizing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination according to village financial capacity;
e. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination; and
f. encouraging and increasing community participation.

Part Four
Community

Article 68

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 64 letter c, are carried out by participating in the protection of women and children victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination, both individually and in groups.
(2) The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, women's and children's protection institutions, social welfare institutions, community organizations, educational institutions, mass media, and the business world.
(3) The role of the community in organizing the protection of women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. providing information through socialization and education regarding the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
b. providing input in the formulation of policies related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
c. reporting to the authorities if there is a violation of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination against women and children;
d. playing an active role in the process of rehabilitation and social reintegration for women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
e. monitoring and supervising the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
f. providing facilities and infrastructure in order to support the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
g. playing an active role by eliminating negative labeling of women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination; and
h. providing space for women and children to be able to participate and express opinions.

Part Five
Parents and Family

Article 69

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of parents and family as referred to in Article 45 letter d, are to maintain and prevent all forms of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination both against women and against children.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of parents towards children as referred to in paragraph (1), are to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children according to abilities, talents, and interests;
c. prevent marriage at child age; and
d. provide character education and instillation of moral values in children.
(3) Guardians and/or foster parents appointed as referred to in paragraph (3) must have the same religion as that professed by the Child.
(4) Guardians and/or foster parents as referred to in paragraph (3) are responsible for the child and are obliged to manage the property of the child concerned for the best interests of the child.
(6) Guardians and/or foster parents as referred to in paragraph (3), may represent the child to perform legal acts, both inside and outside the court for the best interests of the child.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONS

Part One
PPT

Article 70

(1) In order to protect women and children, the Regional Government may establish PPT.
(2) The establishment and development of PPT is adjusted to priority needs, regional financial capacity and the capacity of existing institutions and personnel in the region.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), may take the form of:
a. P2TP2A;
b. LK3;
c. KPAD; and
d. other institutions as needed and in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 71

(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 70 paragraph (3) letter a, is located at the regional level and sub-district level.
(2) P2TP2A is under the coordination of OPD or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have the authority to formulate policies on women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) P2TP2A is one form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. information center for women and children;
b. service center for women and children victims of violence; and
c. empowerment center for women and children.

Article 72

(1) The establishment of P2TP2A is stipulated by Regent's Decree for the regional level and sub-district head's decree for the sub-district level.
(2) P2TP2A membership may come from elements of the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent's Regulation.

Article 73

(1) In order to handle psychosocial problems of victims, restore the psychosocial condition of victims and strengthen family resilience, LK3 may be established in the region.
(2) The procedure for establishing, main tasks and functions and service mechanisms of LK3 are carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 74

(1) In order to provide protection and fulfillment of children's rights, KPAD may be established in the region.
(2) The procedure for establishing, main tasks and functions and service mechanisms of KPAD as referred to in paragraph (1), are carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
Children's Forum

Article 75

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to facilitate the formation of a children's forum.
(2) The children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is a representation of children in Pesawaran Regency, both representation of children's geographical domicile, components of children's socio-cultural groups and children's educational background.
(3) In every formulation of policies related to children, the Regional Government must pay attention to and accommodate children's opinions submitted through the children's forum.
(4) The establishment of the children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regional Head Decree.
(5) Sources of financing for the implementation of children's forum activities may come from:
a. contributions from children's forum members;
b. donations from the community/private parties that are non-binding;
c. assistance from the Regional Government; and/or
d. other sources of financing in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY

Article 76

(1) To ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination, concrete efforts are needed in an integrated manner between the regional government, community and business world through the development of KLA.
(2) The implementation of Child-Friendly Regency by the Regency Government is intended to:
a. Ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, for the realization of quality, noble and prosperous children;
b. Ensure the fulfillment of children's rights in creating a sense of security, friendliness, companionship;
c. Protect children from the threat of social problems in their lives;
d. Develop children's potential, talents and creativity;
e. Optimize the role and function of the family as the first educational base for children; and
f. Build Regency facilities and infrastructure capable of meeting children's basic needs to grow and develop optimally.

Article 77

The Child-Friendly Regency organized by the Regency Government is implemented based on principles that include:
a. Good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information openness and rule of law.
b. Non-discrimination, namely not differentiating ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical, mental or psychological condition of children.
c. Culture and local wisdom;
d. The best interests of the child, namely making what is best for the child the main consideration in every policy, program and activity; and
e. Respect for children's views, namely acknowledging and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion is given the opportunity to freely appreciate their views on everything that affects them.

Part One
Child-Friendly

Article 78

(1) The physical condition of an area in which there are facilities and infrastructure managed in such a way as to meet minimum requirements for the interests of children's growth and development in a healthy and normal manner, not containing elements that endanger children.
(2) Suitability as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of infrastructure such as highways, bridges, sidewalks, transportation facilities, regency parks, green living environment and availability of supporting legal instruments.
(3) Suitability as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented at the village, sub-district and Regency levels as well as in the implementation of public services, including in the education and health sectors.

Part Two
Child-Friendly

Article 79

(1) The non-physical condition of an area in which there are cultural values, ethics, attitudes, and community behavior that are consciously practiced or used and developed in such a way as to provide a sense of pleasure, comfort, and joy to children.
(2) Friendliness as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. The way adults face and treat children such as greeting, giving greetings;
b. Choosing and using wise words for children;
c. The habit of praising children;
d. Saying thank you;
e. Being patient and not imposing will;
f. Listening to children's opinions carefully; and
g. Giving examples of good and positive things.
(3) Friendliness as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in the Neighborhood Association, Neighborhood Association, family environment and implementation of public services including in the education and health sectors.
(4) In realizing child-friendly conditions and situations, a social movement of child-caring communities is carried out in the form of child-friendly RW, child-friendly RT, child-friendly families, child-friendly schools, child-friendly health centers, child-friendly polyclinics, child-friendly midwives and others.

Part Three
Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency

Article 80

(1) The implementation of child-friendly regency includes:
a. Fulfillment of basic health and welfare rights;
b. Fulfillment of the right to survive;
c. Fulfillment of the right to growth and development;
d. Fulfillment of the right to participate; and
e. Fulfillment of the right to receive protection from violence and discrimination.
(2) Every person is obliged to support the Child-Friendly Regency program as referred to in paragraph (1).

CHAPTER IX
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY TASK FORCE

Article 81

(1) In order to effectively implement the Child-Friendly Regency policy in the region, a Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is formed whose membership includes OPD, child representatives, and may involve legislative, judicial institutions, business world, religious/community/customary leaders and the community.
(2) The Child-Friendly Regency Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) has the main tasks:
a. coordinating the implementation of policies and development of Child-Friendly Regency;
b. determining the tasks of Task Force members;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication of information and education on Child-Friendly Regency policies;
d. collecting baseline data;
e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
f. disseminating baseline data;
g. determining the focus and priorities of programs in realizing Child-Friendly Regency, which are adjusted to regional potential;
h. preparing a 5 (five) year Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly Regency and work mechanisms;
i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once (1) a year.
(3) Membership of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is appointed and dismissed by the Regent.

Article 82

(1) To assist the smooth implementation of the tasks of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force, a Secretariat is formed.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) is tasked with providing technical and administrative support to the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force.
(3) The Secretariat of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is located at the Office of the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Agency.
(4) The establishment of the secretariat and appointment of secretariat personnel of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is stipulated by the Regional Head.

CHAPTER X
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PLANNING DELIBERATION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 83

(1) Special development planning deliberation for women and children is a form of annual meeting or gathering held specifically for women and children to explore various ideas and input for the fulfillment of the rights of women and children in regional development program activities.
(2) Special development planning deliberation for women and children is carried out before the implementation of development planning deliberation.
(3) Further provisions regarding the implementation mechanism of special development planning deliberation for women and children as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
FINANCING

Article 84

The costs of organizing the protection of women and children are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 85

(1) The Regional Head has the authority to conduct guidance and supervision over the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Forms of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be:
a. providing socialization to the community and children's groups regarding the concept of Child-Friendly Regency and children's rights;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding child protection, reproductive health, dangers of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Narcotics and Other Addictive Substances (NAPZA) and distributing them to the community;
c. providing training related to child care/education, counseling principles, basic psychology to communities that participate in efforts to organize early childhood education, development of Family Toddler Development Groups (BKB), organization of integrated child protection services and other similar activities related to meeting children's needs;
d. facilitating the organization of children's forums and components of children's socio-cultural groups;
e. facilitating the growth and development of information and counseling service centers or forums for adolescents;
f. providing awards to the community, both individuals and groups or community organizations that are deemed to have made good child protection efforts.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities on the Protection of Women and Children carried out by child protection organizers.
(4) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1), may be delegated to the Head of Women's Empowerment and Family Planning and/or other officials within the Regional Government according to their respective duties and functions.

CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 86

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pesawaran Regency.

Stipulated in Gedong Tataan
on January 14, 2019

REGENT OF PESAWARAN,

SGD.

DENDI RAMADHONA K.

Promulgated in Gedong Tataan
on January 14, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PESAWARAN REGENCY,

SGD.

KESUMA DEWANGSA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESAWARAN REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 41

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY LAMPUNG PROVINCE: 02/837/PSW/2019.

In Accordance With the Original Copy
HEAD OF LEGAL SECTION
PESAWARAN REGENCY SECRETARIAT,

sgd

SUSI PATMININGTYAS, S.H.
Pembina Tk. I
NIP. 19661015 199503 2 002

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY
NUMBER 1 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

That humans are endowed by Almighty God with reason and conscience which gives them the ability to distinguish between good and bad which will guide and direct attitudes and behavior in living their lives. With reason and conscience, humans have the freedom to decide for themselves their behavior or actions. In addition, to balance that freedom, humans have the ability to be responsible for all actions taken.

These basic freedoms and basic rights are what are called human rights that are inherently attached to humans naturally as a gift from Almighty God. These rights cannot be denied. Denial of these rights means denying human dignity. Therefore, the state, government, or any organization bears the obligation to recognize and protect human rights for every human being without exception. This means that human rights must always be the starting point and goal in the implementation of community, national, and state life.

The state upholds human rights, including Children's human rights which are marked by guarantees of protection and fulfillment of Children's Rights in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and several provisions of laws and regulations both national and international in nature. This guarantee is strengthened through ratification of international conventions on Children's Rights, namely the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child through Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of The Child.

The State, Government, Regional Government, Community, Family and Parents are obliged to provide protection and ensure the fulfillment of Children's human rights in accordance with their duties and responsibilities. Protection of Children that has been carried out so far has not provided guarantees for Children to receive treatment and opportunities in accordance with their needs in various fields of life, so that in implementing efforts to protect Children's Rights by the Government must be based on the principles of human rights, namely respect, fulfillment, and protection of Children's Rights.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear
Article 2
Sufficiently clear
Article 3
Sufficiently clear
Article 4
Sufficiently clear
Article 5
Sufficiently clear
Article 6
Sufficiently clear
Article 7
Sufficiently clear
Article 8
Sufficiently clear
Article 9
Sufficiently clear
Article 10
Sufficiently clear
Article 11
Sufficiently clear
Article 12
Sufficiently clear
Article 13
Sufficiently clear
Article 14
Sufficiently clear
Article 15
Sufficiently clear
Article 16
Sufficiently clear
Article 17
Sufficiently clear
Article 18
Sufficiently clear
Article 19
Sufficiently clear
Article 20
Sufficiently clear
Article 21
Sufficiently clear
Article 22
Sufficiently clear
Article 23
Sufficiently clear
Article 24
Sufficiently clear
Article 25
Sufficiently clear
Article 26
Sufficiently clear
Article 27
Sufficiently clear
Article 28
Sufficiently clear
Article 29
Sufficiently clear
Article 30
Sufficiently clear
Article 31
Sufficiently clear
Article 32
Sufficiently clear
Article 33
Sufficiently clear
Article 34
Sufficiently clear
Article 35
Sufficiently clear
Article 36
Sufficiently clear
Article 37
Sufficiently clear
Article 38
Sufficiently clear
Article 39
Sufficiently clear
Article 40
Sufficiently clear
Article 41
Sufficiently clear
Article 42
Sufficiently clear
Article 43
Sufficiently clear
Article 44
Sufficiently clear
Article 45
Sufficiently clear
Article 46
Sufficiently clear
Article 47
Sufficiently clear
Article 48
Sufficiently clear
Article 49
Sufficiently clear
Article 50
Sufficiently clear
Article 51
Sufficiently clear
Article 52
Sufficiently clear
Article 53
Sufficiently clear
Article 54
Sufficiently clear
Article 55
Sufficiently clear
Article 56
Sufficiently clear
Article 57
Sufficiently clear
Article 58
Sufficiently clear
Article 59
Sufficiently clear
Article 60
Sufficiently clear
Article 61
Sufficiently clear
Article 62
Sufficiently clear
Article 63
Sufficiently clear
Article 64
Sufficiently clear
Article 65
Sufficiently clear
Article 66
Sufficiently clear
Article 67
Sufficiently clear
Article 68
Sufficiently clear
Article 69
Sufficiently clear
Article 70
Sufficiently clear
Article 71
Sufficiently clear
Article 72
Sufficiently clear
Article 73
Sufficiently clear
Article 74
Sufficiently clear
Article 75
Sufficiently clear
Article 76
Sufficiently clear
Article 77
Sufficiently clear
Article 78
Sufficiently clear
Article 79
Sufficiently clear
Article 80
Sufficiently clear
Article 81
Sufficiently clear
Article 82
Sufficiently clear
Article 83
Sufficiently clear
Article 84
Sufficiently clear
Article 85
Sufficiently clear
Article 86
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESAWARAN REGENCY NUMBER 78