REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA
NORTH MALUKU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA,

Considering: a. that women and children have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth;

b. that all forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and worth need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;

c. that based on Article 12 of Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection are mandatory governmental affairs for regional governments;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of East Halmahera Regency concerning Protection of Women and Children;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age FOR Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action For the Elimination of the worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 208, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as last amended by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

8. Law Number 1 Year 2003 concerning Establishment of North Halmahera Regency, South Halmahera Regency, Sula Islands Regency, East Halmahera Regency and Tidore Islands in North Maluku Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 21, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4264);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

12. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

13. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);

Stipulates:

14. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

15. Law Number 10 Year 2012 concerning Ratification of the Optional Protocol to The Convention on The Rights of The Child on The Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);

16. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

17. Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601);

18. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY

DECIDES:

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of East Halmahera Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of East Halmahera Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Halmahera.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the implementation of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Technical Regional Apparatus is a Regional Apparatus whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes affairs of Women's Empowerment and/or Child Protection.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a child still in the womb.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capacity, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Fulfillment of Children's Rights is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate, optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
11. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Protection is all preventive, service and empowerment actions to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
13. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
14. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against victims.
15. Empowerment is strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
16. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of victims including physical, psychological and social health so that victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
17. Social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions normally.
18. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional area to their area of origin.
19. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
20. Integrated Service Center for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2PTP2A, is the Regional Technical Implementation Unit (UPTDD) of the Integrated Service Center for Protection of Women and Children integrated into the technical Regional Apparatus of East Halmahera Regency.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Child;
e. right to life, survival, and development;
f. empowerment; and
g. legal certainty.

Article 3

This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
b. maintain the integrity of the household to realize a harmonious family;
c. prevent violence against women and children;
d. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
e. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence;
f. provide protection to reporters and witnesses; and
g. carry out empowerment for women victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One
Women's Empowerment

Paragraph 1
Women's Rights

Article 4

Every Woman has the right:
a to live and has the right to maintain life and livelihood;
b to form a family and continue offspring through lawful marriage;
c to develop oneself through fulfillment of basic needs;
d to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, to improve quality of life and for the welfare of humanity;
e to advance oneself in fighting for rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
j to protection of self, family, honor, dignity and property under one's control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something that is a basic right;
k to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth and has the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;
l to live prosperously physically and mentally, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m to social security that enables full development as a dignified human being;
n to equality of position in law and government;
o to work and livelihood worthy of humanity;
p in efforts to defend the state;
q to communicate and obtain information to develop oneself and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available channels;
r to embrace one's respective religion and to worship according to that religion and belief; and
s to obtain education.

Paragraph 2
Forms of Women's Empowerment

Article 5

(1) In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation, and state, women must be empowered.
(2) Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings, to be able to play a role and participate in economic, socio-cultural, political, and legal activities.

Article 6

(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible for women's empowerment efforts.
(2) Women's empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 7

Implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a provision of skills and job training;
b facilitation of formation of productive economic business groups;
c facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d facilitation and capital assistance; and
e facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 8

Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a improvement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;
b improvement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts especially in the field of reproductive health.
c improvement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 9

(1) Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes:
a involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c participation in general elections; and
d self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 10

(1) Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes:
a improvement of awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 11

(1) To implement Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government organizes gender mainstreaming including:
a establishing implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g coordinating implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h organizing protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i facilitating integration of protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j coordinating protection of women especially protection against victims of violence, women workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k facilitating strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business world for implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l developing gender-based information systems; and
m providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, women workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
(2) Further provisions regarding forms of women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Community Participation

Article 12

(1) To carry out women's empowerment as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, Social Community Institutions, religious institutions and/or other legitimate institutions.

Part Two
Child Protection

Paragraph 1
Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 13

Every child has the right to obtain:
a. birth registration;
b. health;
c. education; and
d. social welfare.

Article 14

Every child has the obligation to:
a. respect parents, guardians and teachers;
b. love family, community and care for friends;
c. love homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship according to religion and belief;
e. study and develop oneself according to abilities and talents, interests; and
f. have noble character.

Paragraph 2
Birth Registration

Article 15

Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the field of birth registration, as referred to in Article 13 letter a, the Regional Government is obligated to organize birth registration of children with issuance of birth certificates in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 3
Health

Article 16

(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the health field as referred to in Article 13 letter b, the Regional Government is obligated to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb which is carried out in stages adjusted to regional financial capacity and supported by community participation.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b. exemption from cost burdens for malnourished children, children undergoing dialysis due to kidney failure, children with thalassemia major, children with disabilities, children with special needs, street children, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, children victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance (NAPZA) abuse, children who become victims of violence, such as neglect, economically exploited, sexually and victims of human trafficking.
(3) Children as referred to in paragraph (2) are children from poor families except as otherwise regulated according to health financing programs established by the government.

Article 17

The Regional Government, community, family and parents must endeavor that children born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Paragraph 4
Education

Article 18

(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the education field as referred to in Article 13 letter c, the Regional Government guarantees the implementation of a 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program for all children.
(2) Every organizer of an education unit must provide opportunities for children to obtain education services without discrimination.

Article 19

Every organizer of an education unit is prohibited from expelling children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the child's education.

Article 20

Every organizer of an education unit must coordinate with relevant child protection agencies if they find children dropping out of school because they are victims of acts of violence.

Article 21

Children with disabilities and children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including special and inclusive education.

Article 22

Early Childhood Education for children aged 0 (zero) to 3 (three) years and 4 (four) to 6 (six) years can be organized by Posyandu institutions, Posyandu Parks, Early Childhood Education Posts and similar Early Childhood Education unit institutions.

Article 23

For children who do not pursue formal education, they can pursue education through non-formal education units including:
a For children aged 14 (fourteen) years and above who do not pursue formal elementary school education or equivalent can pursue non-formal Package A education or equivalent to Elementary School (SD)/Madrasah Ibtidaiyah (MI);
b For children aged 17 (seventeen) years and above who do not pursue formal junior high school education or equivalent can pursue non-formal Package B education or equivalent to Junior High School (SMP)/Madrasah Tsanawiyah (MTs); or
c For children aged 21 (twenty-one) years and above who do not pursue formal junior high school education or equivalent can pursue non-formal Package C education or equivalent to Senior High School (SMA)/Vocational High School (SMK)/Madrasah Aliyah/Madrasah Aliyah Kejuruan (MAK);

Paragraph 5
Social Welfare

Article 24

(1) Implementation of Protection and empowerment of children in the social welfare field as referred to in Article 13 letter d, the Regional Government is obligated to organize social welfare for:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. child victims of violence who are economically and sexually exploited, neglected children, child victims of kidnapping and child victims of human trafficking;
c. child victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance (NAPZA) abuse;
d. children infected with HIV/AIDS;
e. children who do not have parents and are cared for by other parties or families who are unable;
f. street children;
g. child victims of natural disasters or social disasters;
h. children with disabilities;
i. children of migrant worker families;
j. children living in or around prostitution locations; and
k. child victims of other mistreatment.
(2) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of provision of services:
a health;
b education;
c legal aid;
d assistance;
e social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f social rehabilitation;
g empowerment;
h social assistance; and/or
i reintegration.

Article 25

(1) The Regional Government is obligated to protect the fulfillment of child workers' rights in the informal sector.
(2) Child Workers in the informal sector as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a domestic workers;
b shoe shiners;
c street vendors;
d scavengers;
e parking attendants;
f children working in agriculture, animal husbandry and plantations;
g children working in mining; and
h other informal sector work that employs children.
(3) Every person who employs children in the informal sector must pay attention to the requirements:
a minimum age of 15 (fifteen) years, except for the category of Worst Forms of Child Labor minimum 18 (eighteen) years;
b obtain written consent from parents/guardians of child workers;
c have a written work agreement between the employer and the parents/guardians of child workers and obtain validation from the authorized agency;
d not employed at night;
e working time of at most 3 (three) hours per day;
f not employed in places or environments that can interfere with the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or child health;
g provide opportunities to obtain education according to talents and interests;
h employ for light types of work; and
i provide one day off per week.

Article 26

Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 25 is in the form of:
a counseling to stakeholders about children's rights;
b assistance with psychological, medical and legal services and socio-economic reintegration;
c empowering families through provision of training, business capital stimulants and assistance;
d scholarships to continue formal education to higher levels; and
e non-formal education and skills training for those not pursuing formal education.

Part Three
Forms of Violence

Article 27

Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 28

Physical violence as referred to in Article 27 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or defects to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 29

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 27 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 30

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 27 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 31

Neglect as referred to in Article 27 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in unfulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of the household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of agreement or contract they are obligated to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 32

Exploitation as referred to in Article 27 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent including prostitution, forced work or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or indecency activities.

Article 33

Other violence as referred to in Article 27 letter f is caused by:
a. threats of violence include: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict the fundamental freedom of a person; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

Part Four
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children

Article 34

(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government and coordinated by the technical Regional Apparatus.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. conducting guidance towards harmonious household integrity;
b. forming work networks in violence prevention efforts;
c. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
d. forming violence prevention systems;
e. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to protection of women and children victims of violence; and
f. providing critical education regarding the rights of women and children for the community.

Article 35

In addition to the Regional Government, prevention efforts as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions; and
d. Non-Governmental Organizations.

Part Five
Handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Article 36

Implementation of Handling of women and children victims of violence is carried out with:
a. speed;
b. safety and comfort;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charges; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 37

Forms of handling of women and children victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. medical rehabilitation services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services; and
f. social reintegration services.

Article 38

Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 37 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims;
b. case identification; and
c. determination of actions to be taken.

Article 39

Assistance services as referred to in Article 37 letter b include:
a. accompanying victims during examination and health recovery processes;
b. accompanying victims during examination processes at police, prosecutor's office and court;
c. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in examination processes at police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. maintaining privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties not concerned, including reporting by mass media;
e. providing a sense of security to victims; and
f. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 40

Medical rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to health services.

Article 41

(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter d are services provided to restore the traumatic condition of victims.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) are through social support.
(3) Social support as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 42

Legal services as referred to in Article 37 letter e are to assist victims in undergoing judicial processes by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and judicial processes;
b. accompanying victims at investigation, prosecution, and court examination levels and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 43

(1) Social reintegration services as referred to in Article 37 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government by coordinating with:
a. relevant government and non-government agencies and institutions; and
b. village community institutions and/or local community leaders.

CHAPTER IV
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER FOR PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN (P2TP2A)

Article 44

(1) The Regional Government in organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence, establishes P2TP2A as a regional technical implementation unit (UPTDD) integrated into the Technical Regional Apparatus.
(2) Implementation of protection and services for women and children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.
(3) Implementation of services for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing fast and free services to victims;
b. organizing protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal aid;
c. cooperating with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for victims;
d. networking with government or private hospitals for care and health recovery of victims and cooperating with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or government-owned trauma centers, community or other institutions for victim health recovery;
e. providing convenience, comfort and safety for victims;
f. maintaining confidentiality of victims; and
g. providing fulfillment of legal aid for victims.
(4) Further provisions regarding establishment, procedures and mechanisms for organizing P2TP2A are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 45

Every Woman and Child victim of violence receives the following rights:
a. right to complaint handling;
b. right to be respected for dignity and worth as a human being;
c. right to obtain protection from family, community, regional government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on court protection orders;
d. right to health and psychological recovery from suffering experienced by victims;
e. right to determine one's own decisions;
f. right to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
g. right to obtain information;
h. right to confidentiality of identity;
i. right to social rehabilitation;
j. right to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of examination process in accordance with laws and regulations; and
k. right to spiritual guidance services.

Article 46

Women and children victims of violence in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 45, also obtain special rights as follows:
a. right to survival;
b. right to grow and develop;
c. right to obtain equal protection; and
d. right to participate in community life.

CHAPTER VI
PROHIBITIONS

Article 47

(1) Every business organizer whose activities can interfere with child development is prohibited from accepting child visitors.
(2) Business organization as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a discotheque;
b night club;
c bar;
d adult karaoke;
e pub;
f massage parlor;
g steam bath/sauna parlor; and
h other similar business fields.

Article 48

Every organizer of hotels, motels, inns, tourism guesthouse businesses and similar business activities is prohibited from renting rooms to children without being accompanied by parents or adult family members or supervising teachers/persons in charge in the context of carrying out school activities or other activities.

Article 49

(1) Every organizer of internet service businesses, play stations and types of children's games based on information and communication technology and others is required to manage and design child-friendly places.
(2) Every business organizer as referred to in paragraph (1) must:
a arrange rooms/cubicles with adequate lighting and not closed;
b not accept children wearing uniforms and/or during school hours;
c locally block sites containing pornographic and pornoaction elements; and
d limit visiting hours and supervise use of existing facilities.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 50

(1) To ensure synergy, balance and effectiveness of integrated measures in implementing policies, programs, activities, protection of Women and children, the Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the technical Regional Apparatus and P2TP2A.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine developments and obstacles in implementing policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and children.
(4) Monitoring is carried out periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus implementing policies, activities for protection of Women and children victims of violence.
(5) Monitoring is carried out from planning to implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children every year.

Article 51

(1) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and children victims of violence is carried out at the end of each Budget year or if needed as required.
(2) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of Women and children victims of violence are used as input material for formulation of policies, programs and activities for protection of Women and children victims of violence for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
FINANCING

Article 52

Funding for implementation of Protection of Women and children, is sourced from:
a. Regional revenue and expenditure budget; and/or
b. Other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 53

(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over implementation of this regional regulation.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include provision of implementation instructions, guidance, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 54

(1) In organizing Protection of Women and children, the community may:
a. form family partners at the Village/Kelurahan level by the community;
b. conduct independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to authorized agencies if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector and/or mass media.

CHAPTER XI
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 55

(1) Every person or business entity that violates the provisions as referred to in Article 47, Article 48, Article 49 is subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a Written warning;
b License suspension;
c Administrative fine; and
d License revocation.
(2) Written warning as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is given 3 (three) times with a grace period between one warning and another of at least 1 (one) month.
(3) License Suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is imposed if written warnings have been given as referred to in paragraph (2).
(4) License Suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b can be withdrawn if the person or business entity committing the violation pays an administrative fine of Rp. 30,000,000,- (thirty million rupiah).
(5) If within the period specified in the license suspension, the administrative fine is not paid, then license revocation will be carried out.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 56

At the latest 1 (one) year, calculated from the enactment of this Regional Regulation, Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation must have been stipulated.

Article 57

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Halmahera Regency.

Promulgated in Maba
on 7 March 2022

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 171

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY NORTH MALUKU PROVINCE NUMBER 6/2022

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and worth need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in East Halmahera so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth, protection must be provided to women and children victims of violence in the form of regional regulations. So far, laws and regulations governing protection of women and children victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so that institutional and regulatory support is needed that can guarantee its implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims especially in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in East Halmahera.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
sufficiently clear

Article 2
sufficiently clear

Article 3
sufficiently clear

Article 4
sufficiently clear

Article 5
sufficiently clear

Article 6
sufficiently clear

Article 7
sufficiently clear

Article 8
sufficiently clear

Article 9
sufficiently clear

Article 10
sufficiently clear

Article 11
sufficiently clear

Article 12
sufficiently clear

Article 13
sufficiently clear

Article 15
sufficiently clear

Article 16
sufficiently clear

Article 17
sufficiently clear

Article 18
sufficiently clear

Article 19
sufficiently clear

Article 20
sufficiently clear

Article 21
sufficiently clear

Article 22
sufficiently clear

Article 23
sufficiently clear

Article 24
sufficiently clear

Article 25
sufficiently clear

Article 26
sufficiently clear

Article 27
sufficiently clear

Article 28
sufficiently clear

Article 29
sufficiently clear

Article 30
sufficiently clear

Article 31
sufficiently clear

Article 32
sufficiently clear

Article 33
sufficiently clear

Article 34
sufficiently clear

Article 35
sufficiently clear

Article 36
sufficiently clear

Article 37
sufficiently clear

Article 38
sufficiently clear

Article 39
sufficiently clear

Article 41
sufficiently clear

Article 42
sufficiently clear

Article 43
sufficiently clear

Article 44
sufficiently clear

Article 45
sufficiently clear

Article 46
sufficiently clear

Article 47
sufficiently clear

Article 48
sufficiently clear

Article 49
sufficiently clear

Article 50
sufficiently clear

Article 51
sufficiently clear

Article 52
sufficiently clear

Article 53
sufficiently clear

Article 54
sufficiently clear

Article 55
sufficiently clear

Article 56
sufficiently clear

Article 57
sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY NUMBER 175