MAYOR OF TUAL
MALUKU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TUAL CITY
NUMBER 03 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF TUAL,

Considering: a. that as citizens, women and children have the right to obtain protection from every act of violence committed against them that causes physical or psychological harm, as part of the recognition and enforcement of human rights;

b. that protection for women and children victims of violence is an effort to provide a sense of security and freedom from all acts of violence guaranteed by Pancasila as the state philosophy, the Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as the highest legal basis in the state and various other laws and regulations;

c. that protection for women and children victims of violence is one aspect of the duties and responsibilities of regional government in providing protection and services to the community;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Tual City concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 60 Year 1958 concerning the Stipulation of Law Number 23 Year 1957 concerning the Establishment of Level II Autonomous Regions Within the Level I Autonomous Region of Maluku (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 111, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1645);

3. Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);

4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

5. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Minimum Age For Admission To Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);

9. Law Number 31 Year 2007 concerning the Establishment of Tual City in Maluku Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 97, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);

10. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Laws and Regulations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);

11. Law Number 17 Year 2014 concerning the People's Consultative Assembly, House of Representatives, Regional Representative Council and Regional House of Representatives (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 182, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5568);

12. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended by Law Number 2 Year 2015 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 24, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5657), and Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

13. Government Regulation Number 58 Year 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 140, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);

14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines and Development for the Establishment of Integrated Service Centers;

16. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 4578);

17. Regional Regulation of Maluku Province Number 02 Year 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence in Maluku;

18. Decree of the Governor of Maluku Number 302 Year 2007 concerning the Establishment of the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children (P2TPA);

19. Regional Regulation of Tual City Number 02 Year 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Tual City (Regional Gazette of Tual City Year 2016 Number 88, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tual City Number 7096);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF TUAL CITY
and
MAYOR OF TUAL

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Tual City.

2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principles of autonomy and Co-Administration with the principle of the broadest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.

3. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.

4. Mayor is the Mayor of Tual.

5. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution as an element of Regional Government administration.

6. Implementation is all actions carried out by government and non-government institutions that include prevention, protection and recovery for victims of violence against women and children.

7. Child is a person who has not reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, and is not married including a child still in the womb.

8. Woman is every person who is physically born as a woman.

9. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of an act of violence.

10. Prevention is all efforts made by government and non-government institutions aimed at providing a sense of security to women and children.

11. Child protection is all activities carried out to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.

12. Women's protection is all activities carried out to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.

13. Suffering is any act that results in or can result in suffering whether psychological, physical, sexual, economic, social to the victim.

14. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting or causing death.

15. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to women and/or children.

16. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

17. Service is action taken as soon as possible to the victim, when seeing, hearing and knowing of, during or after the occurrence of violence against the victim.

18. Companion is a person or institution that has the ability to accompany victims to provide counseling, therapy, legal services and advocacy for strengthening victim recovery.

19. Women and child protection institution is an institution providing services to victims of violence, hospital-based, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medicolegal), psycho-social and legal services.

20. Safe house is temporary housing used to provide protection for women and children victims in accordance with the standard operating procedures or abbreviated as SOP determined.

21. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or other community organizations.

22. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence, hospital-based, health centers, P2TP2A, Safe Houses, Child Social Protection Houses (RPSA), Trauma Center Protection Houses (RPTC), Women's Social Protection Houses (RPSW).

23. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to provide comprehensive and quality services to women and children victims of violence.

Article 1

The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on Pancasila, the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, as well as the principles and basic rights as regulated in the convention on women and children which include:

a. Respect for human rights;
b. Non-discrimination;
c. The best interests of women and/or children;
d. The right to life, survival, and development;
e. Respect for the opinions of women and children;
f. Justice and gender equality; and
g. Victim protection.

Article 2

The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide prevention, protection and services to women and children from acts of violence.

Article 3

The prevention activities of violence as referred to in article 3 include:

a. Socialization;
b. Dissemination; and
c. Training;

Article 4

The protection and service activities for victims as referred to in Article 3 include:

a. Complaints;
b. Health Services;
c. Social Rehabilitation Services;
d. Legal Aid Services; and
e. Repatriation and Social Reintegration Services.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5

Victims have the right to:

a. have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. receive protection from family, community and regional government;
c. receive information;
d. receive optimal services;
e. receive continuous services up to the rehabilitation stage;
f. confidential handling;
g. psychological assistance and legal aid; and
h. make their own decisions;

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6

(1) Protection of Women and Children is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government, community, parents and family;

(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in article 6 paragraph (1) include:

a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
f. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity and;
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(3) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government is obliged to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:

a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving relevant community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.

Article 7

The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (1) include:

a. preventing acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to the authorities; and
e. participating in handling victims of violence.

Article 8

The obligations of parents and/or family as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (1) include:

a. preventing all forms of violence and protecting women and children as family members;
b. providing support for women and children victims of violence who are part of family members;

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutions

Article 9

(1) In implementing protection for women and children victims of violence which includes prevention and mitigation activities, an Integrated Service Center (PPT) is established.

(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements of the Regional Government and elements from related institutions outside the Regional Government.

(3) Further provisions regarding PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), will be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

(4) PPT as referred to in Paragraph (1), in implementing protection for women and children victims of violence may coordinate with institutions and/or organizations in Tual City.

(5) In the Implementation of Protection for women and children victims of violence, it may be established at the sub-district, urban village and village levels.

Article 10

(1) In addition to establishing PPT as referred to in Article 9, to support the implementation of empowerment and protection for women and children victims of violence, the regional government may establish P2TP2A.

(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements of the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Court, Health Office, Social Office, Ministry of Religion, Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, NGOs, Child Advocates.

(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), is a functional work unit with the task of organizing integrated services for women and children victims of violence.

(4) In carrying out the main duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (3), P2TP2A may coordinate and become a working partner of PPT.

(5) Further provisions regarding P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3), and paragraph (4), are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Two
Handling and Mechanisms

Article 11

(1) The Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner in medical handling, legal protection, medicolegal, psychological and economic matters, the implementation of which can be carried out through partnerships with social community institutions engaged in the protection of women and children.

(2) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), must pay attention to religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

(3) Principles of service and assistance:

c. fast, safe and empathetic;
d. guarantee of confidentiality;
e. easily accessible; and
f. free of charge.

(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented according to standard operating procedures.

CHAPTER V
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION

Article 12

(1) Forms of violence against women and children include physical, psychological, sexual, neglect, exploitation and other violence.

(2) Forms of physical violence are any acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage of a fetus in the womb and/or cause death.

(3) Forms of sexual violence are sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes or certain purposes.

(4) Forms of psychological violence are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness.

(5) Forms of neglect violence are intentional or unintentional actions that result in the non-fulfillment of basic needs.

(6) Forms of exploitation violence are forms of violence including acts of exploiting children economically or sexually to benefit oneself or others, actions with or without the victim's consent but not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully, transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing or abilities of a person to gain profit.

Article 13

(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.

(2) Protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out for residents of Tual City both in Tual City and outside Tual City.

Article 14

(1) Forms of protection for women and children victims of violence are in the form of medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), psychological protection, repatriation and social reintegration.

(2) Forms of medical protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1). In the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.

(3) Forms of legal protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.

(4) Forms of medicolegal protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of medical services for the purposes of proof in the field of law.

(5) Forms of psychological protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), in the form of assistance in the context of recovery from the traumatic condition of victims including the provision of Safe Houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in solving problems.

(6) Forms of Repatriation protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are efforts to return women and children victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.

(7) Forms of Social Reintegration protection as referred to in paragraph (1) are efforts to reunite women and children victims of violence with family, substitute family.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 15

(1) The Government in implementing protection for women and children victims of violence may involve community participation.

(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1), can be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.

Article 16

(1) Social community organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in article 15 paragraph (2), are given guidance by the regional government through regional apparatus organizations related to the duties of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

(2) Organizational guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Part One
Guidance

Article 17

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to provide guidance for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:

a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.

Part Two
Supervision

Article 18

(1) The regional government is obliged to supervise the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the principles of:

a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING SOURCES AND REPORTING

Article 19

(1) The funding source for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence carried out by the regional apparatus of Tual city is from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Tual City.

(2) Funding sources as referred to in paragraph (1), may also come from other legitimate and non-binding sources.

(3) Funding sources for implementation from other legitimate sources as referred to in paragraph (2), are supervised in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(4) PPT is obliged to report the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence periodically to the Mayor of Tual in accordance with applicable regulations.

CHAPTER IX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 20

The existing PPT namely P2TP2A and Yante Fangnan Yanad (Child Loving Family) at the time this Regional Regulation comes into effect continue to carry out their duties until the formation of PPT based on this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 21

This Regional Regulation comes into effect on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tual City.

Established in Tual
on the date of July 17, 2019

MAYOR OF TUAL,

SIGNED

ADAM RAHAYAAN

Promulgated in Tual
on the date of July 17, 2019

Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TUAL CITY

SIGNED

MUUTI MATDOAN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TUAL CITY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 106.

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TUAL CITY
NUMBER 03 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

The implementation of protection for victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of humanity, integration and justice. So that everyone must get their right to protection for a sense of security and freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity which is contrary to what is aspired to in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, namely the creation of a just and civilized humanity. In principle, the strategic target of implementing protection is to maintain the sustainability of protection through integrated, comprehensive service efforts and safe and comfortable houses that are conducive for victims of violence. These strategic targets are pursued through interrelated stages, both planning, protection, services and financing, supervision and sanctions.

Therefore, a legal umbrella is needed in the form of a Regional Regulation that is able to accommodate all issues related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, able to provide integrated services holistically and comprehensively, and firmly give a mandate to institutions to coordinate policies and supervision, and a mandate to institutions to provide services. In addition, regional regulations can also open the involvement of non-governmental institutions and the community to play a broad role.

Based on several considerations above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TUAL CITY NUMBER 7106