REGENT OF DOMPU
WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY
NUMBER 02 YEAR 2024
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF DOMPU,

Considering: 
- that women and children are very valuable assets to ensure the continuity of the nation's existence, therefore protection from all forms of violence and injustice is necessary;
- that protection is carried out to guarantee constitutional rights and the fulfillment of the rights of women and children to be free from violence and treatment that degrades the dignity of women and children;
- that to provide direction and foundation to all parties involved in the implementation of protection for women and children, a regulation is needed that can guarantee legal certainty effectively and efficiently;
- that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

Observing:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 69 Year 1958 Concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Within Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of International Labour Organization Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as has been amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2014 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 224, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 238, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);
11. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Crime of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
12. Regional Regulation of Dompu Regency Number 6 Year 2014 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Dompu Regency Year 2014 Number 6);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF DOMPU REGENCY
and
REGENT OF DOMPU

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Dompu Regency
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of Regional autonomy.
3. Regent is the Regent of Dompu.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Dompu Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an assistant element to the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are regional authority.
6. Agency hereinafter referred to as PPPA Agency is the Agency for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Dompu Regency.
7. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
8. Woman is a person of female gender.
9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or distress to women physically, sexually, or psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including threats of certain actions, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
11. Violence Against Children is any act against a child that results in suffering or distress physically, sexually, psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
12. Domestic violence is any action or act against a person, especially women, that results in suffering or neglect of the household including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
13. Crime of Sexual Violence hereinafter abbreviated as TPKS is any act that meets the elements of a criminal act as regulated in the Law on Crimes of Sexual Violence and other sexual acts regulated in the Law as long as determined in the Law on Crimes of Sexual Violence.
14. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
15. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
17. Companion is a person or representative from an Institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy, advocacy, reintegration for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss whether physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights as a result of human rights violations or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or individuals including victims are their heirs.
19. Prevention is an effort made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
20. Outreach is an action to respond to reports of alleged problems of women and children that need to be verified and followed up.
21. Social rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out their social functions properly in community life.
22. Coordination is an effort made to realize integration and harmony in the framework of services for women and children experiencing problems.
23. Task Force for Handling Women's and Children's Problems hereinafter abbreviated as Satgas PPA is a task force formed to handle women's and children's problems reported to women's and children's service organizations that have been established by the regional government.
24. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a Regional Technical Implementation Unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
25. Regional Child Protection Commission hereinafter abbreviated as KPAD is an independent institution established by the Regent to support supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region.
26. Community-Based Integrated Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as PATBM is a movement of networks or groups of citizens at the community level who work in a coordinated manner to achieve the goal of child protection.
27. Regional Long-Term Development Plan hereinafter referred to as RPJPD is a regional planning document for a period of 20 (twenty) years.
28. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan hereinafter referred to as RPJMD is a regional planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
29. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons is a coordinating body tasked with coordinating efforts to prevent and handle the crime of trafficking in persons in Dompu Regency.
30. Task Force for Prevention of Child Marriage is a coordinating body tasked with coordinating efforts to prevent child marriage in Dompu Regency.
31. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children is a coordinating body tasked with coordinating efforts to implement protection of women and children in Dompu Regency.
32. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
33. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line up or down and sideways up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is the dependent of a woman and/or child.
34. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
35. Child-Friendly Regency is a regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of government commitments and resources, community, business world, and media that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights and special protection of children.
36. Private Sector is Non-Governmental Institutions, Business World and Mass Media.

Article 2
The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. order and legal certainty;
e. openness;
f. protection; and
g. best interests of victims.

Article 3
The purpose of implementing Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. provide protection and services to women and children victims of gender-based violence;
c. provide a sense of security to women and children victims of violence;
d. restore the physical, psychological and economic conditions of women and children victims of violence; and
e. take action against perpetrators of violence against women and children.

Article 4
The scope of Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence in this Regional Regulation includes:
a. forms of violence;
b. rights of Women and Children;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. implementation of protection;
e. special protection of Children;
f. guidance and supervision;
g. cooperation and partnership;
h. monitoring, evaluation and reporting; and
i. financing.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5
Forms of Violence against Women and Children include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Domestic neglect;
e. Exploitation;
f. Trafficking in persons; and/or
g. Other violence.

Article 6
(1) Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a, is an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death of Women and/or Children.
(2) Physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) results in:
a. the victim suffering from serious illness or injury;
b. death of the victim; and/or
c. causing illness or obstruction to carrying out work, position or livelihood or daily activities.

Article 7
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b, is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or psychological suffering to Women and/or Children.

Article 8
(1) Sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c, includes:
a. non-physical sexual harassment;
b. physical sexual harassment;
c. forced contraception;
d. forced sterilization;
e. forced marriage;
f. sexual torture;
g. sexual exploitation;
h. sexual slavery; and
i. electronic-based sexual violence.
(2) In addition to sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1), sexual violence also includes:
a. rape;
b. indecent acts;
c. intercourse with Children, indecent acts against Children, and/or sexual exploitation of Children;
d. acts violating decency that are contrary to the Victim's will;
e. pornography involving Children or pornography that explicitly contains Violence and sexual exploitation;
f. forced prostitution;
g. the crime of trafficking in persons intended for sexual exploitation;
h. sexual violence within the scope of the household;
i. the crime of money laundering whose predicate offense is TPKS; and
j. other criminal acts explicitly stated as TPKS as regulated in the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 9
Neglect in the household as referred to in Article 5 letter d, includes:
a. an act of deliberately neglecting a woman within the scope of her household, even though according to the law applicable to her or because of an agreement or contract she is obliged to provide life and care to that woman;
b. an act that results in the non-fulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
c. an act of deliberately neglecting to care for or take care of a child as they should, carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care; and
d. deliberate neglect of a child who still needs care by their biological mother to become an Indonesian Migrant Worker abroad.

Article 10
(1) Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e, includes:
a. an act of economic or sexual exploitation with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. an act with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, physical exploitation, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and
c. an act of exploiting children in horse racing activities as jockeys by ignoring children's rights and/or with the intention of exploiting the labor or ability of children to obtain material or immaterial benefits.
(2) The involvement of Children in horse racing activities as jockeys as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, is further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 11
(1) Other violence as referred to in Article 5 letter g, is threats of violence and coercion.
(2) Threats of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
(3) Coercion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 12
Women and Children Victims of Violence have the following rights:
a. the right to be respected for their dignity as human beings;
b. the right to recovery;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to social rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling that is appropriate, comfortable, and according to needs;
h. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
i. the right to assistance; and
j. to receive continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 13
Child Victims of Violence in addition to obtaining rights as referred to in Article 12 also receive special rights as follows:
a. the right to survival, growth, and development;
b. the right to basic population services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 14
(1) In the event that Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 13 require continuous handling, victims may be placed in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is handling at each required stage.

Article 15
(1) A safe house as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) provides a temporary safe place and/or shelter for victims of violence.
(2) The operation and/or management of a safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the PPPA Agency.
(3) For the safety and at the request of victims of violence, the manager or operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) may place victims of violence in a certain confidential place.
(4) Provisions regarding the operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 16
The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is the joint obligation and responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Private Sector and Community Institutions;
c. Community; and
d. Family and/or Parents.

Article 17
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 16 letter a include:
a. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
b. implementing protection policies for women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
c. cooperating with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health, hospitals, and various non-governmental organizations concerned with women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating a budget for the implementation of protection of women and children, in accordance with regional financial capacity;
f. guiding and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children; and
g. realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and victim protection action activities in the Regional Action Plan and Key Performance Indicators in supporting the main regional programs as a basis for the Region in implementing protection of women and children.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the RPJMD.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Decree.

Article 18
The Regent in carrying out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 17 delegates to relevant Regional Apparatus/Institutions.

Article 19
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Private Sector and Community Institutions as well as the Community as referred to in Article 16 letters b and c, are carried out in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing violence against women and children;
b. providing emergency assistance to victims;
c. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties;
d. protecting victims; and
e. participating in handling victims of violence;
(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 20
The obligations of Family and/or Parents as referred to in Article 16 letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as Family members.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutions

Article 21
(1) The Regional Government empowers and raises awareness among families, parents, and the community.
(2) Empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. providing material on the prevention of acts of violence against women and children in both formal and informal education;
b. providing accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. creating a friendly and safe work environment atmosphere for women;
d. building community participation and concern for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing an easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. providing information, guidance and/or counseling and realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.

Article 22
(1) In order to carry out services and protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government establishes UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1), functions to carry out services for:
a. public complaints;
b. victim outreach;
c. case management;
d. temporary shelter;
e. mediation; and
f. victim assistance.

Article 23
(1) In implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government may also form a task force.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons;
b. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children;
c. Task Force for Prevention of Child Marriage;
(3) Further provisions regarding the position, organizational structure, duties and functions as well as work procedures of the task force as referred to in paragraph (2) are stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 24
(1) The Regional Government may establish KPAD in supervising the implementation of child protection in the region.
(2) Further provisions regarding the position, organizational structure, duties and functions as well as work procedures of KPAD are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government may establish Satgas PPA in an effort to coordinate the implementation of services for Women and Children victims of violence.
(2) Satgas PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize protection services for women and children carried out by the Regional Government, Regional Apparatus/Institutions and the community;
b. improve cooperation and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on violence.
(3) The establishment of Satgas PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 26
(1) Village Government and/or Village Head as representatives of the Regional Government in implementing child protection at the village/sub-district level may establish PATBM.
(2) PATBM functions as a network or group of citizens who work in a coordinated manner in implementing child protection at the village/sub-district level.
(3) The establishment of PATBM as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Village Head Decree.

Part Two
Prevention

Article 27
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against Women and Children are carried out in an integrated manner by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. PPPA;
b. social affairs;
c. health;
d. education;
e. manpower;
f. population and civil registration;
g. law;
h. cooperatives and micro enterprises;
i. mental and spiritual; and
j. peace and order.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. building cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as Educational Institutions, Health, hospitals, various NGOs concerned with women and children;
b. building community participation and concern, families, towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization on laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence;
e. providing critical education on the rights of women and children as victims of violence to the community; and
f. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(3) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner based on RPJPD and RPJMD.

Part Three
Forms and Service Mechanisms

Article 28
(1) Forms of services for acts of violence experienced by Women and Children include:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. report submission;
e. repatriation and social reintegration;
f. rehabilitation; and
g. assistance services.
(2) In carrying out forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with relevant regional apparatus/institutions.

Article 29
Complaint services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter a, include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims; and
b. consent to take action (informed consent).

Article 30
Health services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter b, include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. care and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to health services;
d. medicolegal;
e. psychological assistance.

Article 31
(1) Legal aid services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter c, aim to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process.
(2) Legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the reporting, investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process runs as it should.

Article 32
Report submission services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter d, aim to accompany women and children as victims of violence after mediation results are obtained from UPTD PPA.

Article 33
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter e, aim to return victims to be accepted back into their social environment.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out after socialization regarding the rights of women and children as victims of violence.
(3) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with relevant regional apparatus/institutions and the community.

Article 34
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter f, include:
a. motivation and psychosocial diagnosis;
b. social assistance and assistance;
c. care and upbringing;
d. vocational training and entrepreneurship development;
e. mental spiritual guidance;
f. physical guidance;
g. social guidance and psychosocial counseling;
h. accessibility services;
i. resocialization guidance;
j. follow-up guidance; and/or
k. referral.
(2) Forms of vocational training and entrepreneurship development as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, include:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice;
c. apprenticeship;
d. entrepreneurial skills training;
e. facilitation of joint business group formation;
f. business capital in the form of business support tools; and
g. business implementation assistance.

Article 35
Assistance services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter g, include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the medicolegal process;
c. accompanying victims during the mediation process and/or examination at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other companions; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 36
(1) The implementation of services for Victims as referred to in Article 28 is carried out every day (including holidays), in a manner that is:
a. fast;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. empathetic;
d. non-discriminatory;
e. easily accessible;
f. not charged; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(2) Service operators or managers are prohibited from collecting any fees from victims of violence.

Part Four
Assistance

Article 37
(1) The Regional Government may provide assistance to women and children victims of violence.
(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims, carried out at health service units, education, police, prosecutors, courts, and social service institutions.
(3) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out by UPTD PPA companions and other Companions.

CHAPTER VI
SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN

Article 38
(1) The Regional Government and other institutions are obliged and responsible to provide Special Protection to Children.
(2) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1), is given to:
a. Children in Emergency Situations;
b. Children in Conflict with the Law;
c. Children from Minority and Isolated Groups;
d. Children Who Are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited;
e. Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substance Abuse;
f. Children Who Are Victims of Pornography;
g. Children with HIV and AIDS;
h. Child Victims of Kidnapping, Sale, and/or Trafficking;
i. Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence;
j. Children with Disabilities;
k. Child Victims of Sexual Crimes;
l. Child Victims of Terrorism Networks;
m. Children Who Are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling Related to Their Parents' Condition;
n. Child Victims of Maltreatment and Neglect;
o. Children with Deviant Social Behavior; and
p. Related to Their Parents' Condition.
(3) Special Protection for Children is carried out through efforts to:
a. rapid handling, including treatment and/or physical, psychological, and social rehabilitation, as well as prevention of diseases and other health disorders;
b. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery;
c. provision of social assistance for Children from underprivileged families; and
d. provision of protection and assistance at every stage of the judicial process.
(4) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided at UPTD PPA that has been established with reference to established service standards.
(5) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out quickly, comprehensively and in an integrated manner.

Article 39
(1) Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter a, is given to:
a. Children who become refugees;
b. Child victims of riots;
c. Child victims of natural disasters; and
d. Children in armed conflict situations.
(2) In addition to children as referred to in paragraph (1), Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations is also given to:
a. Child victims of social disasters;
b. Child victims of non-natural disasters; and
c. Children of female prisoners/detainees.
(3) Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. prevention so that children do not become victims in emergency situations;
b. recording the number of children who need Special Protection in emergency situations;
c. mapping the basic and specific needs of children who need Special Protection in emergency situations;
d. guaranteeing the security and safety of children in emergency situations;
e. recording children and their families for family tracing and reunification;
f. priority emergency rescue, evacuation, and security actions;
g. restoration of physical, psychological and social health of children in emergency situations;
h. provision of legal aid, assistance, physical, psychological and social rehabilitation for children in emergency situations;
i. care;
j. improvement of facilities needed by children in emergency situations;
k. fulfillment of basic and specific needs of children consisting of food, clothing, housing, education, provision of health services, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment;
l. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial problems;
m. exemption from education fees both conducted in formal and non-formal educational institutions during the emergency period;
n. provision of services for fulfilling children's identity rights and important documents lost due to emergency situations; and/or
o. provision of social reintegration services.
(4) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) is provided in the form of care, upbringing, as well as fulfillment of basic needs and special needs of children according to their age level and development.

Article 40
(1) Special Protection for Children in Conflict with the Law as referred to in Article 38 Paragraph (2) letter b, is carried out through:
a. humane treatment taking into account needs according to age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal aid and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment, or other treatment that is cruel, inhuman, and degrades dignity and degree;
f. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention, or imprisonment, except as a last resort and for the shortest possible time;
h. provision of justice before an objective, impartial juvenile court, and in closed hearings for the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity;
j. provision of assistance from parents/guardians and persons trusted by the child;
k. provision of social advocacy;
l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility, especially for children with disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Special Protection for Children in Conflict with the Law as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through efforts to:
a. prevent;
b. resolve case administration;
c. rehabilitate; and
d. socially reintegrate.

Article 41
Special Protection for Children from Minority and Isolated Groups as referred to in Article 38 Paragraph (2) letter c, is carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religion, and use their own language.

Article 42
(1) Special Protection for Children Who Are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter d, is carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children Who Are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposing sanctions; and
c. involving various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the community in eliminating exploitation of children economically and/or sexually.
(2) In the event that Children Who Are Economically and/or Sexually Exploited require restoration of conditions as before, services must be provided in the form of:
a. medical rehabilitation;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. legal aid and social assistance; and/or
d. repatriation and social reintegration.

Article 43
Special Protection for Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substance Abuse as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter e, is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 44
(1) Special Protection for Children Who Are Victims of Pornography as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter f, is carried out through guidance, assistance, and social, physical and mental health recovery efforts.
(2) Provisions regarding guidance, assistance, social recovery, physical and mental health as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 45
Special Protection for Children with HIV and AIDS as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter g, is carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 46
Special Protection for Child Victims of Kidnapping, Sale, and/or Trafficking as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter h, is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care and rehabilitation.

Article 47
(1) Special Protection for Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter i, is carried out through efforts to:
a. disseminate and socialize provisions of laws and regulations that protect Child victims of acts of violence; and
b. monitor, report, and impose sanctions.
(2) Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of:
a. prevention;
b. assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation; and
d. social rehabilitation.
(3) Handling of Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 48
Special Protection for Child Victims of Sexual Crimes as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter j, is carried out through:
a. education on reproductive health, religious values, and moral values;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery; and
d. provision of protection and assistance at every level of examination from investigation, prosecution, to examination in court hearings.

Article 49
(1) Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter k, is carried out through efforts to:
a. educate on education, ideology and nationalism values;
b. social rehabilitation; and
c. counseling on the dangers of terrorism;
d. rehabilitation on the dangers of terrorism;
e. social assistance.
(2) Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks is also provided in the form of:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Terrorism Networks to care and psychological health recovery;
b. medical rehabilitation;
c. re-education and social reintegration; and
d. safety guarantees both physical, mental, and social for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks.

Article 50
Special Protection for Child Victims of Maltreatment and Child Victims of Neglect as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter m, is carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation and social assistance efforts.

Article 51
Special Protection for Children with Deviant Social Behavior as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter n, is carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation and social assistance efforts.

Article 52
Special Protection for Children Who Are Victims of Stigmatization and Labeling related to Their Parents' Condition as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter o, is carried out through counseling, social rehabilitation, and social assistance.

Article 53
Further provisions regarding Special Protection for Children as referred to in Articles 38 through 52 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 54
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in the region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing implementation instructions;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. supervision;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation of service implementation.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 55
(1) In order to achieve the goal of protecting women and children victims of violence, the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. central government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. law enforcement institutions/and/or law enforcement apparatus;
e. non-governmental institutions;
f. community;
g. universities/academics; and
h. mass media.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. recovery of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration;
d. provision of evidence and witnesses; and
e. followed up in accordance with applicable law.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) is set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 56
(1) The Regional Government may establish partnerships with the Business World in the protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
b. education and training for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 57
(1) Monitoring, evaluation and reporting on the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence includes supervision in preventive, rehabilitative and curative efforts.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out every 3 (three) months.
(3) Evaluation and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out every 6 (six) months.
(4) Monitoring, evaluation and reporting are carried out by the agency that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING

Article 58
Financing for the implementation of protection for women and children is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and
b. other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER XI
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 59
(1) Appointed officials who do not carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 18, are subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 60
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Dompu Regency.

Stipulated in Dompu
on January 29, 2024

REGENT OF DOMPU,

Promulgated in Dompu
on January 29, 2024

REGIONAL SECRETARY,

GATOT GUNAWAN PARANTAUAN PUTRA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DOMPU REGENCY YEAR 2024 NUMBER 02

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY, WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE NUMBER 02

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY
NUMBER 02 YEAR 2024
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children are experiencing an increasing trend. Triggering factors such as economic, social, cultural and social environment are increasingly complex along with the influence of technological developments. Concrete steps are needed to provide protection by all elements of Citizens as a unity of society, as well as the role of the Regional Government as protector of its citizens with various programs to prevent acts of violence against women and children. One effort to prevent violence against women is carried out through women's empowerment and optimization of previously owned potential, so that it is expected to be able to improve and develop themselves to play a role and be protected from potential acts of violence. This condition will strengthen forms of appreciation and respect for women while maintaining their role and nature as women to play a role in educating and supporting the welfare and happiness of their families.

Efforts to prevent violence against children are the joint obligation of parents, families, communities and the private sector holistically and inseparably from one another. Community service is the front line when there is potential for violence against children. The mechanism for preventing violence and protecting child victims of violence involves multiple sectors coordinated by the Regional Government. These efforts are carried out with the direction of providing social rehabilitation for child victims of violence, reuniting child victims of violence with their families and/or environment, and increasing the empowerment of child victims of violence.

In connection with the above, to realize the provision of protection efforts for women and children victims of violence and for legal certainty in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence in the Regional area, it needs to be regulated in a Regional Regulation.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Paragraph (2)
Letter h
What is meant by sexual violence in the household is any act in the form of forced sexual relations, forced sexual relations in an unnatural and/or disliked manner, forced sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Letter d
What is meant by medicolegal services are medical services to provide optimal professional assistance in utilizing medical science for the purposes of law enforcement and justice, including medicolegal services including: visum et repertum and visum et psychiatricum.

Letter e
What is meant by psychological services is an action taken to restore the psyche of women and children as victims of acts of violence.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Sufficiently clear

Article 41
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear

Article 43
Sufficiently clear

Article 44
Sufficiently clear

Article 45
Sufficiently clear

Article 46
Sufficiently clear

Article 47
Sufficiently clear

Article 48
Sufficiently clear

Article 49
Sufficiently clear

Article 50
Sufficiently clear

Article 51
Sufficiently clear

Article 52
Sufficiently clear

Article 53
Sufficiently clear

Article 54
Sufficiently clear

Article 55
Sufficiently clear

Article 56
Sufficiently clear

Article 57
Sufficiently clear

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Sufficiently clear

Article 60
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DOMPU REGENCY YEAR 2024 NUMBER 02