REGIONAL REGULATION OF MATARAM CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF MATARAM,

Considering: a. that violence against women and children is an act that violates the rights and dignity of women and children as human beings;
b. that the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence has not been carried out optimally thus far;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 Year 1993 concerning the Establishment of the Level II Regional Municipality of Mataram (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1993 Number 66, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3531);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
4. Law Number 23 Year 2004 Concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 Concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
11. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
14. Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 2 Year 2009 concerning the Implementation of Prevention and Protection of Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Year 2009 Number 15, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 45);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MATARAM CITY
and
THE MAYOR OF MATARAM

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Mataram City.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Mataram.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution of Mataram City as an element of regional government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the regional apparatus work unit of Mataram City.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the regional apparatus work unit of Mataram City.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child in the womb.
8. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
9. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
10. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
11. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and pain whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
12. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
13. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, disbelief or severe psychological suffering to a person.
14. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
15. Victim is a woman and child who experiences acts of violence.
16. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
17. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
19. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in providing assistance.
20. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
21. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
22. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with their family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
23. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that provide assistance.
24. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psychosocial and legal services.
25. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service unit established by the regional government to provide services in the context of empowerment of women and children victims of acts of violence.
26. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for relevant agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
27. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
28. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
29. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
30. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of victims.

Article 3
(1) The objectives of implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence are to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity.
(2) The objectives of implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4
Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantees of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

Article 5
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 4, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigmas; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6
Obligations and responsibilities in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the regional government as referred to in Article 6 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD and UKPD in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. participating in providing assistance and/or handling victims of acts of violence.
(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

Article 9
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER V
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 10
(1) The Regional Government has the duty to carry out efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of acts of violence, and legislation;
b. socializing legislation related to the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The Regional Government in anticipating the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, has the authority to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. providing and facilitating the formation of integrated services for victims of acts of violence by involving institutions and community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims; and
c. empowering the community for the prevention of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Institutional

Article 11
(1) In order to provide services and protection to women and children from acts of violence, the regional government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for women and children victims of acts of violence.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements: Health Office, Education Youth and Sports Office, Social Manpower and Transmigration Office, Cooperatives Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women's Empowerment and Family Planning Agency, Community Empowerment Agency, Civil Service Police Unit, Mataram City Regional General Hospital, Mataram City Police Resort, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Universities.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be established by Mayoral Decree.
(4) PPT may receive case referrals from Sub-districts and Community Health Centers.
(5) Further provisions regarding PPT as referred to in paragraph (3) and paragraph (4), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Article 12
(1) In addition to establishing PPT as referred to in Article 11, to support the implementation of empowerment of women victims of acts of violence, the regional government may establish P2TP2A.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements: Education Youth and Sports Office, Social Manpower and Transmigration Office, Cooperatives Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women's Empowerment and Family Planning Agency, Community Empowerment Agency, Civil Service Police Unit, Mataram City Regional General Hospital, Mataram City Police Resort, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Universities.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), has the main duties and functions as an institution for empowering women victims of acts of violence, namely by providing training to improve capability, skills, and independence.
(4) In carrying out the main duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (3), P2TP2A may coordinate and become a working partner of PPT.
(5) Further provisions regarding P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3), and paragraph (4), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Two
Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention

Article 13
Forms of prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children carried out by PPT, may be implemented through:
a. socialization activities of legislation to the community related to the protection of the rights of women and children; and
b. training of relevant PPT members regarding the implementation of their duties in preventing acts of violence against women and children.

Article 14
(1) PPT in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with Sub-district PPT, and competent parties in making efforts to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
(2) Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Article 15
Forms of services to victims organized by PPT, include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel;
b. medicolegal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence, in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing legal processes; and
e. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

Article 16
(1) In carrying out the task of serving victims of acts of violence against women and children, PPT coordinates with Sub-district PPT.
(2) The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Three
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 17
(1) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the regional government conducts empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government makes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 17, is carried out by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. employment;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD and UKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Part Four
Assistance Mechanism

Article 19
(1) Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions that cooperate with PPT.
(2) The assistance mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Five
Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 20
The implementation of services and assistance to victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. not charged.

Part Six
Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 21
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented according to minimum service standards established by the government and carried out by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other district/city governments, and the community.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for services, and handling of women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Article 22
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to provide complaint services, in order to provide protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The Regional Government and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses.
(3) Further provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

Part Seven
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 23
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to empower women victims of acts of violence.
(2) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out by P2TP2A.
(3) In empowering women victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government prepares empowerment programs in the economic field, which include:
a. providing the needs required for entrepreneurship training for women victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic businesses;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of women victims of acts of violence;
e. seeking the provision of capital for women victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding access to information and promoting products of women victims of acts of violence.
(4) In empowering women victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government may establish cooperation with job training institutions organized by the private sector.

Article 24
(1) Empowerment of women victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 23, is carried out by providing training to improve capability, skills, and independence.
(2) Training as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through:
a. on the job training;
b. pre employment training; and
c. understudy training.

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 25
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the regional government cooperates with:
a. government;
b. provincial government;
c. other district/city governments; and
d. non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up in accordance with applicable law.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 26
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business world in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who are withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 27
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 28
Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 27 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence according to minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/UKPD and the community.

Article 29
The community may supervise the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence organized by the regional government, with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Mayor or DPRD.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 30
(1) The community may participate in efforts to implement protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be carried out by individuals or organizations.
(3) Forms of community participation carried out by individuals or organizations, as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (2).

CHAPTER X
REPORTING

Article 31
(1) PPT and P2TP2A are obliged to report the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. service; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out at least every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XI
SOURCES OF FUNDS

Article 32
Funds for the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal sources in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

Article 33
(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations that implement protection for women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION

Article 34
(1) In addition to general investigating officers, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation, may also be carried out by civil servant investigators as referred to in the Criminal Procedure Law.
(2) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are certain civil servant officials within the regional government appointed by authorized officials in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
(3) In carrying out investigation duties, investigating officials as referred to in paragraph (1), have the authority to:
a. receive reports or complaints from someone about the existence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take first action at that time at the scene and conduct an examination;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identification;
d. seize objects and/or letters;
e. take fingerprints and photograph a person;
f. summon people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in experts needed in connection with case examination;
h. stop the investigation after receiving instructions from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this to the public prosecutor, suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.
(4) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), notify the commencement of investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the investigating officer of the Republic of Indonesia Police, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Law.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 35
(1) Any person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children so as to cause acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in applicable legislation.
(2) If officials appointed to implement protection do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with applicable legislation.
(3) PPT managers who carry out service and protection duties for women and children from acts of violence, violate service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with PPT internal mechanisms.

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 36
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Mataram City.

Established in Mataram
on 1 May 2012

MAYOR OF MATARAM,

Signed

H. AHYAR ABDUH

Promulgated in Mataram
on 1 May 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MATARAM CITY,

Signed

H. L. MAKMUR SAID

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MATARAM CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 2 SERIES E

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MATARAM CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The state has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb and damage psychological, physical, sexual and economic security. This is philosophically stated in the preamble to the 1945 Constitution, that the purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire Indonesian Nation and Homeland.

Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it must fulfill these provisions. Human Rights state that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the State, especially the Government.

Through Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, the government recognizes the existence of children's rights. The inherent human rights of children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, the Right to Growth and Development, the Right to Protection and the Right to Participation.

To fulfill the Right to life, children need food in sufficient quantities, healthy and nutritious, as well as optimal health access. Protection from violence that threatens their safety and health must be provided from an early age. Protection is needed to prevent physical, mental and sexual violence and exploitation. To fulfill the right to growth and development, children need space to play, exercise, education that is appropriate to their physical and psychological development. In fulfilling children's rights, every government administrator, community and parents must understand and care about children's rights. The existence of legal instruments and legal apparatus that defend children's interests is needed for this protection effort. Legislation that is principled on defending the best interests of the child is needed to realize protection that is legal in nature.

Furthermore, it is not uncommon to find cases of women and children who experience problems of physical, psychological, sexual and social violence. For example, women and children victims of persecution, neglect, eviction and abuse by parents or others. For women and children who experience these problems, the government must provide Safe Houses (children protection homes) or Integrated Service Centers (PPT) for women and children victims of acts of violence. Safe Houses or PPT are safe and friendly places for women and children. The PPT is equipped with assistants from educators, doctors, psychologists, religious leaders and networked with lawyers for women and children as well as RPK Units at the Police.

The fate of women and children victims of acts of violence must be given attention by the government. The large number of cases of acts of violence against women and children are often caused by factors that develop in society, such as low levels of economy, education, environments in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of acts of violence like this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights.

For the empowerment of victims of acts of violence, the regional government may establish an Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) as a center for empowering women victims of acts of violence that specifically has the main duties and functions for the empowerment of women and children victims of acts of violence.

From the above framework, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children. From these various efforts, a legal framework will be realized in implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by "respect for the rights of victims" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and ensure the fulfillment of the rights of victims.

Letter b
What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a process to be fair to men and women and equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, national defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Letter c
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d
What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Letter a
What is meant by the aspect of "prevention" is a protection strategy effort through:
a. Primary prevention, all people, families, communities and the state in efforts to increase the ability of knowledge, understanding and ensure that violence against women and children does not occur, including policy socialization, adequate services, supportive workplace policies, and life skill training for women and children. What is meant by life skill training includes conflict resolution without violence, stress management skills, resource management, making effective decisions, effective interpersonal communication, guidance on the psychosocial development of women and children.
b. Secondary prevention, aimed at community groups at high risk in efforts to improve skills, including training and victim services to ensure that violence against women and children does not occur in the next generation. Activities carried out here include conducting home visits for parents who have just had children to conduct self-assessment of whether they are at risk of committing violence against children in the future.
c. Tertiary prevention, intended to improve parenting abilities that ensure that violence against women and children is not repeated, what is done here is integrated services for women and children who are victims of violence, through counseling, stress management training.

Letter b
What is meant by the aspect of "service and assistance" is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel and assistants in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Letter c
What is meant by the aspect of "reunification" is an effort to return and restore the physical and psychological condition of victims which then unites them with the victim's family and community.

Letter d
What is meant by the aspect of "empowerment" is a process of increasing the role of the community to participate in implementing protection for women and children victims of acts of violence which aims to obtain access and participation in the protection process for women and children broadly.

Article 4
Letter a
What is meant by "obtaining protection" is obtaining protection from individuals, groups and institutions both government and non-government.

Letter b
What is meant by "obtaining information" is access and information about the existence of complaint centers, PPT, and all matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and involvement in the decision-making process related to assistance and case developments.

Letter c
What is meant by "optimal service" is service that includes medical, extensive medicolegal, psychosocial and legal services.

Letter d
What is meant by "continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage" is handling that does not stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can live life again in society including in restoring their good name.

Letter e
What is meant by "confidential handling" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Letter f
What is meant by "obtaining psychological assistance" is assistance provided by psychologists to victims suffering from trauma/other psychological problems to restore the victim's psychological condition. Meanwhile, legal assistance is an assistance effort provided by persons and/or legal aid institutions to victims at every level of examination and during the legal process.

Letter g
What is meant by "guarantees of rights related to victim status" is an effort to provide certainty and protection for victims as family members and community members.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Letter a
What is meant by "fast" is immediate action taken without complications or simplified procedures.

What is meant by "safe" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, not disturbed, and served in a friendly, respectful and appreciative manner.

What is meant by "empathetic" is an action of appreciating, respecting, loving, being friendly, and making happy that aims to please and calm the victim's heart.

Letter b
What is meant by "guarantee of confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Letter c
What is meant by "easily accessible" is the implementation of services and assistance for everyone regardless of their social status, so that the service is affordable for the underprivileged or relatively sufficient for the capable.

Letter d
What is meant by "not charged" is that service and assistance activities carried out by PPT are not charged to victims.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Letter a
What is meant by "on the job training" is aimed at providing the skills needed in certain jobs, according to the demands and abilities of women victims of acts of violence.

Letter b
What is meant by "pre employment training" is aimed at preparing women victims of acts of violence before being placed or assigned to an organization, by providing intellectual background, developing the art of thinking and using reason.

Letter c
What is meant by "understudy training" is aimed at preparing women victims of acts of violence as skilled workers in certain types of work, by working directly in the work concerned.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

_________________________________________________________________________