CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY
WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY NUMBER 22 YEAR 2024
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF CENTRAL LOMBOK,

Considering that women and children are creatures of God and assets of the nation who must be protected, respected, and have their human rights fulfilled by the State, law and government to obtain true welfare as stated in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
that women and children require protection from various forms of violence, exploitation, child marriage, and neglect, there is a need for strategic efforts from the Regional Government and other parties who are obligated to provide protection to women and children;
that Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency Number 3 Year 2009 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence is no longer in accordance with legal developments and policies on protection of women and children established by the government and provincial government and therefore needs to be replaced;
that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children.

Considering Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 69 Year 1958 concerning Formation of Level II Regions within Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1665);
Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019) as amended by Law Number 16 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 186, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6401);
Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 903);
Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 8 Year 2015 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women and Children (Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Year 2015 Number 8, Supplement to Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 119);
Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 5 Year 2021 concerning Prevention of Child Marriage (Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Year 2021 Number 5, Supplement to Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 174);

With Joint Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY
and
REGENT OF CENTRAL LOMBOK
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1.
2.
3.
10.
Region is Central Lombok Regency.
Regent is the Regent of Central Lombok.
Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous Region.
Regional apparatus is an assistant element to the Regent in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the region.
Implementation of Protection is all actions and service efforts to guarantee and protect the rights of children and women organized by the Regional Government and the Community.
Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
Violence against women hereinafter abbreviated as KTP is that which results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions. Coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
Violence against children is any action that results in misery or suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom.
Victim is a woman and child who experiences and/or suffers either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, Courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive Protection from violence and discrimination.
Article 2
Protection of women and children is based on the principles of: a. respect for human dignity;
b. non-discrimination;
c. best interests of Victims;
d. justice;
e. benefit; and
f. legal certainty.
Article 3

The objectives of Protection of women and children consist of:
a. preventing all forms of violence against women and children;
b. providing Protection and services to women and children victims of violence;
c. providing a sense of security to women and children from crime and violence;
d. avoiding children from child marriage;
e. guaranteeing Protection and fulfillment of children's rights; and
f. providing reproductive health guarantees to women and children.
Article 4
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. Women's Protection;
c. Fulfillment of Children's Rights; and
d. Special Protection of Children.
CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 5
Implementation of Women's Empowerment includes: a. efforts to raise awareness and shape women's behavior in the need for self-capacity improvement;
b. efforts to develop women's access to participate in economic, political, social, and cultural fields; and
c. efforts to improve women's competence.
Article 6
(1) Efforts to raise awareness and shape women's behavior in the need for self-capacity improvement as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include:
a. understanding and awareness of women's basic rights;
b. providing motivation for women to have ability or empowerment; and
c. fostering awareness in women about equality and their position.
(2) Efforts to raise awareness and shape women's behavior as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented through guidance of community groups, women's forums, women's organizations, and women's institutions.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out in the form of education, socialization, and advocacy.
Article 7
Efforts to develop women's access to participate in economic, political, social and cultural fields as referred to in Article 5 letter b, include:
a. fostering women's entrepreneurship;
b. increasing Women's Empowerment in various professions;
c. increasing the role and function of women in political organizations;
d. involving women to actively participate in development programs;
e. providing access for women to participate in the Provincial Regional Government environment;
f. providing leadership opportunities for women;
g. fostering forums or women's institutions in order to increase Women's Empowerment; and
h. increasing Women's Empowerment in arts and culture.
Article 8
Efforts to improve women's competence as referred to in Article 5 letter c, are carried out among others through:
a. skills training; and
b. education and literacy for women.
CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S PROTECTION
Article 9
Implementation of Women's Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. efforts to improve family quality;
b. efforts to fulfill special needs of women;
c. efforts to prevent and protect Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination quickly, in an integrated and integrated manner; and
d. efforts to protect Women in disaster situations.
Article 10
Efforts to improve family quality as referred to in Article 9 letter a, are implemented through:
a. improving child quality through providing access to information, education, counseling, and services regarding care, nurturing, Protection, and child development;
b. improving youth quality through providing access to information, education, counseling, and services regarding family life;
c. improving family functionality, roles, and duties;
d. empowering vulnerable families through Protection and assistance and/or facilitation to develop themselves to be equal with other families;
e. improving family environmental quality;
f. increasing access and opportunities to receive information and family economic resources; and
g. developing innovative ways through assistance and/or facilitation that is more effective for pre-prosperous families, and developing programs and activities in efforts to reduce poverty rates for pre-prosperous families and women who serve as heads of families.
Article 11
Efforts to fulfill special needs of women as referred to in Article 9 letter b, are implemented through:
a. health services especially family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum;
b. fulfillment of the right to obtain paid leave including maternity leave; and
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure for women.
Article 12
Efforts to prevent and protect Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination as referred to in Article 9 letter c, include:
a. preventing women from becoming victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination;
b. handling women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination; and
c. Empowerment of Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination.
Article 13
Efforts to protect Women in disaster situations as referred to in Article 9 letter d, are implemented through:
a. health services; and
b. provision of women-friendly facilities at disaster evacuation sites.
CHAPTER IV
FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Article 14
Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 4 letter c, includes:
a. fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms;
b. guidance of family environment and alternative care;
c. fulfillment of basic health rights and welfare; and
d. fulfillment of education, leisure, culture, and recreation rights.
Article 15
Fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms as referred to in Article 14 letter a, is implemented through:
a. facilitation of population administration and civil registration of children;
b. provision of child-appropriate information; and
c. increasing child participation in development.
Article 16
Facilitation of population administration and civil registration of Children as referred to in Article 15 letter a, among others:
a. facilitation of ownership of birth certificate extracts;
b. facilitation of family card ownership; and
c. facilitation of child identity cards.
Article 17
(1) Provision of child-appropriate information as referred to in Article 15 letter b, includes efforts to:
a. provide broad access to information for Children;
b. provide appropriate information for Children;
c. encourage production and dissemination of children's books; and
d. develop Protection of Children from inappropriate information.
(2) In order to provide broad access to information for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, analog information facilities and digital information facilities are built and developed.
Article 18
(1) Increasing Child participation in development as referred to in Article 15 letter c, is carried out by institutionalizing Child participation.
(2) Institutionalization of Child participation as referred to in paragraph (1), is in the form of Regional Children's Forum to accommodate Child participation in development.
(3) Regional Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (2), has the functions of:
a. monitoring fulfillment of rights and implementation of Children's obligations;
b. socializing children's rights and obligations among peers;
c. voicing Children's aspirations;
d. involving themselves in regional development planning consultation forums;
e. involving themselves in decision-making processes; and
f. encouraging children to actively develop their potential.
Article 19
(1) Guidance of family environment and alternative care as referred to in Article 14 letter b, is implemented through:
a. guidance for families or substitute families; and
b. holistic and integrative early childhood development; and
c. guidance on prevention of Child marriage.
(2) Guidance for families or substitute families as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, includes:
a. guidance on fulfillment of Children's Rights needed during their care; and
b. guidance to always include love and affection in child care.
(3) Forms of guidance for families or substitute families as referred to in paragraph (2), among others:
a. provision of family consultation institutions for Child care;
b. guidance on standardization of alternative care institutions; and
c. capacity strengthening of consultation institutions providing Child care services.
Article 20
(1) Fulfillment of basic health and welfare as referred to in Article 14 letter c, includes:
a. provision of Children's health facilities and infrastructure;
b. provision of human resources in the health field;
c. guidance on Protection and maintenance of Children's health, including:
1. guidance on child growth health in efforts to reduce infant mortality rates and malnutrition rates for children;
2. guidance on providing early breastfeeding initiation, exclusive breast milk and continuous breast milk directly;
3. guidance on providing complete immunization for children; and
4. guidance on providing healthy, balanced, and safe food for Children;
d. provision of Children's welfare facilities and infrastructure, including:
1. guidance on child-appropriate households;
2. provision of child-friendly public spaces;
3. guidance on availability of child-friendly infrastructure in public spaces;
4. guidance on implementation of Children's playgrounds;
5. guidance on child care facilities;
6. guidance on availability of breastfeeding (lactation) rooms;
7. guidance on availability of child-friendly places of worship;
8. provision and guidance on availability of green open spaces;
9. guidance on implementation of smoke-free areas; and
10. guidance on implementation of child-friendly public transportation;
e. provision of accessibility facilities and infrastructure for Children with disabilities;
f. maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children;
g. guidance on improving welfare of poor families.
(2) Guidance on child-appropriate households as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d number 1, is carried out in efforts to fulfill access to clean water and proper sanitation.
Article 21
Fulfillment of education, leisure, culture, and recreation rights as referred to in Article 14 letter d, is implemented through:
a. provision of educational facilities and infrastructure;
b. provision of educational human resources;
c. implementation of child-friendly schools;
d. implementation of support for 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program;
e. guidance on early childhood education;
f. facilitation of educational access for children who are already married;
g. facilitation of educational access for children in conflict with the law;
h. provision of children's playground facilities and infrastructure;
i. provision of creative and recreational facilities and infrastructure; and
j. provision of sports facilities and infrastructure for Children with disabilities.
CHAPTER V
SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
Part One
General
Article 22
(1) Special Protection as referred to in Article 4 letter d, includes:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Child victims of child marriage;
c. Children in conflict with the law;
d. Children from minority and isolated groups;
e. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
f. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
g. Children who are victims of pornography;
h. Children with Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome;
i. Child victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
j. Child victims of physical and/or psychological Violence;
k. Child victims of sexual crimes;
l. Child victims of terrorism networks;
m. Children with Disabilities;
n. Child victims of abuse and neglect;
o. Children with deviant social behavior; and
p. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(2) Children in emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, consist of:
a. Children who become refugees;
b. Child victims of riots;
c. Child victims of natural disasters and non-natural disasters; and
d. Children in armed conflict situations.
(3) Child victims of child marriage as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is a marriage conducted between a man and a woman where one and/or both are still of child age.
Article 23
Implementation of Special Protection of Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1), includes:
a. Prevention; and
b. Handling.
Part Two
Prevention
Article 24
Prevention as referred to in Article 23 letter a, includes:
a. optimization of child resource capacity;
b. creation of an environment that supports child Protection;
c. strengthening coordination of stakeholders;
d. increasing accessibility and expanding services;
e. strengthening regulations and institutions; and
f. strengthening coordination of stakeholders.
Article 25
(1) Optimization of child resource capacity as referred to in Article 4 letter a is carried out through:
a. increasing children's awareness and attitudes regarding the right to receive Protection;
b. increasing child participation in child Protection efforts; and
c. increasing spaces and communities that support children to grow and develop optimally, both in formal and informal environments in line with the development of information, technology, and children's situations.
(2) Increasing children's awareness and attitudes regarding the right to receive Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through regional government policy intervention on optimization of child Protection implementation in school education.
(3) Increasing child participation in child Protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is carried out through regional policy intervention to:
a. provide and strengthen peer counselors and Youth Posyandu starting from village/kelurahan level to regency level integrated with formal referral systems;
b. provide formal participation mechanisms for children and adolescents to be directly involved in child Protection efforts at various levels, one of which is through Children's Forums; and
c. strengthen Children's Forums as pioneers and reporters.
Article 26
(1) Creation of an environment that supports child Protection as referred to in Article 24 letter b, is carried out through:
a. changing values, norms, and perspectives on child Protection;
b. strengthening the role of parents, schools, families, and communities in child Protection; and
c. revitalization of cultures that risk encouraging violence and child marriage.
(2) Changing values, norms, and perspectives on child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through regional government policy intervention strategies on:
a. strengthening understanding and roles of parents, families, social/community organizations, schools, Islamic boarding schools and other stakeholders in child Protection efforts;
b. transformation of counseling and mentoring services for parents and children professionally;
c. improving quality parenting skills especially for adolescents; and
d. encouraging cultural practices that support the realization of child Protection and prevent child marriage.
(3) Strengthening the role of parents, schools, families, communities and other stakeholders in child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is carried out through regional government policy intervention strategies on:
a. socialization and education about the importance of child Protection;
b. family economic empowerment through family entrepreneurship, family hope programs and/or other programs that ensure children from poor and vulnerable families receive social assistance;
c. strengthening child-friendly school systems and environments by adding reproductive health rights and mental health; and
d. strengthening community institutions at various levels up to village/kelurahan level with various training and child mentoring skills.
Article 27
(1) Increasing accessibility and expanding services as referred to in Article 24 letter c is carried out through:
a. provision of child and adolescent-friendly, gender-responsive and inclusive access and services before violence occurs to children; and
b. provision of child and adolescent-friendly, gender-responsive and inclusive access and services after violence occurs to children.
(2) Increasing accessibility and expanding services through provision of child and adolescent-friendly, gender-responsive and inclusive access and services before violence occurs to children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is carried out through regional government policy intervention on:
a. provision of child-friendly information services;
b. developing Youth Posyandu services starting at hamlet/neighborhood level; and
c. optimization of services to reduce vulnerability in children.
(3) Increasing accessibility and expanding services through provision of child and adolescent-friendly, gender-responsive and inclusive access and services after violence occurs to children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is carried out through regional government policy intervention on:
a. Development of comprehensive service referral systems for vulnerable children; and
b. Mentoring for children who need special Protection to obtain their rights as children.
(4) Increasing accessibility and expanding services can be carried out by strengthening existing service institutions, namely:
a. puskesmas;
b. posyandu, Youth Posyandu and Family Posyandu;
c. UPTD PPA;
d. Family Learning Center (PUSPAGA);
e. Family Welfare Consultation Institution (LK3);
f. Child Protection Organizing Institution;
g. Child Social Welfare Institution (LKSA);
h. Prosperous Family Service Center (PPKS); and
i. other institutions.
Article 28
(1) Strengthening regulations and institutions as referred to in Article 24 letter d is carried out through:
a. strengthening institutional capacity for child Protection and empowerment and educational units;
b. encouraging formation of village regulations and village head regulations concerning child Protection;
c. conducting evaluations of village regulations, school regulations and/or awig-awig that encourage violence and child vulnerability; and
d. encouraging formation of village regulations and village head regulations concerning child Protection.
(2) Strengthening institutional capacity for child Protection and empowerment and educational units as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through regional government policy intervention on increasing knowledge and skills of law enforcement officials, village apparatus, KUA officers, customary stakeholders, extension workers and teachers.
Article 29
(1) Strengthening stakeholder coordination as referred to in Article 24 letter e is carried out through strategies focused on:
a. increasing cross-sectoral, cross-field, and cross-regional cooperation;
b. strengthening data and information systems; and
c. supervision, monitoring, and evaluation.
(2) Strengthening stakeholder coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through regional government policy intervention on:
a. strengthening coordination forums for planning and implementation of child Protection policies;
b. utilizing data for policy improvement; and
c. building data and information systems as a basis for implementing referral services for children who need special Protection.
Part Three
Handling
Article 30
(1) Handling as referred to in Article 23 letter b, includes:
a. rehabilitation services, including physical, medical, psychological, educational, and social rehabilitation;
b. facilitation of legal aid services;
c. facilitation of fulfillment of basic needs, including food, clothing, housing, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment;
d. facilitation of fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and psychosocial disorders;
e. facilitation of health services;
f. repatriation and social reintegration; and
g. protection of child witnesses.
(2) Protection of child witnesses as referred to in paragraph (1) letter g, is implemented through:
a. facilitation of medical, psychological rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, within institutions and outside institutions;
b. facilitation of safety guarantees; and
c. facilitation of ease in obtaining information regarding case developments.
Article 31
In order to implement handling in Special Protection of Children efforts, the Regional Government needs to provide child social protection houses/comprehensive integrated child safe houses.
CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION TEAM FOR PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 32
(1) The Regent forms a Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children.
(2) The Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1), serves as a coordination forum in implementing empowerment, Protection of women, fulfillment of Children's Rights and Special Protection of Children in the region, which has functions including:
a. facilitation in empowerment and Protection of women; and
b. facilitation in efforts to fulfill Children's Rights and Special Protection of Children.
(3) Membership of the Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), consists at least of:
a. elements of Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child Protection;
b. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of education;
c. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of health;
d. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of social affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of transportation;
f. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of community and village empowerment;
g. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of population and civil registration;
h. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of communication and informatics;
i. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of manpower and transmigration;
j. Regional Apparatus implementing government affairs in the field of highways and spatial planning;
k. elements of the Police;
l. elements of the Prosecutor's Office;
m. elements of the Court;
n. elements of Children's Forum;
o. educational institutions;
p. community organizations concerned with Protection of women and children;
q. media; and
r. community.
(4) The Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), is established by Regent's Decree.
CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONS
Article 33
(1) The regional government forms UPTD PPA which implements Handling, Protection, and Recovery of Victims, Victims' Families, and/or Witnesses.
(2) UPTD PPA is positioned in the work unit implementing government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Formation of UPTD PPA is established by Regent's Regulation after meeting requirements in accordance with statutory provisions.
(4) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duties to:
a. receive reports or outreach to Victims;
b. provide information about Victims' rights;
c. facilitate provision of health services;
d. facilitate provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitate provision of psychosocial services, social rehabilitation, social empowerment, and social reintegration;
f. provide legal services;
g. identify economic empowerment needs;
h. identify temporary shelter needs for Victims and Victims' Families that need to be fulfilled immediately;
i. facilitate needs of Victims with Disabilities;
j. coordinate and work together on fulfillment of Victims' rights with other institutions; and
k. monitor fulfillment of Victims' rights by law enforcement officials during judicial proceedings.
Article 34
(1) UPTD PPA in carrying out duties as referred to in Article 33 performs the functions of:
a. provision of service facilities, places, and/or service rooms;
b. arrangement of service patterns;
c. guarantee of service quality;
d. provision of mechanisms, management, and resolution of public complaints; and
e. monitoring and evaluation.
(2) Work Procedures and Implementation Mechanisms of UPTD PPA Duties and Functions are further regulated in Regent's Regulation.
CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS WORLD PARTICIPATION
Part One
Community Participation
Article 35
Community participation in empowerment and Protection of Women can be carried out through:
a. provision of skills training;
b. prevention of women from becoming victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination; and
c. assistance to women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination.
Article 36
Community participation in implementation of child Protection is carried out through activities of:
a. providing suggestions and considerations in implementation of Child Protection;
b. dissemination of information in the context of Child Protection;
c. provision of funds, services, and facilities and infrastructure in the context of Child Protection;
d. providing education in efforts to improve Children's morals;
e. prevention of child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children;
f. reporting, emergency assistance and Protection for Children experiencing child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect;
g. advocacy for handling child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children;
h. facilitation of repatriation and/or social reintegration processes; and
i. other activities that support Protection, maintenance, and welfare of Children.
Part Two
Business World Participation
Article 37
Business world participation in empowerment and Protection of Women can be carried out through:
a. provision of facilities and infrastructure for empowerment and Protection of Women;
b. facilitation of education and training; and
c. provision of awards.
Article 38
Business world participation in child protection can be carried out through:
a. providing suggestions and considerations in implementation of Child Protection;
b. provision of funds, services, and facilities and infrastructure in the context of Child Protection;
c. providing education in efforts to protect Children;
d. prevention of child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children;
e. other activities that support Protection, maintenance, and welfare of Children.
CHAPTER IX
AWARDS
Article 39
(1) The Regent may provide awards to Regional Apparatus, Village/Kelurahan Government, business world, and community who have played an active role in:
a. support and active participation in women's empowerment efforts; and
b. provision of facilitation for protection of women and children.
(2) Provision of awards as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. Incentives, grants or financial assistance;
b. certificates;
c. trophies; and/or
d. facilitation of construction of women and child protection facilities and infrastructure.
CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 40
Financing for implementation of Child Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with statutory provisions.
CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 41
(1) UPTD PPA that has been formed before this regional regulation is promulgated continues to carry out its duties and functions related to protection of women and children and must adjust to this regional regulation no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional regulation.
(2) In the event UPTD PPA has not been formed, formation of UPTD PPA is carried out no later than 2 (two) years from the promulgation of this regional regulation.
(3) In the event UPTD PPA has not been formed as referred to in paragraph (2), implementation of Integrated Services in the region is organized by the regional work unit implementing government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 42
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into effect, Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency Number 3 Year 2009 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence, is revoked and declared invalid.
Article 43
This Regional Regulation comes into effect on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Central Lombok Regency.

Enacted in Praya
on date, 23 9— 2024

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY YEAR .... NUMBER ....
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY, WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE NUMBER ... YEAR 2024

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY
NUMBER YEAR 2024
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
GENERAL
I.
Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency number 3 year 2009 concerning Protection of children and women victims of violence has been in effect for approximately 14 years. During the period of its validity, there have been many policy changes and statutory regulations in the field of Protection of children and women both taken by the central government, provincial government and Central Lombok regency government. Therefore at the regency regional regulation level, adjustments need to be made so that the Central Lombok regency government has a legal basis in implementing policies and programs in the field of Protection of women and children.
The field of regional government has undergone changes with the revocation of Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government by Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government. Based on article 12 of Law Number 23 year 2014 concerning Regional Government, affairs of women's empowerment and child protection are Mandatory Government Affairs not related to Basic Services. In the appendix to Law Number 23 year 2014 concerning Regional Government, the division of regency government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection is regulated in more detail. The field of women includes authority: a). Prevention of violence against women involving parties within the regency/city Region scope. b). Provision of services for women victims of violence requiring coordination at regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening and development of women's Protection service provider institutions at regency/city Region level. Field of Women's Quality of Life includes, a. Institutionalization of PUG in government institutions at regency/city Region level. b. Women's empowerment in political, legal, social and economic fields in community organizations at regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening and development of women's empowerment service provider institutions at regency/city Region level. Field of Fulfillment of Children's Rights (PHA), includes: Institutionalization of PHA in government, non-government, and business world institutions at regency/city Region level, Strengthening and development of child quality of life improvement service provider institutions at regency/city Region level. Field of special child Protection includes, a. Prevention of violence against children involving parties within the regency/city Region scope. b. Provision of services for children requiring special Protection requiring coordination at regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening development of service provider institutions for children requiring special Protection at regency/city Region level.
Changes also occurred in law number 23 year 2022 concerning Child Protection through two amendments namely 1). law number 35 year 2014 concerning amendment to law number concerning Child Protection, and 2. Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 Concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 Concerning Child Protection into Law. There are a number of regional government obligations contained in this law that must be further regulated by regional regulation. Changes to law number 23 year 2022 concerning Child Protection certainly have legal implications for child Protection legal policy in Central Lombok regency.
In the aspect of women's Protection, significant changes occurred when law number 12 year 2022 concerning criminal acts of sexual violence was promulgated. There are several provisions related to regional government obligations that must be regulated in regional regulations: 1). Provisions of Article 76 paragraph (2) Provincial and regency/city Regional Governments are obligated to form UPTD PPA which implements Handling, Protection, and Recovery of Victims, Victims' Families, and/or Witnesses, 2). Article 79 paragraph (1) obligation of Central Government and Regional Government to organize Prevention of Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence quickly, in an integrated and integrated manner. 3). Article 80 paragraph (1) Regional Government is obligated to organize education and training for law enforcement officials, government service personnel, and service personnel at Community-Based Service Provider Institutions, 4). Article 82 Central Government and Regional Government are obligated to conduct coordination regularly and continuously for Victims.
At the provincial government level, Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 8 Year 2015 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women and Children has been promulgated. There are several obligations contained in the Regional Regulation related to regency obligations. 1). formation of regional regulations and regional head regulations in regencies/cities concerning Protection of Women and Children, 2). Formation of Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children at regency/city level.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear
Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by "principle of respect for human dignity" is recognition of the dignity and honor of Victims that must be protected, respected, and upheld.
Letter b
What is meant by "principle of non-discrimination" is respecting equality of degree without differentiating, both parties, on the basis of religion, race, ethnicity, nationality, skin color, social status, affiliation, and ideology.
Letter c
What is meant by "principle of best interests of Victims" is that all actions concerning Victims carried out by executive institutions, legislative institutions, judicial institutions, and the Community must be the main consideration.
Letter d
What is meant by "principle of justice" is that material content related to Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence must reflect fair and proportional treatment for every citizen.
Letter e
What is meant by "principle of benefit" is that material content related to Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence is able to provide broad benefits for the interests of the Community, nation, and state.
Letter f
What is meant by "principle of legal certainty" is that the organization of regulation of Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence must be carried out within the framework of a rule of law that prioritizes the foundation of statutory regulations, propriety, and justice.
Article 3
Sufficiently clear
Article 4
Sufficiently clear
Article 5
Sufficiently clear
Article 6
Sufficiently clear
Article 7
Sufficiently clear
Article 8
Sufficiently clear
Article 9
Sufficiently clear
Article 10
Sufficiently clear
Article 11
Sufficiently clear
Article 12
Sufficiently clear
Article 13
Sufficiently clear
Article 14
Sufficiently clear
Article 15
Sufficiently clear
Article 16
Sufficiently clear
Article 17
Sufficiently clear
Article 18
Sufficiently clear
Article 19
Sufficiently clear
Article 20
Sufficiently clear
Article 21
Sufficiently clear
Article 22
Sufficiently clear
Article 23
Sufficiently clear
Article 24
Sufficiently clear
Article 25
Sufficiently clear
Article 26
Sufficiently clear
Article 27
Sufficiently clear
Article 28
Sufficiently clear
Article 29
Sufficiently clear
Article 30
Sufficiently clear
Article 31
Sufficiently clear
Article 32
Sufficiently clear
Article 33
Sufficiently clear
Article 34
Sufficiently clear
Article 35
Sufficiently clear
Article 36
Sufficiently clear
Article 37
Sufficiently clear
Article 38
Sufficiently clear
Article 39
Sufficiently clear
Article 40
Sufficiently clear
Article 41
Sufficiently clear
Article 42
Sufficiently clear
Article 43
Sufficiently clear
SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY NUMBER ....