REGENT OF BENGKALIS RIAU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BENGKALIS REGENCY NUMBER YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN WITH THE BLESSING OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BENGKALIS,

Considering
a. that women and children have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from acts of violence, exploitation and maltreatment as guaranteed in the 1945 Constitution;

b. that the implementation of protection of women and children is the authority of the Regional Government based on Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government;

c. that in order to prevent and protect women and children victims of violence, regulations are needed to guarantee the implementation of protection of women and children in the Region;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;

Observing
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 Year 1956 concerning the Establishment of Autonomous Regency Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 25);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 11 Year 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2020 Number 245, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);

7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 Year 2022 concerning Service Standards for Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 85);

With Joint Approval:
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BENGKALIS REGENCY
and
REGENT OF BENGKALIS

DECIDES:

To Establish
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Bengkalis Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Bengkalis Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Bengkalis.
4. Regional Apparatus is the Regional Apparatus of Bengkalis Regency as an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the Region.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a child still in the womb.
6. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties, either temporarily or based on court determination.
7. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
8. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence.
9. Violence is any act unlawfully, with or without means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body, or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
11. Violence against children is any act against children that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of children.
12. Threat of violence is any act unlawfully in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, either with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
13. Domestic Violence hereinafter abbreviated as KDRT, is any act against a person, especially women, that results in suffering or hardship physically, sexually, psychologically and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion, or unlawful deprivation of freedom within the scope of the household.
14. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
15. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a Parent over a Child.
16. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, and/or community organizations.
18. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
19. Non-Governmental Organization hereinafter abbreviated as LSM, is an organization/institution formed by citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily of their own will and interested in and engaged in the field of social welfare business established by the organization/institution as a manifestation of community participation in efforts to improve community welfare that emphasizes voluntary service.
20. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the Bengkalis Regency area.
21. Prevention is an effort to develop the capacity and mechanisms of Regional Government and society in creating conditions that can prevent the occurrence of violence, maltreatment, KDRT, exploitation and/or neglect.
22. Handling is action that includes identification, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children who are victims of acts of violence, maltreatment, KDRT, exploitation, maltreatment or neglect.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
24. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
25. Assistance is an effort made by a person or representative from an institution that has expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
26. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with established standards.
27. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions so they can carry out their roles again properly both in the family and in society.
28. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so they can carry out their social functions properly.
29. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
30. Legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to conduct the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender responsive.
31. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD, is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Bengkalis Regency.
32. Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as UPT PPA, is the Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children in the working area of several Sub-districts at the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Bengkalis Regency.
33. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts for criminal acts of trafficking in persons.
34. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children is a functional Work Unit that organizes integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against children and women at the Sub-district and Village/Kelurahan level.
35. Exploitation is an act with or without the victim's consent that includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs or unlawfully, transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material/immaterial benefits.
36. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring or receiving a person by threat of violence, kidnapping, confinement, falsification, fraud, abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
37. Empowerment is a process of developing independence and welfare of a person or community by increasing knowledge and skills to meet their life needs both economically and socially.
38. Restorative Justice is the settlement of criminal cases by involving perpetrators, victims, families of perpetrators/victims, and other related parties to jointly seek a fair settlement by emphasizing restoration to the original state, and not retaliation.

Article 2
Protection of women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children;
e. non-discrimination; and
f. empowerment.

Article 3
This Regional Regulation is intended as:
a. fulfillment of the rights of children and women in the context of protection and prevention of violence for children and women in the Region; and
b. guidelines for Regional Government and society to provide protection, services, medical rehabilitation, social rehabilitation and empowerment for women and children victims of acts of violence.

Article 4
The objectives of protection of women and children in this Regional Regulation are:
a. to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. to eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. to protect and provide a sense of security for victims (women and children);
d. to provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence and to carry out rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children victims of acts of violence with the involvement of business actors;
e. to increase cooperation and partnerships with the involvement of companies to implement empowerment and protection of women and children from various acts of violence;
f. to implement women's empowerment to improve the quality of women's lives; and
g. to establish and implement policies and programs/activities for fulfillment of children's rights.

Article 5
The scope of implementation of protection of women and children regulated in this Regional Regulation includes:
a. prevention of violence against women and children;
b. provision of services for women and children victims of violence;
c. institutions;
d. cooperation and partnerships;
e. funding;
f. investigation; and
g. criminal provisions.

CHAPTER II
PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One
Forms of Violence Against Women and Children

Article 6
Forms of violence against women and children, include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 7
Physical violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death of women and/or children.

Article 8
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, sense of helplessness and/or psychological suffering to women and/or children.

Article 9
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c includes:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. coercion of unnatural or unwanted sexual relations; and/or
c. coercion of sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 10
Neglect as referred to in Article 6 letter d includes:
a. acts that result in the non-fulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of deliberately neglecting women and children within their household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance to that woman; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 11
Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter e includes:
a. acts of exploiting economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent that include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, but not limited to prostitution or indecency activities.

Article 12
(1) Other violence as referred to in Article 6 letter f constitutes threats of violence and coercion.
(2) Threats of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include any act unlawfully in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, either with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
(3) Coercion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

Part Two
Rights of Women and Children

Paragraph 1
Rights of Women

Article 13
Every woman has the right to:
a. obtain protection from discriminatory acts;
b. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
c. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence and neglect;
d. obtain decent work according to their ability;
e. obtain work leave while receiving wages/salaries in accordance with laws and regulations;
f. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education;
g. obtain special protection in carrying out their work or profession against matters that may threaten their safety and/or health in connection with women's reproductive functions; and
h. ownership and management of joint assets in marriage in accordance with laws and regulations.

Paragraph 2
Rights of Children

Article 14
Every child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop and participate properly in accordance with human dignity;
b. obtain protection from discriminatory acts;
c. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
d. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence and neglect;
e. a name as self-identity and citizenship status;
f. obtain a birth certificate free of charge;
g. embrace religion and worship according to religious teachings with the guidance of parents/guardians;
h. not be forced to change religion by foster parents, adoptive parents and by anyone;
i. be recognized and know their parents, be raised and cared for by their own parents;
j. obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual and social needs;
k. obtain education and teaching according to their interests and talents;
l. obtain care, education and training, improve themselves and the ability to participate in community and state life for children with special needs;
m. express and have their opinions heard; and
n. rest and utilize time for self-development.

Part Three
Rights of Victims

Article 15
Women and children victims of acts of violence receive the following rights:
a. right to be respected for their dignity as human beings;
b. right to recovery of health and psychology from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. right to determine their own decisions;
d. right to obtain information;
e. right to confidentiality especially regarding their identity;
f. right to compensation;
g. right to social rehabilitation;
h. right to complaint handling;
i. right to assistance; and
j. right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process.

Article 16
Women and children victims of acts of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 15, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. right to basic services;
c. right to equal protection;
d. right to be free from various stigma;
e. right to obtain freedom;
f. right to obtain empowerment; and
g. right to be tried based on restorative justice.

CHAPTER III
PROVISION OF SERVICES FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 17
Protection of women and children is the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Parents, Guardians and/or Family;
c. Community; and
d. Business world/private sector.

Paragraph 1
Regional Government

Article 18
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 17 letter a, include:
a. preparing and implementing programs and activities related to protection of women and children;
b. implementing protection of women and children;
c. supervising services to victims of violence based on minimum service standards in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
d. allocating budget for protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government prepares programs and activities for protection of women and children in a regional action plan which is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
(3) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their main tasks and functions.
(4) Further provisions regarding the regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2), are stipulated further by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 2
Parents, Guardians and/or Family

Article 19
(1) Parents, guardians and/or family legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence, report if violence occurs and protect victims.
(2) Parents and/or family are obliged to prevent all forms of violence by providing guidance and example in accordance with religious teachings and applicable norms.
(3) In the event that parents, guardians and/or family as referred to in paragraph (1) do not exist or their whereabouts are unknown or for some reason cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities may transfer to the Regional Government and other families implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 3
Community

Article 20
(1) The community is obliged and responsible for the protection of women and children victims of violence through community participation activities in the protection of women and children.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. participating in handling victims of acts of violence.

Paragraph 4
Business World/Private Sector

Article 21
The obligations and responsibilities of the business world/private sector as referred to in Article 17 letter d include:
a. protecting women's rights;
b. participating in allocating and providing budget for protection and empowerment of women and children; and/or
c. providing wider space for women according to competence.

Part Two
Implementation of Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence

Paragraph 1
General

Article 22
The Regional Government in implementing the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence through activities:
a. prevention;
b. service; and
c. empowerment.

Paragraph 2
Prevention

Article 23
(1) Prevention as referred to in Article 22 letter a, is implemented by:
a. forming a network in efforts to prevent violence against women and children;
b. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing prevention of violence based on partnership patterns;
c. forming a system for preventing violence against women and children;
d. socializing laws and regulations related to protection of women and children victims of violence;
e. providing knowledge about prevention and mechanisms for overcoming violence against women and children; and
f. increasing the role and value of local wisdom and the role of customs in protecting women and children.
(2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in an integrated manner by Regional Apparatus whose main tasks and functions are in the fields of:
a. women's empowerment and child protection;
b. education;
c. health;
d. social affairs and manpower;
e. youth and sports; and
f. mental and spiritual.
(3) Regional Apparatus in preventing acts of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) may involve related agencies.
(4) In addition to being implemented by Regional Apparatus and related agencies as referred to in paragraph (3), prevention is also implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community, LSM, universities, community organizations, social organizations and religious organizations; and
c. business world.
(5) Procedures for preventing acts of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated further by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Service

Article 24
Service as referred to in Article 22 letter b, takes into account:
a. service principles; and
b. forms of service to victims.

Article 25
Service principles as referred to in Article 24 letter a, consist of:
a. fast;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 26
(1) Forms of service to victims as referred to in Article 24 letter b, are as follows:
a. services to women and children victims of acts of violence, include:
1. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
2. assistance services;
3. health services;
4. legal aid services;
5. repatriation and social reintegration services; and
6. social rehabilitation services.
b. in addition to the forms of service regulated in letter a, special services are also provided which include:
1. pick-up services; and/or
2. medical and psychological referral services.
(2) Forms of service as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a and letter b, are implemented by Regional Apparatus according to minimum service standards established by the government.
(3) Further provisions regarding the implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated further by Regent Regulation.

Article 27
Complaint, consultation and counseling services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 1 include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims; and
b. consent to take action.

Article 28
Assistance services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 2 include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
c. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
e. coordinating with other assistants; and
f. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 29
Health services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 3 include:
a. first aid to victims by competent officers;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel, and other health services needed in the legal process;
c. referral to health services as needed.

Article 30
(1) Legal aid services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 4 are to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process.
(2) Legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully explain the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds properly.

Article 31
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 5 are carried out to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with regency/city governments within one provincial area or outside the province and/or related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Article 32
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1) letter a number 6 is a service provided by assistants to restore the traumatic condition of victims.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. providing guidance and counseling;
b. psychological recovery of victims;
c. assisting victims in the family and community environment; and
d. providing Safe Houses for victims of violence who need continuous handling.
(3) Special social rehabilitation for women victims of KDRT and trafficking in persons is carried out by:
a. providing guidance and counseling;
b. psychological recovery of victims;
c. assisting victims in the family and community environment;
d. providing training and skills education; and
e. providing business capital assistance.
(4) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by Regional Apparatus whose main tasks and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. women's empowerment and child protection;
c. education;
d. health; and
e. mental and spiritual.
(5) In addition to being implemented by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (4), social rehabilitation can also be implemented by the community or social service institutions.

Article 33
(1) Forms of service as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1), are implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.
(2) Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) is Regional Apparatus that carries out duties and functions in the fields of:
a. women's empowerment and child protection;
b. social affairs;
c. manpower;
d. health;
e. education;
f. security and order; and
g. mental and spiritual.
(3) In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1) Regional Apparatus can cooperate with government agencies, provincial government, other regency/city governments and the community and business world.

Paragraph 4
Empowerment

Article 34
Empowerment as referred to in Article 22 letter c is carried out for women victims of violence, in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 35
Job training as referred to in Article 34 letter a includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 36
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 34 letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training;
b. facilitation of joint business group formation; and
c. business implementation assistance.

Article 37
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 34 letter c includes:
a. assistance with work facilities and infrastructure; and
b. facilitation of working capital assistance.

CHAPTER IV
INSTITUTIONS

Article 38
In order to strengthen and develop service provider institutions for protection of women and children, the Regional Government establishes:
a. UPT PPA;
b. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons; and
c. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children.

Article 39
(1) UPT PPA as referred to in Article 38 letter a, is a technical operational implementing element and carries out part of the duties and functions of the Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, or other designation.
(2) The establishment of UPT PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is regulated further by Regent Regulation in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40
(1) The Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons as referred to in Article 38 letter b, is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling of trafficking in persons.
(2) The Task Force for Protection of Women and Children as referred to in Article 38 letter c, is a functional work unit that organizes integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against children and women.
(3) Provisions regarding the Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons and the Task Force for Protection of Women and Children are regulated further by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIPS

Part One
Cooperation

Article 41
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children as referred to in Article 4, the Regional Government can cooperate with other parties in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is set forth in the form of Joint Agreement and/or Cooperation Agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
Partnerships

Article 42
(1) In addition to conducting cooperation as referred to in Article 41, the Regional Government can partner with the business world, LSM/Social organizations concerned with women and children in protecting women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women and children victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who are withdrawn from their education;
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence;
e. providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities, private parties and various non-governmental organizations concerned with women and children from various forms of violence; and/or
g. opening complaint posts for protection of women and children from various forms of violence up to the Village level.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are set forth in the form of agreements in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
FUNDING

Article 43
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to allocate budget/financing for the implementation of protection of women and children up to the village level.
(2) The implementation budget as referred to in paragraph (1) is sourced from APBD and can be sourced from other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) The budget as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is used for prevention, service, handling, protection and empowerment activities for women and children.

CHAPTER VII
INVESTIGATION

Article 44
(1) In addition to Police Investigator Officials of the Republic of Indonesia Police, investigation of criminal acts referred to in this Regional Regulation can be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators within the Bengkalis Regency Government whose appointment is determined in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. conduct examinations of the truth of reports or information regarding criminal acts related to violence against women and children;
b. conduct examinations of any person and/or business entity suspected of participating in criminal acts related to violence against women and children in the business world environment;
c. request information from any person and/or business entity in connection with criminal act events related to violence against women and children;
d. conduct examinations of evidence, records, or other documents regarding criminal acts related to violence against Women and children;
e. conduct examinations at certain places suspected of containing evidence;
f. conduct seizures of goods and materials resulting from violations that can be used as evidence in criminal cases related to violence against women and children;
g. request the assistance of experts in carrying out investigation tasks regarding criminal acts related to violence against women and children; and
h. stop investigations if there is insufficient evidence of criminal acts related to violence against women and children.
(3) In carrying out their authority, Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) coordinate with the Police in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) notify the commencement of investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the Public Prosecutor through the Police Officer Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia Police in accordance with the provisions regulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER VIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 45
Any person who intentionally commits violence against women and children as referred to in Article 6 through Article 12 is subject to criminal sanctions as regulated in laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 46
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bengkalis Regency.

Stipulated in Bengkalis
on 18 November 2022

REGENT OF BENGKALIS,

signed

KASMARNI

Promulgated in Bengkalis
on 21 November 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BENGKALIS REGENCY,

signed

H. BUSTAMI HY

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BENGKALIS REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BENGKALIS REGENCY RIAU PROVINCE: 9.63.C/2022