REGENT OF SOUTH BUTON
PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH BUTON REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 YEAR 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF SOUTH BUTON,

Considering: a. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b, Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection constitutes mandatory governmental affairs for Regional Government not related to Basic Services, therefore in order to fulfill human rights regarding acts of violence against women and children, it is deemed necessary to provide protection;

b. that based on the consideration as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

4. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victim Witnesses (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

5. Law Number 16 Year 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 104, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5248);

6. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

7. Law Number 16 Year 2014 concerning Establishment of South Buton Regency in Southeast Sulawesi Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 173, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5563);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been most recently amended by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

9. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

10. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 concerning System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 615);

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SOUTH BUTON REGENCY
AND
REGENT OF SOUTH BUTON

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is South Buton Regency.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of South Buton.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
7. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and verbal that causes danger to life, body and/or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.
8. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
9. Violence against children is any act against children that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of children.
10. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
11. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in exploitation of the person.
12. Child is a person who has not reached 18 (eighteen) years of age including children still in the womb.
13. Victim of violence is a woman and child who experiences suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experiences neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights.
14. Prevention is direct efforts carried out by Regional Government and/or the community to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
15. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services and rehabilitation to women and children who are victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
16. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking, hereinafter referred to as Task Force is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts for criminal acts of human trafficking in South Buton Regency.
17. Safe house is temporary housing used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
18. Social reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports reunification of victims into the family environment, school environment, work environment and community environment that can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
19. Victim recovery is services provided in the form of strengthening and developing the capabilities of a person who experiences acts of violence against women and children to be more empowered physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance, for self-strengthening of women and children from acts of violence to resolve problems faced.
21. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their children or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward to the third degree.
22. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
23. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is organized based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. order and legal certainty;
e. openness; and
f. protection.

Article 3

The objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence are to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including human trafficking;
b. eliminate all forms of acts of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children from acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. strengthen women and children victims of violence to be more empowered physically, psychologically, socially and economically.

CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. maltreatment;
f. exploitation; and/or
g. other violence.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5

Women and children victims of violence receive the following rights:
a. right to be respected for dignity and dignity as human beings;
b. right to recovery;
c. right to determine their own decisions;
d. right to obtain information;
e. right to confidentiality;
f. right to social rehabilitation;
g. right to quick, appropriate, comfortable and needs-based complaint handling;
h. right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process;
i. right to assistance; and
j. right to a sense of security.

Article 6

Children victims of violence in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Article 5, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. right to survival, growth and development;
b. right to basic population services;
c. right to equal protection;
d. right to be free from various stigma; and
e. right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 7

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government; and
b. Community.

Article 8

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 letter a, include:
a. establishing, implementing policies, programs and conducting cooperation activities in organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence;
b. facilitating the establishment of institutions for protection of women and children from acts of violence and providing support for facilities and infrastructure;
c. allocating budget for organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity;
d. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing protection services for women and children victims of acts of violence;
f. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
g. appointing parents and/or substitute family caregivers as a protection measure for children who are victims of violence.

(2) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and activities for protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 9

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to women and children from acts of violence;
c. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
d. participating in handling victims of violence.

(3) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 10

Every person who hears, sees or knows of the occurrence of violence against women and children is obliged to make efforts according to their capacity to:
a. prevent and stop the continuation of acts of violence;
b. provide protection to victims;
c. provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. assist in the process of submitting applications for determination of protection for victims of violence.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONS

Article 11

(1) The Regional Government establishes PPT in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.

(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), is established at the Regency and Sub-district levels.

(3) Membership of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Work Procedures of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 12

In addition to establishing PPT as referred to in Article 11, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regent establishes:
a. task force for human trafficking; and
b. regional action committee for elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 13

(1) The task force as referred to in Article 12 letter a, consists of representatives from Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations and researchers/academics.

(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling of human trafficking.

(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14

(1) The committee as referred to in Article 12 letter b, consists of elements from Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.

(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
ORGANIZATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 15

(1) The Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.

(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), it is implemented by:
a. providing material on prevention of acts of violence against women and children in both formal and informal education;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services in accordance with applicable provisions;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing complete and easily accessible information systems;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, educational institutions and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening integrated service systems for protection of women and children from acts of violence in every sub-district/village.

Article 16

(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 15, is implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. population and civil registration;
f. law;
g. women's empowerment and child protection;
h. cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises;
i. mental and spiritual; and
j. peace and order.

(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Part Two
Legal Protection

Article 17

Legal protection includes:
a. providing protection in safe houses (shelters);
b. providing legal information to victims;
c. providing assistance for victims as witnesses from the investigation process to the verdict; and
d. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence by appointing guardianship in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Part Three
Recovery

Article 18

Recovery includes:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. providing medicolegal services;
c. assisting victim repatriation;
d. providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters);
e. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. providing spiritual guidance services; and
g. preparing family, school, work and community environments, as well as economic empowerment.

Part Four
Coordination

Article 19

Coordination includes:
a. conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated service institutions; and
b. conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated services between regions.

Part Five
Community Participation

Article 20

Community participation is carried out by:
a. fostering community awareness of cases of acts of violence against women and children;
b. encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting acts of violence against women and children;
c. fostering local wisdom in handling cases of acts of violence;
d. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling acts of violence against women and children; and
e. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to acts of violence against women and children.

CHAPTER IX
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One
Cooperation

Article 21

(1) The Regional Government develops cooperation patterns in order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted between the Regional Government and:
a. Central Government;
b. Provincial Government;
c. Other Regency/City Governments;
d. Universities;
e. Social and Religious Institutions;
f. Non-Governmental Organizations; and/or
g. Media.

(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.

(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government may organize partnerships with the business world in protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who are withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of violence.

(3) Partnership as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 23

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. coordination;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.

Article 24

The community may conduct supervision of the organization of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent or to the DPRD.

Article 25

Further provisions regarding procedures for implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in Articles 23 and 24 are regulated in Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
FINANCING

Article 26

Financing for organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence, may be sourced from:
a. state revenue and expenditure budget;
b. regional revenue and expenditure budget;
c. non-binding community donations;
d. non-binding foreign assistance; and/or
e. other lawful and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 27

(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence.

(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with regional financial capacity and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 28

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of South Buton Regency.

Enacted in Batauga
on 16 March 2021

REGENT OF SOUTH BUTON,

LA ODE ARUSANI

Promulgated in Batauga
on 16 March 2021

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SOUTH BUTON REGENCY,

LA SIAMBO

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH BUTON REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER: 2

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH BUTON REGENCY SOUTHEAST SULAWESI PROVINCE NUMBER: 2/35/2021