REGENT OF LUWU
SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF LUWU REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 FA BUT 2010
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

Considering:
a. that Women and Men have equal rights in participating in various fields of life;
b. that women are a national asset who play a very important role in the process of creating and developing quality generations so they need to receive protection from discrimination and violence and need to be empowered to actualize their potential optimally;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Protection of Women;

Recalling:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia,
2. Law Number [blank] Year 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1);
4. Law Number 13 Year 1998 concerning Welfare of the Elderly (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 190);
5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

-2-

7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58);
9. Law Number [blank] Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12);
10. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
11. Law Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of Persons With Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
12. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244 Supplement to the State Gazette Number 5589) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Protection of Women;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products.

-3-

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF LUWU REGENCY
and
THE REGENT OF LUWU

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Government is the Central Government.
2. Governor is the Governor of South Sulawesi Province.
3. Region is Luwu Regency.
4. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
5. Regent is the Regent of Luwu.
6. Gender is a concept that refers to roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in families, communities and the culture of the society in which we live including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
7. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on differentiation of humans on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
8. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capacity, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court decisions.
10. Violence is any act unlawfully, with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Disability is an Individual who has physical or mental limitations.
12. Regional Cooperation is an agreement between governor and governor or governor and regent/mayor or between regent/mayor and other regent/mayor, and or governor, regent/mayor with third parties, made in writing and giving rise to rights and obligations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.

Article 3

The implementation of Protection of Women aims to:
a. increase the participation of women both individually and in groups as potential and resources in the implementation of social community life;
b. prevent all forms of Discrimination;
c. empower women both individually and in groups and communities experiencing gender problems so they are able to meet their needs independently;
d. prevent and handle risks from women's vulnerability so that their survival can be fulfilled in accordance with minimum basic needs;
e. reduce the gap in opportunities between women and men in achieving development; and
f. reduce acts of Violence against women.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE

Article 4

The implementation of protection of women from acts of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. handling;
c. empowerment.

-5-

Article 5

(1) Protection of women from violence includes protection of women in the household, in the community, in the workplace and in conflict and disaster areas.
(2) Protection of women from violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes women with disabilities, elderly women.

CHAPTER IV
HUMAN RIGHTS AND BASIC HUMAN FREEDOMS

Article 6

Human Rights and basic human freedoms, consist of:
a. Right to life;
b. Right to have a family and continue offspring;
c. Right to self-development;
d. Right to obtain justice;
e. Right to personal freedom;
f. Right to security;
g. Right to welfare; and
h. Right to participate in government.

Article 7

(1) Every Woman has the right to:
a. live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and mentally;
b. live in a family within the bonds of a legal marriage;
c. maintain life and improve their standard of living;
d. have a job they like and are also entitled to fair employment conditions;
e. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education in accordance with specified requirements;
f. a healthy and clean environment;
g. receive fair work wages in accordance with their work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity;
h. choose and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political position elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable laws and regulations;
i. receive special protection in the implementation of work or profession against matters that may threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive function; and
j. special rights inherent in women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.
(2) Women who are adults and or are married have the right to perform legal acts themselves unless otherwise determined by laws and regulations and other social norms.

-6-

(3) A legal marriage can only take place by the free will of the woman and the man in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) A wife during the marriage bond has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband regarding all matters relating to their married life, relations with their children and ownership rights and management of joint property.
(5) After the dissolution of her marriage a woman has the same rights and responsibilities as her former husband regarding all matters relating to their children, taking into account the best interests of the child.
(6) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights as her former husband regarding all matters relating to joint property without reducing the rights of children, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(7) Every woman who is in a condition of Disability, elderly, and pregnant is entitled to receive facilities and special treatment.
(8) Every elderly woman, physically and/or mentally disabled, has the right to receive care, education, training and special assistance at the expense of the regional government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Prevention

Article 8

The target of prevention as referred to in Article 4 letter a is every woman.

Article 9

(1) Prevention as referred to in Article 4 letter a, includes:
a. collecting data and information about women victims of violence and laws and regulations;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women;
c. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of women victims of violence;
d. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for women victims by involving community elements;
e. encouraging public awareness of the importance of protection for women victims of violence;
f. Increasing women's awareness of the importance of complying with ethics, religious norms and cultural norms in behavior.
(2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regency Regional Government, police institutions, prosecutor institutions, judicial institutions, non-governmental organizations, and the community in accordance with their duties, functions, and responsibilities.

Part Two
Handling

Article 10

The target of handling as referred to in Article 4 letter b is every woman.

Article 11

(1) Forms of services for women victims of violence that are provided include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including providing safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and providing social support so that victims have confidence, strength, and independence in solving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized according to standard operating procedures that will be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 12

The provision of integrated services to women victims of violence is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, empathetically, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and with guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 13

Integrated service providers are obliged to provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 12.

-10-

Article 21

(1) Provision and facilitation of Protection services for women as referred to in Article 20 letter c in the form of:
a. handling complaints/reports;
b. legal assistance;
c. health rehabilitation;
d. social rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration; or
f. repatriation assistance.
(2) Provision and facilitation of Protection services for women as referred to in paragraph (1) are given to women:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of trafficking in persons;
c. elderly who are not independent;
d. with Disabilities;
e. victims of sexual exploitation;
f. disaster victims and those in conflict-prone areas; and
g. workers/employees.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 22

(1) The community can participate in the implementation of Empowerment and Protection of women.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of:
a. Responses and input in policy formulation;
b. cooperation; and/or
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
INSTITUTIONS, GUIDANCE, AND SUPERVISION

Part One
Institutions

Article 23

(1) Handling as referred to in Article 11 is carried out in an integrated manner by related SKPD and/or service institutions that handle protection of women from acts of violence.

-11-

(2) The implementation of integrated services is coordinated by BPPKB or another name which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
(3) The implementation of integrated services is in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part Two
Guidance

Article 24

(1) The regional government is obliged to provide guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women victims of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. Guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. Technical guidance and training;
c. Provision of facilities;
d. Monitoring;
e. Evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is intended to realize protection of women from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD and the community.
(4) SKPD as referred to in paragraph (3) is the Regional Work Unit within the Luwu Regency Regional Government that is related to the protection of women against acts of violence.

Part Three
Supervision

Article 24

(1) The regional government is obliged to supervise the implementation of protection of women from acts of violence.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with professional, transparent and accountable principles.

Article 25

The community can supervise the implementation of protection of women from acts of violence organized by the regional government with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent or DPRD.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING

Article 26

(1) Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women in the Region is sourced from the regional revenue and expenditure budget.

-12-

(2) In the event that the Region receives funding assistance for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women from the Government, it must be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 27

(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is carried out periodically starting from planning up to policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women for the current year.
(4) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women is carried out at the end of each fiscal year.
(5) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Empowerment and Protection of women are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(6) The Regent submits a report on the implementation of integrated services for Protection of women victims of violence to the Governor with a copy submitted to the minister in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs, and the minister in charge of home affairs.
(7) The Regent submits a report on the implementation of the formation and development of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions in an integrated manner to the minister in charge of home affairs with a copy to the minister in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(8) Implementation of reporting as referred to in paragraphs (6) and (7) is carried out annually and/or when necessary.

CHAPTER XI
PROHIBITIONS AND SANCTIONS

Article 28

Any person who intentionally commits violence against women will be subject to sanctions in accordance with laws and regulations.

-13-

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 29

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Luwu Regency.

Enacted in Belopa
on 6 August 2019

REGENT OF LUWU,

BASMIN MATTAYANG

Promulgated in Belopa
on 6 August 2019

Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF LUWU REGENCY,

RIDVAN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF LUWU REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER ..
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF LUWU REGENCY, SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE