POSO REGENCY GOVERNMENT
POSO REGENCY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION, SERVICES AND RECOVERY FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF POSO,

Considering: a. that acts of violence occurring against women and children can create victims resulting in prolonged trauma;
b. that in order to protect the interests of women and children, it is deemed necessary to have legal certainty guaranteeing protection for women and children;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection, Services and Recovery for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of: 1. Law Number 29 Year 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1992 Number 100, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
5. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
6. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
7. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for Elimination of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
9. Law Number 10 Year 2004 concerning the Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
11. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as amended by Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 3 Year 2005 concerning Amendment to Law 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 38, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4493), which was enacted into Law Number 8 Year 2005 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4548), as amended by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
12. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance Between Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
13. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4635);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4604);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4737);
16. Regional Regulation of Poso Regency Number 25 Year 2003 concerning Community Empowerment of Poso Regency (Regional Gazette of Poso Regency Year 2003 Series D Number 25).
17. Regional Regulation of Poso Regency Number 1 Year 2008 concerning Authority of Poso Regency Region (Regional Gazette of Poso Regency Year 2008 Number 1);

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF POSO REGENCY and
THE REGENT OF POSO

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION, SERVICES AND RECOVERY FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of Poso Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as Elements of Regional Government Administration of Poso Regency.
3. Regional House of Representatives is the Regional People's Representative Institution as an Element of Regional Government Administration of Poso Regency.
4. Child is a Person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
5. Victim is a Woman and child who experiences violence and or threats of violence in conflict situations, post-conflict, domestic sphere and or public.
6. Implementation is all actions that include Protection, Services and Recovery for Victims of Violence.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by the Government, Family, Advocates, Social Institutions, Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Special Protection is Protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children in minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropics and other addictive substances (narcotics), children victims of kidnapping sales trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and or mental, children victims of conflict who experience physical violence and trauma, children with disabilities, and children victims of maltreatment and neglect.
9. Recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of violence to be more empowered both physically, psychologically and economically.
10. Implementer is Government Agencies and Social Institutions in accordance with their respective duties and functions, including providing facilities needed for victim recovery.
11. Violence is any act and or threat of act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, psychological, sexual, or neglect.
12. Physical Violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or bodily defects to a person, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.
13. Psychological Violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
14. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
15. Domestic Neglect is the act of neglecting a person within the domestic sphere whereas according to the applicable law for the person concerned or because of an agreement or contract he is obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance for that person. Neglect also applies to any person who causes economic dependence by restricting and or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
16. Service is carrying out actions taken immediately to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence has occurred against victims.
17. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, spiritual guidance for self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems faced.
18. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an Institution providing services to victims of violence, based in Hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services including medical-legal, psycho-social, legal services, and customary institutions.
19. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an Institution for recovery of victims of violence from health, education and economic independence aspects.
20. Safe house is temporary housing used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The principles of regulating protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. Respect for victims' rights;
b. Gender equality and justice;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Best interests of victims; and
6. Respect for the rights of women and children.

Article 3

The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence aims to:
a. Prevent all forms of violence;
b. Protect victims of violence;
c. Provide recovery services to victims of violence; and d. Implement comprehensive recovery for victims;

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION, SERVICES AND RECOVERY

Part One
PROTECTION

Article 4

(1) In order to provide strengthening to victims of violence, protection and special protection need to be provided;
(2) Protection is given to victims in the form of assistance;
(3) In the context of assistance, a forum called the Integrated Service Center (PPT) and/or Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) is established;
(4) In order to provide a sense of security, victims can be placed in safe houses and rehabilitation centers for child victims of violence under the auspices of the Integrated Service Center and/or P2TP2A.

Part Two
SERVICES

Article 5

(1) Services are provided for recovery of victims.
(2) Services for victims are organized by Regional Government Agencies and Social Institutions in accordance with their respective duties and functions, including providing facilities needed for victim recovery.
(3) Facilities as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children abbreviated as P2TPA;
b. Expert and Professional Personnel;
c. Integrated Service Center (PPT) and or Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A);
d. Safe House; and
e. Other infrastructure and facilities needed for victim recovery.
(4) PPT and or P2TP2A is an assistance forum managed in an integrated manner consisting of health workers, education workers, social institutions, law enforcement officers, psychologists, psychiatrists, volunteer assistants and or spiritual counselors and involving community participation;
(5) PPT and or P2TP2A seeks and receives reports, complaints and or referrals from the community;
(6) Regulations concerning PPT and or P2TP2A will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 6

(1) Forms of services for victims of violence implemented by PPT and or P2TP2A include:
a. Medical Services carried out by Medical Personnel and Paramedics, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries and or other physical consequences;
b. Medical-Legal Services are medical services for the purposes of legal evidence;
c. Psycho-social Services are services provided by assistants in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including recovery with a spiritual approach;
d. Legal Services at every level of examination; and e. Resocialization services so that victims can return to performing their social functions in society;
(2) Service Mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to Standard Operating Procedures, which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
(3) In certain cases PPT and or P2TP2A can cooperate with:
a. Police, to report and process perpetrators of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. Advocates, to assist victims in the judicial process;
c. Other Law Enforcers, to assist victims at every level of examination;
d. Commission on anti-violence against women;
e. Indonesian Child Protection Commission (KPAI); and f. Certain parties desired for the benefit of victims.

Article 7

(1) Implementation of services to victims is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, empathetically, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and with guaranteed confidentiality;
(2) PPT and or P2TP2A managers are obliged to organize services in accordance with service principles as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Three
RECOVERY

Article 8

Recovery intended includes:
a. Health recovery;
b. Education for child victims of violence can be in the form of formal, informal and non-formal education; and
c. Economic independence in the form of skills training, providing access and economic strengthening so that victims can be independent

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 9

(1) Regional Government is obliged to organize protection, services and recovery for victims of violence, including:
a. Providing integrated service facilities and infrastructure;
b. Involving Non-Governmental Organizations, Women's Organizations, Religious Leaders, Customary Leaders, Community Leaders, in organizing protection and services for victims;
c. Providing budget according to programs and needs;
d. Guaranteeing the implementation of service convenience for victims;
e. Seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. Seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
(2) Regional Government coordinates between agencies and other social institutions that are fully responsible for carrying out their obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 10

Every victim has the right to guarantee their rights as Citizens in accordance with laws and regulations which include:
(1) Protection and special protection in the form of assistance and sense of security.
(2) Services in the form of medical services, psycho-social, medical-legal, legal services and resocialization services.
(3) Recovery in the form of education, health and economic recovery.

CHAPTER VI
FINANCING

Article 11

All costs for the implementation of protection, services and recovery carried out by the Regional Government for victims of violence are charged to:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget
b. Other legitimate sources of income in accordance with Laws and Regulations; and
c. Other non-binding sources of income.

CHAPTER VII
SUPERVISION

Article 12

Supervision of the implementation of this Regional Regulation is carried out in accordance with applicable Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 13

(1) Officials appointed to organize integrated protection, services and recovery who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities are subject to actions and or sanctions in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
(2) PPT and or P2TP2A managers in carrying out protection, service and recovery tasks who violate the principles of protection, services, and recovery may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal mechanisms of PPT and or P2TP2A and sanctions in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 14

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Poso Regency.

Established in Poso
On the date of July 26, 2008

REGENT OF POSO,

signed

PIET INKIRIWANG

Promulgated in Poso
On the date of July 29, 2008


REGIONAL GAZETTE OF POSO REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 6