REGENT OF NORTH KONAWE
PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY NUMBER t; YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF NORTH KONAWE

Considering

a. that women and children have dignity and worth as complete human beings and have the right to obtain protection, a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence or inhumane treatment;

b. that in its development there are still many Women and Children who need to receive protection from various forms of acts of violence, mistreatment, exploitation, and neglect so that strategic efforts are needed to provide protection for women and children;

c. that in carrying out concurrent government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection which is part of the affairs of Regional Government of Regency/City needs to be further regulated by Regional Regulation;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children.

Noting

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 13 of 2007 concerning the establishment of North Konawe Regency in Southeast Sulawesi Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 15);

3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 1 of 2022 concerning Financial Relations Between the Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 4, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6757);

4. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 83), as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157).

With Joint Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY
and
REGENT OF NORTH KONAWE

DECIDES:

To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is North Konawe Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of North Konawe Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of North Konawe.
4. State Civil Apparatus hereinafter abbreviated as ASN is a profession for civil servants and government employees with work agreements who work in government agencies.
5. Women are adult humans of female sex and persons recognized by law as women.
6. Children are persons who have not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, children still in the womb, children with special needs, child victims, child perpetrators and children as Witnesses.
7. Victims are women and children who experience suffering and or distress either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
8. Implementation is the execution of something done to achieve a goal.
9. Protection of Women and Children is all activities to guarantee and protect women and children and their rights so they can live, grow, and develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from violence, exploitation, discrimination, and neglect.
10. Trafficking in Women and Children is the act of recruitment, harboring, sending, transferring or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, falsification, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
11. Special Protection is a form of protection received by children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
12. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
13. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
14. Community is families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations, individuals who have expertise, concern and sincerity to help and social organizations that are potential and strategic and legal.
15. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter referred to as UPTD PPA is a service provider institution for protection of women and children victims of violence that is established and is under the Regional Government.
16. North Konawe Regency Child Protection Committee is a supervisory institution for the implementation of Child Protection in North Konawe Regency whose members consist of various elements namely religious leaders, community leaders, related Regional Government and Social Organizations.
17. Regional Children's Forum is a forum for Children to gather, express and be heard their opinions, and seek, receive and convey information.
18. Exploitation is an act with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
19. Child-Friendly School is an educational institution that recognizes and respects children's rights to obtain education, health, opportunities to play and have fun, protection from violence and abuse, can express views freely, and participate in making decisions according to their capacity.
20. Child-Friendly Health Services are hospital services that pay attention to aspects of child growth and development by providing child-friendly officers or doctors and child-friendly facilities.
21. Service is an activity or series of service activities in the context of implementing protection for Women and Children in accordance with statutory regulations.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One
Rights of Women

Article 2

Women have the right to obtain:
a. protection in the field of employment;
b. services in the field of health;
c. equality in the field of education;
d. protection in marriage and family; and
e. equality in public and political life.

Part Two
Rights of Children

Article 3

(1) Children have the right to obtain:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. Family environment and substitute family;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, use of leisure time, and cultural arts activities; and
e. implementation of Special protection.

(2) The basic rights of children as referred to in paragraph (1) are guaranteed their fulfillment by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
Regional Government

Article 4

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government include:
a. establishing policies for protection of Women and Children;
b. implementing policies for protection of Women and Children from acts of violence in accordance with statutory provisions;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of Women and Children;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation of protection of Women and Children;
e. allocating budget for implementation of protection of Women and Children in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region;
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children; and
g. realizing a Child-Worthy regency.

(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regent establishes programs and activities for action on protection of women and children in the regional action plan as a basis for Regional apparatus in implementing protection of Women and Children.

(3) The Regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2) is part of the Regional medium-term development plan.

(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional action plan are regulated by Regent regulation.

Part Two
Private Sector and Community

Article 5

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the private sector and community are organized in the form of participation.

(2) Forms of participation of the private sector and community as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. Preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. Providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. Participating in handling victims of acts of violence.

(3) Forms of participation of the private sector and community as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out responsibly in accordance with statutory provisions.

Part Three
Parents and Family

Article 6

(1) Parents are obliged to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect Children;
b. develop children according to their abilities, talents and interests;
c. prevent marriage at child age; and
d. provide character education and instilling moral values in Children.

(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to some reason cannot carry out the obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to a substitute family.

CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 7

Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. non-physical violence;
b. physical violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic violence;
e. social violence;
f. exploitation;
g. domestic neglect;
h. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and
i. threat of certain actions.

Article 8

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 7 shall make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence;
c. provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. assist in the process of submitting an application for protection order.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One
Establishment of UPTD PPA

Article 9

(1) In order to provide protection to victims, the Regional Government establishes UPTD PPA as a Regional Technical Implementation Unit in the unit that handles Protection of Women and Children.

(2) The establishment of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is in accordance with statutory provisions.

(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, organizational structure, and work procedures of UPTD PPA are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Forms and Standard Operating Procedures for Protection Services

Article 10

(1) Forms of protection services for Victims organized by UPTD PPA include:
a. complaint and referral services;
b. protection services for personal, Family, and property security, and freedom from threats;
c. psychosocial and psychological rehabilitation assistance services;
d. legal assistance services;
e. spiritual assistance services;
f. mediation services for women's and children's problems;
g. information services regarding case developments;
h. information services regarding court decisions;
i. information services in the event the convict is released;
j. compensation and restitution assistance services;
k. safe house services;
l. special protection services for children; and
m. social reintegration services.

(2) Implementation of services for victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. prioritizing the interests of victims;
c. best interests for children;
d. non-discrimination based on the origin of Victims;
e. guarantee of confidentiality;
f. easily accessible; and
g. free of charge.

(3) Further provisions regarding procedures and standard operating procedures for protection services for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children

Article 11

(1) To prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, the Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents and communities by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.

(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government makes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal, non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to carry out prevention and protection of women and children from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint services for protection of women and children from violence.

Article 12

(1) Prevention of the occurrence of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 11, is carried out by Regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. employment;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.

(2) Prevention of violence by Regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), must be prepared by the Regional Government and implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan as a manifestation of the implementation of the Work Plan and Strategic Plan of Regional Apparatus in the form of programs and activities contained in the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Part Four
Special Protection for Children

Article 13

(1) Special Protection is provided to Children in emergency situations which include:
a. refugee children;
b. children victims of natural disasters; and
c. children victims of unrest.

(2) Handling of special protection for Children in emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in a coordinated manner between the Provincial Government, Regency/City and community.

(3) Handling of refugee Children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out regardless of citizenship status and entitled to receive basic services.

(4) Handling of Children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b and letter c includes decent housing, recovery both physical and psychological, fulfillment of nutrition, education, health, children's play areas, and prevention of violence and exploitation.

Article 14

(1) Special protection is provided to Children in conflict with the law including:
a. children as perpetrators of criminal acts;
b. children as victims of criminal acts; and
c. children as witnesses to criminal acts.

(2) The Regional Government is obliged to provide protection and Child facilities for Children in conflict with the law.

(3) Protection and facilities as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. protection from negative labeling, publication, threats and other forms that harm Children;
b. physical and psychological health service facilities, education and training, safe housing or social protection houses for Children;
c. providing professional and trained companion/service officers in accompanying child cases; and
d. providing special service units in the form of social protection houses for Children.

Article 15

Special Protection for Children from minority and isolated groups is carried out through:
a. provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture; and
b. recognizing and implementing their own religious teachings and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Article 16

(1) Special protection is provided to children who are exploited economically and/or sexually including:
a. worst forms of work for Children;
b. children victims of the crime of trafficking in persons;
c. child prostitution;
d. child pornography; and
e. child marriage.

(2) The Regional Government is obliged to provide protection and facilities for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually.

(3) Protection for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by including rescue, recovery, and reintegration.

(4) Provisions regarding procedures and procedures for providing protection and facilities as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 17

(1) Children with special needs have the right to receive the same treatment as other children to develop their potential according to their dignity and worth.

(2) The regional government is obliged to provide educational and health facilities and infrastructure.

(3) The regional government is obliged to provide a rehabilitation center that includes rehabilitation for children and strengthening for Families.

(4) The Regional Government facilitates the formation of a Communication Forum for Families of Children with Special Needs.

Part Five
Child Protection Committee

Article 18

(1) In order to supervise the implementation of Child Protection, a Child Protection Committee is established.

(2) Provisions regarding the composition and work procedures of the Child Protection Committee as referred to in paragraph (1) are stipulated by Regent Decree.

CHAPTER VI
COOPERATION

Article 19

(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children, cooperation can be carried out with:
a. other Regional apparatus;
b. TNI/Polri;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
e. District Attorney's Office;
f. District Court;
g. Correctional Center;
h. Correctional Institution;
i. business world;
j. social workers;
k. volunteer companions;
l. spiritual counselors;
m. non-governmental institutions;
n. other regency/city governments;
o. community;
p. universities; and
q. mass media.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER VII
REPORTING

Article 20

(1) UPTD PPA is obliged to report the implementation of protection for Women and Children to the Regent through the head of the agency.

(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing and/or electronically including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services;
d. performance;

(3) Submission of reporting as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out at least every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING

Article 21

Funds for the implementation of protection for Women and Children from acts of violence are sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other lawful sources.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 22

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.

(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) in order to realize the objectives of protection of women and children according to minimum service standards implemented by regional apparatus/related institutions and the community.

(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (3) are carried out with professional and transparent principles.

(5) Related agencies are obliged to report regularly to the Regent regarding the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER X
PROHIBITIONS

Article 23

Every person is prohibited from:
a. treating women and children in a discriminatory manner that results in women and children experiencing losses, both material and moral, thus hindering their social function;
b. treating women and children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of mistreatment and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing violence against women and children;
e. committing violence or threat of violence forcing women and children to have intercourse with him or with another person;
f. committing violence or threat of violence, coercion, committing trickery, committing a series of lies, or persuading women and children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of women and children;
h. obstructing women and children from enjoying their own culture, recognizing and implementing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of women and children;
j. intentionally placing, allowing, involving women and children in the abuse, and production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropics; and/or
k. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of women and children in the abuse, and production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

Article 24

UPTD PPA or safe houses are prohibited from collecting fees in providing services to women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER XI
SANCTIONS

Article 25

(1) For officials, officers, private institutions that violate the provisions as referred to in Article 5, Article 6 paragraph (1), Article 11 paragraph (1), paragraph (2), Article 13, Article 23 and Article 16 paragraph (2) are subject to Administrative sanctions in accordance with statutory provisions.

(2) Provisions regarding the imposition of administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 26

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of North Konawe Regency.

Stipulated in Wanggudu
On date ~- O\lho\xr ~

REGENT OF NORTH KONAWE,

H. RUKSAMIN

Promulgated in Wanggudu
On Date 9. e)k,rooq- Q..o2'J..

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY,

KASIM PAGALA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY YEAR!lb72NUMBER .\?)(

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY
NUMBER t. YEAR ')/)7:l
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

Every human being has equal rights in living life. The state has an obligation to provide protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. That women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence so they need to receive protection. Violence against women and children is a violation of human rights so their dignity and worth need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination.

Women and children are vulnerable groups who have special needs that are at risk due to physical, psychological, social, cultural and health conditions. In order to realize general welfare in accordance with its authority, the Regional Government is obliged to provide protection to Women and Children.

The objectives of implementing protection of women and children are:
a. Prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. Provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence;
c. Provide a sense of security to women and children victims of violence;
d. Restore the physical, psychological and economic condition of women and children victims of violence;
e. Best interests for women and children victims of violence that occurs in the domestic and/or public sphere; and
f. Take action against perpetrators of violence against women and children.

Through the regulation of protection for Women and Children, it is hoped that all parties can better implement the fulfillment of the rights of women and children and their protection so that it can be implemented more comprehensively, integrated and continuously by government elements, families and communities as well as other institutions related to efforts to protect Women and Children.

This Regional Regulation regulates efforts to implement protection for women and children, especially in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and children victims of violence in North Konawe Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Letter a
What is meant by "Non-physical Violence" is statements, body movements, or activities that are improper and lead to violence with the aim of demeaning or humiliating.

Letter b
What is meant by "Physical Violence" is an act that results in pain, illness, or serious injury.

Letter c
What is meant by "Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence" is any act that meets the elements of a criminal act as regulated in this regional regulation and other acts of sexual violence as regulated in Law.

Letter d
What is meant by "economic violence" is acts of exploitation, manipulation and control through economic means in the form of forcing victims to work in an exploitative manner, including prostitution, and neglect.

Letter e
What is meant by "social violence" is any action with social impact that threatens the physical, mental, or relationship integrity of a person or group, such actions are carried out by the subject or by society itself.

Letter f
What is meant by "domestic neglect" is a neglect of a person's obligations in their household where legally that person is responsible for life within the family scope.

Letter g
What is meant by "coercion or deprivation of liberty" is deprivation of liberty or deprivation of freedom physically or otherwise arbitrarily in violation of basic provisions of international law, Torture, Rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution,

Letter h
What is meant by "Threat of Certain Actions" is an effort or activity carried out by an individual or certain group that has the potential to endanger the safety of other individuals or groups.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH KONAWE REGENCY .1{