REGENT OF BUTON
PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2021
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND
CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BUTON,

Considering: a. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience acts of torture and violence and therefore must receive protection;
b. that to provide direction, foundation and legal certainty to all parties in the implementation of protection for women and children in Buton Regency, regulation is necessary;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

Noting: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 29 Year 1959 concerning Formation of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
- 2 -
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234), as has been amended by Law Number 15 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 183, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6398);
8. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);
- 3 -
11. Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 2 Year 2016 concerning Government Affairs Which Are the Authority of Buton Regency Government as an Autonomous Region (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2016 Number 112)
12. Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 6 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Buton Regency (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2016 Number 116), as has been amended by Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 4 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Buton Regency Number 6 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Buton Regency (Regional Gazette of Buton Regency Year 2019 Number 146);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BUTON REGENCY
And
THE REGENT OF BUTON

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Buton Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government organizer who leads the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the Autonomous Region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Buton.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in organizing government affairs which are the authority of the Region.
5. Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter referred to as Office of PPPA is the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Buton Regency.
- 4 -
6. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD-PPA is a regional technical implementation unit formed by the Regional Government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection and other problems.
7. Forum for Protection of Violence Victims hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner.
8. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
9. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 years, including a child in the womb.
10. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother or adoptive father and/or mother.
11. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
12. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
13. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
14. Companion is a person or representative of an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of violence victims.
15. Judicial body is general court which has the authority to receive, examine, and adjudicate, as well as resolve every case submitted to it, to realize law enforcement and justice.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, and psychological to victims.
18. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
- 5 -
19. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
20. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the territory of Buton Regency.
21. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, court, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
22. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
23. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
24. Prosecution is the action of the public prosecutor to transfer a case to the competent district court in matters and according to the manner regulated in the law with a request to be examined and decided by a judge in a court session.
25. Lawsuit is notification accompanied by a request by an interested party to a judge to act according to law against someone who has harmed him civilly.
26. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the accompaniment process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
27. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, rehabilitation, health, social rehabilitation, legal services up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
28. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a regency that has a Child Rights-based development system through integration of commitments and resources of government, community and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure fulfillment of children's rights.
- 6 -
29. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Buton Regency.

Article 2
Protection of women and child victims of violence is organized based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment.

Article 3
Protection of women and child victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. provide services to victims; and
c. empower women victims of violence.

Article 4
The scope of regulation of implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence in this regional regulation includes prevention, service, and empowerment efforts for violence victims in the Region.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE

Article 5
Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.
- 7 -

Article 6
Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to someone's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 7
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to someone.

Article 8
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 9
Neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in non-fulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that victims are under the control of that person.
- 8 -

Article 10
Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of someone by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or indecency activities.

Article 11
Other violence as referred to in Article 5 letter f is caused by:
a. threats of violence, including any unlawful act in the form of words, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict someone's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, including a situation where someone/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER IV
VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 12
Every victim has the right to:
a. be respected for their dignity as a human being;
b. receive health and psychological recovery;
c. determine their own decisions;
d. receive information;
e. receive special handling related to victim confidentiality;
f. receive restitution;
g. receive social rehabilitation;
h. receive complaint handling services;
- 9 -
i. receive facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
j. receive assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with statutory provisions.

Article 13
(1) Children as victims of violence in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Article 12, also receive special rights as follows:
a. right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. right to basic services;
c. right to equal protection;
d. right to be free from various stigma; and/or
e. right to receive freedom.
(2) In the case of a Child as a perpetrator of sexual violence or perpetrator of a criminal act, the child has the right to receive legal assistance and other assistance as well as receive special handling related to the confidentiality of their identity.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
Regional Government

Article 14
(1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible to implement victim protection efforts.
(2) Victim protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. formation of UPTD-PPA;
b. policy determination;
c. preparation of program and activity plans;
d. provision of facilities and infrastructure support;
e. supervision of service implementation for victims according to minimum service standards; and
f. budget allocation.
(3) In carrying out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government prepares a Regional Action Plan for victim protection.
(4) The Regional Action Plan for victim protection as referred to in paragraph (4) is stipulated by Regent Regulation.
- 10 -

Article 15
In carrying out the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 14, the Regent grants authority to the SKPD which has duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two
Community and Family

Article 16
In victim protection efforts, the community and family have the following obligations and responsibilities:
a. prevent violence against women and children;
b. report if violence occurs;
c. protect victims; and
d. provide emergency assistance.

CHAPTER VI
VICTIM PROTECTION

Part One
Prevention

Article 17
(1) Prevention of violence against women and children is carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the regional apparatus which has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. forming a network in violence prevention efforts;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. providing counseling/guidance;
d. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to protection of women and child victims of violence; and
e. providing critical education about women's and children's rights to the community.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 17 is implemented by Regional Apparatus and UPTD whose main duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. education;
- 11 -
b. health;
c. social;
d. labor;
e. women's empowerment and child protection; and
f. peace and order.
(2) Prevention of violence by Regional Apparatus and UPTD as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on technical guidelines in the Regional Action Plan.

Part Two
Integrated Services for Victims

Article 19
(1) In order to organize integrated services for Victims, the Regional Government forms UPTD-PPA.
(2) Implementation of services to victims by UPTD-PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to other service units in a networked manner.
(3) In implementing services to victims as referred to in paragraph (1), UPTD-PPA is under and responsible to the Head of PPPA Office and must coordinate with related fields.
(4) Further provisions regarding the formation and working procedures of UPTD-PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20
(1) Services to victims as referred to in Article 19, include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. accompaniment services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal assistance services;
f. psychological services; and
g. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by UPTD-PPA and may cooperate with related Regional Apparatus and the community.

Article 21
(1) Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 20 letter a are carried out by UPTD-PPA to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of:
a. interviews and observation of victim conditions;
b. initial identification or recording of victims;
- 12 -
c. consent for action to be taken;
d. recommendations for follow-up services;
e. coordination and referral to follow-up services and related parties; and
f. administration of the complaint process.

Article 22
Accompaniment services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (1) letter b, include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the medico-legal process;
c. accompanying victims during mediation, examination at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
f. coordinating with other companions; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 23
(1) Health services as referred to in Article 20 letter c are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects for both basic health services and referrals.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. examination and treatment;
c. follow-up examination of victims;
d. coordination of health rehabilitation implementation;
e. medico-legal examination including collection of evidence on victims and preparation of visum et repertum;
f. supporting and laboratory examination of evidence;
g. consultation with specialist doctors or making referrals; and
h. case reporting.

Article 24
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 letter d are services provided by companions in order to:
a. restore the traumatic condition of victims, including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation; and
b. provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in solving problems.
- 13 -
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 25
(1) Legal assistance services as referred to in Article 20 letter e are services provided to help victims go through the judicial process.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of:
a. legal consultation which includes information regarding victims' rights and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution and examination levels in court sessions and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced;
c. coordination with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process runs properly; and
d. case progress reporting.

Article 26
(1) Victim repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 20 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out after socialization related to women's rights as victims has been implemented.
(3) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. Provincial Regional Government;
b. other Regional Governments; and
c. related government and non-government agencies and institutions.

Article 27
(1) Implementation of services to victims as referred to in Article 20 is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not charged; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(2) Service organizers or managers are prohibited from collecting any fees from victims.
- 14 -

Part Three
Empowerment

Paragraph 1
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 28
Forms of empowerment of women victims of violence include:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 29
Job training as referred to in Article 28 letter a, includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 30
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 28 letter b, include:
a. entrepreneurship skills training;
b. facilitation of joint business group formation; and
c. business implementation assistance.

Article 31
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 28 letter c, includes:
a. facilities and infrastructure assistance; and
b. working capital assistance facilitation.

Paragraph 2
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Article 32
(1) The Regional Government and community are obliged to fulfill the rights of child victims of violence.
(2) Forms of fulfillment of the rights of child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include fulfillment of children's basic rights according to their needs.

Article 33
(1) Fulfillment of children's rights is implemented in an integrated and systematic manner from all sectors continuously through KLA development policies.
- 15 -
(2) KLA development policies as referred to in paragraph (1) contain:
a. KLA concept;
b. children's rights; and
c. KLA development approach.
(3) KLA development policies as referred to in paragraph (1) are directed at fulfillment of children's rights, including:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time utilization, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.
(4) KLA development stages as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preparation;
b. planning;
c. implementation;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.
(5) Further provisions regarding KLA development policies are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 34
(1) In order to ensure effectiveness of KLA policy implementation in the Region, a KLA Task Force is formed.
(2) The KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), has the main duties, namely:
a. coordinating implementation of KLA policies and development;
b. determining tasks of KLA Task Force members;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication, information and education of KLA policies;
d. collecting baseline data;
e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
f. conducting baseline data dissemination;
g. determining focus and program priorities in realizing KLA, which are adjusted to Regional potential;
h. preparing regional action plans and KLA work mechanisms for 5 (five) years; and
i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once (1) a year.
(3) Further provisions regarding procedures for appointment and dismissal of KLA Task Force membership are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 35
(1) To assist the smooth implementation of KLA Task Force duties, a secretariat is formed.
- 16 -
(2) The secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1), is tasked with providing technical and administrative support to the KLA Task Force.
(3) The KLA Task Force is domiciled in the Regional Apparatus which has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Four
Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 36
(1) In an effort to provide and organize handling services for victims, the Regional Government may form FPKK.
(2) FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize UPTD-PPA service handling;
b. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present violence reports.
(3) FPKK management and membership as referred to in paragraph (1) are stipulated by Regent Decree.
(4) FPKK membership as referred to in paragraph (3) is grouped in the following roles:
a. health role;
b. psychology role;
c. legal role;
d. social role; and
e. economic role.
(5) Further provisions regarding formation, main duties, and functions as well as FPKK membership as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
INFORMATION/REPORTING SYSTEM

Article 37
(1) The Regent implements an information/reporting system for protection of women and child victims of violence.
(2) The information/reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized in accordance with statutory provisions.
- 17 -

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 38
(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence in the region.
(2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a covers aspects related to planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b covers aspects related to planning, implementation, procedures, financing, quality, control and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c are carried out in accordance with statutory regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d are carried out periodically.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING

Article 39
Costs of implementing protection for children and women victims of violence, as well as implementation of KLA development policies are charged to:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and/or
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 40
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection for Victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. forming family partners at the village/sub-district level by the community;
b. forming women and child protection units within community organizations;
- 18 -
c. conducting socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to authorized agencies if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 41
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, UPTD-PPA and other women and child protection institutions that have been formed in carrying out their duties must adjust to this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 42
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Buton Regency.

Stipulated in Pasarwajo
on 23 February 2021
REGENT OF BUTON,

Seal/signature
LA BAKRY

Promulgated in Pasarwajo
on 23 February 2021
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BUTON REGENCY,

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUTON REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER 130 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI NUMBER: 6/30/2021
- 19 -
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUTON REGENCY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The state has an obligation to provide protection to citizens in accordance with the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. That women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence and therefore need to receive protection. Violence against Women and Children is a violation of human rights so their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination.

Violence is any unlawful act with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of someone's freedom.

Furthermore, violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against children that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens body integrity and degrades the dignity of children. The existence of Women and Child Victims of Violence has not received adequate services so minimum services are needed for violence victims.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Buton Regency so as to avoid violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, protection needs to be provided for women and child victims of violence, especially in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, financing, guidance and supervision of women and child victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.
- 20 -

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
What is meant by "counseling" is the provision of assistance by an expert or trained person in such a way that the victim's psychological understanding and ability increases in solving the problems faced.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
- 21 -
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
Sufficiently clear.

Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.

Letter b
What is meant by "medico-legal" is an examination conducted by a doctor for investigation purposes.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
Sufficiently clear.

Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
- 22 -

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUTON REGENCY NUMBER 5