REGENT OF MAMUJU
WEST SULAWESI PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAMUJU REGENCY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF MAMUJU,

Considering: a. that the fulfillment of constitutional rights and protection of women's human rights regarding empowerment and protection of women is one of the values contained in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution;
b. that women play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations, thus requiring a sense of security, obtaining guarantees of protection from acts of violence and discrimination, and need to be empowered to be able to actualize their potential optimally;
c. that based on Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as mentioned in the Appendix, the division of government affairs in the field of women's empowerment includes protection of women as one of the sub-affairs;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

Recalling: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 29 Year 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MAMUJU REGENCY and
REGENT OF MAMUJU

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this regional regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Mamuju Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Mamuju Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Mamuju.
4. Regional Apparatus hereinafter abbreviated as PD is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are regional authorities.
5. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social abilities, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
6. Protection of Women is all efforts made by families, government and others directed at women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
7. Discrimination against women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
8. Violence Against Women is any action that violates, hinders, eliminates enjoyment, and neglects women's human rights.
9. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service center in the effort to organize women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including human trafficking, established by the government or community-based.
10. Integrated Service Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UPT is technical service units in the region that carry out integrated service functions for women and children victims of crime and/or violence, including as an information center for organizing women and child protection.
11. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles, functions and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
12. Gender Mainstreaming, hereinafter abbreviated as PUG, is a strategy built to integrate gender into men and women.
13. Regional Action Plan for Gender Mainstreaming hereinafter referred to as RANDA PUG is a planning document as a guide in efforts to implement development strategies by integrating gender into a unified integral dimension of planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the region.
14. PUG Institutionalization is an institution that meets the prerequisite elements of PUG, which functions effectively in a sustainable system with agreed norms in fulfilling the human rights of women and men fairly to achieve equality between women and men in all fields of development and levels of government.
15. Community institution is an institution formed by members of Indonesian citizen society voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function, and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, consisting of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.
16. Victim is a person who experiences violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
18. Task force is a coordinating institution formed by the Mamuju Regency Government that coordinates policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children in Mamuju Regency.

CHAPTER II
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 2

(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible for the empowerment and Protection of Women.
(2) Efforts for Empowerment and Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services; and
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) Efforts for Empowerment and Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Article 3

(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue offspring;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery or enslavement;
g. be free from threats;
h. obtain protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
i. obtain welfare and a decent life;
j. participate in the political, economic, socio-cultural fields;
k. perform legal acts; and
l. freely choose a partner in marriage.
(2) Every wife during the marriage bond has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband regarding all matters relating to their married life, relations with their children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities with her former husband regarding all matters relating to children with due regard to the best interests of the child.

CHAPTER IV
QUALITY OF LIFE OF WOMEN

Part One
General

Article 4

(1) To improve the quality of life of women, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. respecting and guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with human dignity;
b. institutionalization of PUG in Regional Government institutions;
c. Women's Empowerment;
d. strengthening and developing service provider institutions for Women's Empowerment in the Region.
(2) Efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by PD that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two
Institutionalization of PUG in Regional Government Institutions

Article 5

(1) The Regent is responsible for the implementation of PUG.
(2) The responsibility of the Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to the Vice Regent.

Article 6

The coordinator of PUG implementation in the region is the PD that handles government affairs in the field of women and child empowerment.

Article 7

(1) In an effort to accelerate the institutionalization of PUG as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (1) letter b, a PUG working group is formed.
(2) Members of the PUG working group are all heads/leaders of PD.
(3) The Regent establishes:
a. the head of PD that administers government affairs in the field of regional development planning as chairman of the PUG working group; and
b. the head of PD that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection as head of the PUG working group secretariat.
(4) The formation of the PUG working group as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 8

Provisions regarding PUG as referred to in Articles 6 through 8 are regulated by Regional Regulation.

Part Three
Women's Empowerment

Article 9

Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter c is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. politics;
b. law;
c. socio-culture; and
d. economy.

Paragraph 1
Political Field

Article 10

(1) Women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 9 letter a includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) The Regional Government provides guarantees to women to vote and/or be elected in:
a. general elections;
b. regional head elections;
c. village head elections; and/or
d. other political office elections.
based on equal rights.
(4) Equal rights as referred to in paragraph (3) are implemented through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable laws and regulations.
(5) The Regional Government provides opportunities for women to be appointed as regional government officials and occupy strategic positions in regional government; and
(6) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties are responsible for providing political education for women.

Paragraph 2
Legal Field

Article 11

(1) Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 9 letter b includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services;
b. mapping and review of gender-biased policies; and
c. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Paragraph 3
Social Field

Article 12

Women's empowerment in the social field is implemented through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education according to potential to improve social status;
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, especially in the field of reproductive health;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and develop science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Paragraph 4
Economic Field

Article 13

Women's empowerment in the economic field is implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. ease in obtaining employment;
c. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
e. facilitation and capital assistance;
f. ease of access to information and technology; and
g. facilitation of marketing network development.

Part Four
Strengthening and Development of Women's Empowerment Service Provider Institutions

Article 14

(1) Strengthening and development of women's empowerment service provider institutions is implemented by PD that handles government affairs in the field of women's empowerment.
(2) Strengthening and development of women's empowerment service provider institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. socialization;
b. coordination;
c. communication, information and education;
d. training; and
e. increasing community member participation.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 15

Prevention of violence against women is the responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. educational institutions;
c. religious institutions;
d. health service provider institutions;
e. professional institutions;
f. business world;
g. service institutions;
h. Islamic boarding schools;
i. youth organizations;
j. legal aid organizations;
k. communities; and
l. media.

Article 16

(1) Prevention of violence against women is intended to:
a. create a safe environment for women; and
b. reduce vulnerability to violence, exploitation and discrimination against vulnerable women groups.
(2) Vulnerable women groups as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b are as follows:
a. women in disaster and social conflict situations;
b. women with disabilities;
c. women with HIV/AIDS;
d. migrant women workers;
e. girls;
f. women heads of households;
g. domestic women workers;
h. home-based women workers;
i. elderly women;
j. informal women workers;
k. women in situations of intolerance; and
l. other vulnerable women groups.

Article 17

(1) Prevention of violence against women is carried out in the following fields:
a. education;
b. health;
c. religion;
d. security;
e. justice;
f. public works and spatial planning;
g. public housing and residential areas;
h. social;
i. labor;
j. women's empowerment and child protection;
k. land;
l. environment;
m. population administration and civil registration;
n. population control and family planning;
o. transportation;
p. communication and informatics;
q. cooperatives, small and medium enterprises;
r. youth and sports;
s. culture;
t. tourism;
u. trade and industry; and
v. other related fields.
(2) Prevention of violence against women as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the following forms:
a. developing media for communication, information, education and public campaigns through media;
b. developing educational materials and curricula;
c. developing safe transportation systems and public spaces;
d. building early detection systems, security and integrated complaint services in industrial areas, companies, residential environments, educational environments, Islamic boarding schools and other public spaces;
e. providing consultation services for families, prospective brides, students, santri, youth, university students and vulnerable groups;
f. encouraging behavioral change of parents and society;
g. developing policies related to regencies/cities, villages, schools, Islamic boarding schools, and universities that are safe and friendly for women and integrated with regional spatial planning policies;
h. forming and developing cadres, communities, and groups from among youth, students, santri, university students, journalists, social media influencers, educators, and religious leaders for prevention;
i. conducting education and advocacy to owners, managers and/or users of social media;
j. developing protection systems and special support for vulnerable women groups;
k. conducting awareness for perpetrators;
l. conducting cooperation between those responsible for preventing violence against women; and
m. conducting socialization of laws and regulations.
(3) Fields and forms of prevention of violence against women as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus that handle related affairs.

Article 18

Prevention of violence against women is carried out in an integrated and integrated manner between those responsible for preventing violence against women and Regional Apparatus that handle affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 19

Further provisions regarding prevention of violence against women as referred to in Articles 16, 17 and 18 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Provision of Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 20

(1) In implementing protection services for women, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A as a service network for women victims of violence.
(2) The establishment of P2TP2A is intended so that women victims of violence receive comprehensive, integrated, quality, inclusive and sustainable services.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the following tasks:
a. provide services to women victims of violence in accordance with standard operating procedures;
b. coordinate prevention, services and referrals between government-owned service institutions, community-owned service institutions, professional organizations, law enforcement agencies and other related institutions;
c. conduct case service data collection;
d. provide various information needed by victims, victims' families and the community;
e. prevent recurrence of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women;
f. conduct monitoring and evaluation of victim services; and
g. provide capacity building, guidance and assistance related to victim services.

Article 21

P2TP2A as referred to in Article 20 consists of the following elements:
a. related regional apparatus;
b. government and/or private hospitals;
c. police;
d. prosecutor's office;
e. courts;
f. regional office of the ministry of law and human rights;
g. regional office of the ministry of religion;
h. professional organizations;
i. religious organizations;
j. community social organizations;
k. government-owned service institutions and community-owned service institutions;
l. legal aid organizations;
m. women's organizations;
n. universities; and
o. broadcasting media and/or mass media.

Article 22

Further provisions regarding the establishment and structure of P2TP2A as referred to in Articles 20 and 21 are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 23

(1) Services are implemented to fulfill the rights of women victims of violence and are carried out with the following principles:
a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. confidentiality;
d. empathy;
e. inclusion;
f. empowerment;
g. victim-based decisions;
h. honesty;
i. professionalism;
j. integration; and
k. sustainability.
(2) Services to women victims of violence must consider special conditions and needs based on the vulnerability experienced by women as referred to in Article 20.

Article 24

(1) Forms of service as referred to in Article 23 include:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. legal aid and enforcement services; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) Services for women victims of violence are implemented quickly, free of charge, comprehensively, quality and integrated with services provided by government agencies, communities, educational institutions, religious institutions, professional institutions, Islamic boarding schools, business world through an integrated service system.

Article 25

(1) Complaint services as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter a consist of:
a. receiving complaints;
b. special complaints;
c. providing information;
d. outreach;
e. crisis or emergency services;
f. assessment; and
g. other forms of complaint services needed by victims.
(2) Complaint services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by trained officers in special rooms that are safe and comfortable.
(3) Further provisions regarding complaint services are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 26

(1) Health services as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter b are implemented with the following activities:
a. examination and treatment of physical and mental health;
b. psychological examination and recovery;
c. pregnancy, childbirth, and reproductive health services;
d. medical resume and psychological examination results;
e. visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum;
f. Deoxyribonucleic Acid test; and
g. other forms of health services needed by victims.
(2) Health services for women victims are carried out by trained officers in special rooms that are safe and comfortable.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through special mechanisms for hospital-based integrated services and are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus that handle health affairs.
(4) Further provisions regarding health services are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 27

(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter c are implemented with the following activities:
a. counseling;
b. assistance;
c. linguists and/or translators;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. shelter and/or safe house;
f. temporary shelter;
g. strengthening based on family and/or group support;
h. mobility support for victims with disabilities;
i. provision of special social assistance for victims; and
j. other forms of social rehabilitation services needed by victims.
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) letters a, b, c, d, f, g, h, and i are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus that handle affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) letters e and j are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus that handle social affairs and affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) Further provisions regarding social rehabilitation services are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 28

(1) Legal aid and enforcement services as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter d are implemented in an integrated manner with related parties through the following activities:
a. legal consultation;
b. legal empowerment;
c. mediation;
d. restorative justice;
e. legal aid;
f. expert witnesses;
g. restitution;
h. security protection; and
i. other forms of legal aid and enforcement services needed by victims.
(2) In implementing the integration of legal aid and enforcement services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent is responsible for coordinating cooperation between:
a. regional apparatus;
b. service institutions;
c. legal aid organizations;
d. advocate professional organizations with law enforcement agencies; and
e. other related vertical agencies.
through integration of the recovery system into the criminal justice system.
(3) Further provisions regarding legal aid and enforcement services are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 29

(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) letter e are implemented with the following activities:
a. repatriation and/or pick-up of victims;
b. provision of population documents or identity;
c. alternative families;
d. scholarships and educational support facilities;
e. non-formal education;
f. skills training and economic business;
g. financial assistance and business capital;
h. economic business assistance;
i. housing assistance;
j. food and/or nutrition assistance for victims and their families;
k. provision of social protection programs and poverty alleviation programs;
l. other forms of repatriation and social reintegration services needed by victims.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are provided to victims, families and people whose lives depend on victims with the aim that victims have readiness and ability to live life in society.
(3) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner with the Integrated Referral Service System for social protection and poverty alleviation and Child Social Welfare Center.
(4) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are the responsibility of Regional Apparatus that handle:
a. social affairs;
b. population administration and civil registration affairs;
c. labor affairs;
d. cooperatives, small and medium enterprises affairs;
e. education affairs;
f. health affairs;
g. public works and spatial planning affairs;
h. land affairs, women's empowerment and child protection affairs; and
i. other related affairs.
(5) Further provisions regarding repatriation and social reintegration services are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Strengthening and Development of Women's Protection Service Provider Institutions

Article 30

(1) Strengthening of women's protection service provider institutions through the establishment of citizen shelters in every sub-district and village;
(2) Human resource development for women's protection service provider institutions to shelter members who have been formed through training.

CHAPTER VI
FAMILY QUALITY

Article 31

(1) To improve family quality, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. improving family quality in realizing gender equality and children's rights;
b. strengthening and developing service provider institutions for improving family quality in realizing gender equality; and
c. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and children's rights.
(2) Efforts to improve family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by PD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Part One
Improving Family Quality in Realizing Gender Equality

Article 32

The Regional Government makes efforts to improve family quality in realizing gender equality by:
a. guidance;
b. counseling;
c. supervision;
d. facilitation of family development implementation; and
e. improving the health quality of pregnant and nursing mothers.

Article 33

Guidance as referred to in Article 32 letter a includes:
a. providing access to information;
b. education; and
c. counseling.
about family life in family development programs.

Article 34

Counseling as referred to in Article 32 letter b includes:
a. providing protection and assistance to develop oneself through improving family abilities and skills;
b. conducting outreach to improve women's quality of life;
c. conducting outreach to improve gender equality in family and community life;
d. increasing access and opportunities to receive information and economic resources through efforts to increase prosperous family income and increase women's economic productivity; and
e. making efforts to empower women heads of households.

Article 35

Supervision as referred to in Article 32 letter c is conducting evaluation and monitoring of improving family abilities and skills.

Article 36

Provision of services for families in realizing gender equality includes:
a. communication, information and education;
b. contraceptive tools and drugs; and
c. recording and reporting of family planning services at adequate health service facilities and infrastructure, breastfeeding corners in every public facility.

Part Two
Provision of Services for Families in Realizing Gender Equality

Article 37

(1) In order to improve family quality, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. making efforts to improve family quality to realize gender equality and children's rights;
b. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and children's rights; and
c. strengthening and developing service provision institutions for improving family quality.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by PD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Part Three
Strengthening and Development of Service Provider Institutions for Improving Family Quality in Realizing Gender Equality

Article 38

(1) The Regional Government makes efforts to strengthen and develop service provider institutions including:
a. guidance;
b. counseling;
c. supervision;
d. facilitation of family development implementation; and
e. improving the health quality of pregnant and nursing mothers.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 39

(1) The community participates in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of:
a. providing outreach regarding women's rights;
b. providing skills training to support the community's economy;
c. forming community social institutions to help victims of violence;
d. providing information and/or reporting violence against women to law enforcement or authorities; and/or
e. participating in handling acts of violence against women.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 40

(1) The Regent implements guidance and supervision of women's empowerment and protection in the Region.
(2) In implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent assigns Regional Apparatus that handle affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Regional Apparatus that handle affairs of women's empowerment and child protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is the coordinator of implementation of women's empowerment and protection in the Region.

Article 41

(1) Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 40 are implemented with the following activities:
a. routine coordination;
b. preparation of modules and work guidelines;
c. technical guidance and training;
d. preparation of standard operating procedures;
e. providing facilities and mechanisms for managing complaints or grievances related to services for women victims from the community;
f. service access testing;
g. mapping and studies;
h. resolution of inter-institutional disputes;
i. monitoring and evaluation; and
j. reporting.
(2) Guidance and supervision are implemented at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year.
(3) Results of implementation of guidance and supervision are reported to the Regent.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING

Article 42

Funding for implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection in the Region is sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. other legal and non-binding funding sources.

CHAPTER X
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 43

At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all provisions of regional laws and regulations related to the Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection that have existed so far, remain in force as long as they do not conflict with the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 44

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation are stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 45

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Mamuju Regency.

Stipulated in Mamuju
on date, December 8, 2023

REGENT OF MAMUJU,

seal/signature

SITTI SUTINAH SUHARDI

Promulgated in Mamuju
on December 8, 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MAMUJU REGENCY,

seal/signature

SUAIB

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAMUJU REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 9
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAMUJU REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 32


ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MAMUJU REGENCY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION

Empowerment and Protection of women currently needs to receive serious attention from all parties, including attention from the Regional Government, related to the phenomenon in social community life that often makes them victims of violence and exploitation, they are often positioned as economic objects and are often marginalized and/or excluded in social interaction.

In Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (UU KDRT), it is regulated that the state guarantees to prevent the occurrence of domestic violence, prosecute perpetrators of domestic violence, and protect victims of domestic violence. Victims of domestic violence, who are mostly women and children, must receive protection to avoid and be free from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity. Therefore, the Regional Government makes regulations related to Women's Empowerment and Protection.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
This Article contains definitions or contains general definitions related to the Regional Regulation of Mamuju Regency concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection.

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently Clear

Article 5
Sufficiently Clear

Article 6
Sufficiently Clear

Article 7
Sufficiently Clear

Article 8
Sufficiently Clear

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear

Article 10
Sufficiently Clear

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear

Article 13
Sufficiently Clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently Clear

Article 36
Sufficiently Clear

Article 37
Sufficiently Clear

Article 38
Sufficiently Clear

Article 39
Sufficiently Clear

Article 40
Sufficiently Clear

Article 41
Sufficiently Clear

Article 42
Sufficiently Clear

Article 43
Sufficiently Clear

Article 44
Sufficiently Clear

Article 45
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MAMUJU REGENCY NUMBER 7