- 1 -

REGENT OF BULUKUMBA
SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY NUMBER 3 OF 2024
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BULUKUMBA,
Considering:
a. that as citizens of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, women and children have the right to receive protection, security and freedom from all forms of violence or inhumane treatment that is contrary to the values of Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that in its development there are still many women and children who need to receive protection from various forms of violence, mistreatment, exploitation, and discrimination so that strategic efforts are needed to provide protection for women and children;
c. that based on Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government in implementing concurrent governmental affairs, the Regency Government has the authority in implementing governmental affairs in the field of protection of women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;
Considering: 1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 29 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as most recently amended by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Law Number 12 of 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
- 2 -
5. Law Number 23 of 2022 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606)
6. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2023 concerning Implementation of Concurrent Governmental Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 175);
With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY
And
REGENT OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY
HAS DECIDED:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Bulukumba Regency.
2. Government is a body or organization that exercises governmental power of a state. The Government has the duty to administer governmental affairs, from the central, provincial, regency, municipal, sub-district, village, to village levels.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government organizer who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is an organization/institution in regional government that is responsible to the Regent in the context of government administration consisting of regional secretary, regional agencies and regional technical institutions, sub-districts, villages and civil service police units according to regional needs.
5. Agency is a Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in carrying out Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in Bulukumba Regency.
6. Village Government is the administration of governmental affairs and local community interests in the governmental system of the unitary state of the Republic of Indonesia.
7. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of regional government that is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD, and established by Regional Regulation.
8. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter referred to as APBDes is the annual financial plan of village government that is discussed and approved jointly by the Village Head and Village Representative Body established through Village Regulation.
- 3 -
9. Woman is a person who has female genitalia who can menstruate and become pregnant or has obtained legal status as a woman.
10. Implementation of Protection for Women and Children is a directed, integrated, and sustainable effort carried out by the Central Government, Regional Government, Village Government, and society to fulfill the rights of women and children as citizens within the scope of this Regional Regulation.
11. Protection of Women is all efforts to protect and provide security to women and fulfill their rights through consistent, structured, and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
12. Protection of Women and Children is an effort to handle, protect and fulfill the rights of women and children from all forms of violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
13. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old, including children still in the womb.
14. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Violence Against Children is any act against a child that results in physical, mental, sexual suffering or misery, and or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
16. Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or misery to women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, and arbitrary deprivation of liberty whether occurring in the private or public sphere.
17. Victim is a person who experiences physical suffering, women and children who experience violence and/or mental threats and or economic loss caused by an act of violence.
18. Victim of Violence is a person who experiences psychological, mental, physical, sexual, economic, and/or social suffering caused by criminal acts of violence.
19. Prevention of Violence is any action or effort made to eliminate various factors that cause acts of violence against women and children.
20. Society is individual Indonesian citizens, community groups, and/or Mass Organizations.
21. Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPT PPA is a technical operational implementation unit in a work unit that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, which functions as an integrated service provider for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, and other problems.
22. Child-Friendly Regency is a regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and resources of government, society and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
- 4 -
23. Assistance for Victims of Violence is an effort or process to accompany victims of violence in accessing rights to handling, protection, and recovery.
24. Rapid Reaction Team hereinafter abbreviated as TRC is a team formed by the agency in charge of Women's Empowerment and Children that is tasked with assisting UPT PPA in conducting outreach and/or assistance to accelerate the process of handling cases of violence against women and children.
25. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children is a coordinative institution formed by the Bulukumba Regency Government that coordinates policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children in Bulukumba Regency.
26. Vulnerable Groups are any person or community group entitled to receive special treatment and protection related to their specificity. Vulnerable groups as referred to in this regulation consist of women and children in conflict with the law, persons with disabilities, Indonesian migrant workers, the elderly and/or indigenous peoples of ammatoa Kajang.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Implementation of Protection for Women and Children is organized based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children;
e. non-discrimination; and
f. special treatment for vulnerable groups.
Article 3
Implementation of Protection for Women and children aims to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide security for women and children;
d. provide services to women victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. provide services to children both as victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence;
f. facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize equal and just households; and
g. prioritize services and protection for Vulnerable Groups.
CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 4
The Scope of implementation of Protection for Women and Children includes:
a. prevention of violence;
b. provision of service institutions;
c. institutional strengthening;
- 5 -
d. obligations and responsibilities;
e. cooperation;
f. community participation; and
g. funding.
CHAPTER IV
PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
(1) Prevention of violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a is implemented through:
a. planning and implementation of policies, programs, and activities;
b. provision of education; and
c. increasing community participation.
(2) Prevention of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented by the Regional Government in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
(3) Planning and Implementation of policies, programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a namely:
a. integrating women's and children's protection issues into Regional Apparatus policies, programs and activities; and
b. making women's and children's protection issues one of the regional development priorities.
(4) Provision of education as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b namely:
a. providing information, guidance and/or counseling;
b. providing accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. creating a friendly and safe work environment atmosphere for women; and
d. building and providing an easily accessible information system;
(5) Increasing Community participation through involvement of parties as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, namely:
a. building and increasing community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women and children;
b. making regional regulations and encouraging Village Government to make Village Regulations related to protection of women and children; and
c. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, private sector/business world, universities, mass media, and non-governmental organizations as well as community institutions that work and care about women and children.
CHAPTER V
PROVISION OF SERVICE INSTITUTIONS
Article 6
(1) In order to provide protection services to women and children, the Regional Government establishes UPT PPA.
(2) UPT PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) carries out the following service functions:
a. public complaints;
b. victim outreach;
c. case management;
d. temporary shelter;
e. mediation; and
f. victim assistance.
- 6 -
(3) In carrying out service functions as referred to in paragraph (2) UPT PPA requires support:
a. infrastructure facilities and infrastructure;
b. sufficient number of management personnel;
c. competent human resources;
d. budget; and
e. safe house facilities.
(4) Further provisions regarding the organization and work procedures of UPT PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.
Article 7
(1) Victim assistance as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (2) letter f includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the victim's condition.
(2) Victim assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by UPT PPA.
(3) Victim assistance is implemented in accordance with statutory provisions.
Article 8
Assistants have the duties to:
a. provide sufficient information to victims about their rights;
b. provide psychosocial services to victims so that victims feel safe and comfortable;
c. accompany victims during examination and medical recovery processes;
d. accompany victims during medicolegal processes;
e. accompany victims during examination processes at police, prosecutor's office and court;
f. accompany victims while in safe houses;
g. monitor the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at police, prosecutor's office and court;
h. maintain privacy and confidentiality of victim identity from all parties who have no interest, including reporting by mass media;
i. coordinate with other assistants; and
j. provide continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
Article 9
(1) In carrying out the service functions of UPT PPA as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (2) UPT PPA uses a Case Management approach.
(2) The Case Management approach as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:
a. identification;
b. assessment;
c. intervention planning;
d. intervention implementation;
e. monitoring and evaluation;
f. follow-up; and
g. case termination.
(3) Procedures for implementing the case management approach as referred to in paragraph (2) are established by standard operating procedures.
Article 10
(1) In order to maximize the function and role of UPT PPA, the agency in charge of Women's Empowerment and Children as the parent of UPT PPA may form a TRC established through a Regent's decree.
- 7 -
(2) TRC membership as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:
a. paralegals;
b. women's and children's activists;
c. health workers;
d. mass media; and/or
e. observers of vulnerable groups.
(3) Requirements for TRC members are:
a. Indonesian citizens as evidenced by population identity;
b. have a good perspective on women and children;
c. physically and mentally healthy; and
d. have good communication skills, preferably those who can use sign language.
(4) TRC as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duties and functions of conducting outreach and victim assistance.
(5) TRC reports the results of task implementation to the head of the Agency in charge of women and children through the head of UPT PPA.
Article 11
(1) The Regional Government establishes a Task Force for Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Task Force membership as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social welfare;
b. health;
c. education;
d. employment;
e. population and civil registration;
f. law;
g. women's empowerment and child protection;
h. cooperatives and micro enterprises;
i. community empowerment;
j. religious affairs;
k. planning and research;
l. disaster and emergency; and
m. peace and order.
(3) The Task Force for Protection of Women and Children is established in a Regent's Decree.
Article 12
(1) The Task Force for Protection of Women and Children has the duties to:
a. promote Protection of Women and Children to the community continuously;
b. carry out socialization and advocacy of Protection of Women and Children to government officials and the community;
c. prepare regional action plans for Protection of Women and Children;
d. prepare annual work programs;
e. encourage the realization of planning and budgeting that supports Protection of Women and children; and
f. formulate regent policy recommendations.
(2) The Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) is responsible to the Regent.
- 8 -
Article 13
Service delivery at Women and children protection service institutions is carried out with the principles of:
a. free of charge;
b. fast;
c. safe;
d. empathy;
e. non-discrimination;
f. easily accessible; and
g. confidentiality.
CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING
Article 14
In order to maximize the function and role of service officers, the following are needed:
a. increasing the number and capacity of human resources of service officers;
b. development of communication, information, and education systems about women's and children's protection services;
c. coordination system between UPT PPA and other service institutions at the Regional level;
d. integrated case data system;
e. case handling and or assistance system and/or mechanism; and
f. improvement of service facilities and infrastructure.
CHAPTER VII
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 15
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Village Government;
c. private sector;
d. community institutions and civil society organizations; and
e. family, parents or guardians.
Part One
Regional Government
Article 16
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 15 letter a include:
a. establishing policies for protection of women and children;
b. implementing policies for protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. cooperating with all parties in implementing protection of women and children;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation of protection of women and children;
e. allocating budget for implementation of protection of women and children, according to regional financial capacity;
f. encouraging the role of private sector and community institutions to be involved in supporting protection of women and children;
- 9 -
g. encouraging the emergence of local institutions at the village and/or village level to provide protection for women and children; and
h. encouraging the emergence of regulations at the village level that regulate protection of women and children;
i. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children; and
j. realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) In addition to the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has obligations and responsibilities to provide special protection to Children.
(3) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) is given to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually including child marriage;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome;
h. children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorism networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children victims of mistreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(4) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in this Article are implemented by Regional Apparatus or designated Officials.
Article 17
(1) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 16, the Regent establishes programs and activities for protection of women and children in the form of regional action plans as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing protection for women and children.
(2) The regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (1), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
Part Two
Village Government
Article 18
The obligations and responsibilities of Village Government as referred to in Article 15 letter b include:
a. establishing policies for protection of women and children at the village level;
b. implementing policies for protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. cooperating with all parties in implementing protection of women and children;
- 10 -
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation of protection of women and children;
e. allocating budget for implementation of protection of women and children, according to village financial capacity;
f. involving community institutions at the village level in supporting protection of women and children;
g. creating institutions at the village level to provide protection for women and children;
h. preparing regulations at the village level that regulate protection of women and children; and
i. realizing women-friendly and child-caring villages.
Part Three
Private Sector
Article 19
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the private sector as referred to in Article 15 letter c are organized in the form of private sector participation.
(2) The role of the private sector as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:
a. providing protection for women and children through corporate social and environmental responsibility programs;
b. providing support to government, community institutions, civil society organizations and society in the context of protection for women and children; and
c. actively participating in business organizations that have commitment to protection of women and children.
Part Four
Community Institutions and civil society organizations
Article 20
The obligations and responsibilities of Community Institutions and Civil Society Organizations as referred to in Article 15 letter d include:
a. providing information and/or reporting every occurrence of vulnerability risk and violence that is known;
b. providing protection for women and children;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. accompanying victims, providing shelters and/or safe houses initiated by community institutions or civil society organizations; and
e. assisting in the repatriation, social rehabilitation and social reintegration process.
Part Five
Family, Parents or Guardians
Article 21
The obligations and responsibilities of family, parents or guardians as referred to in Article 15 letter e include:
a. caring for, maintaining, educating, and protecting Children;
b. developing Children according to their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. preventing marriage at Child age; and
d. providing character education and instilling moral values in Children
- 11 -
CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION
Article 22
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children, cooperation can be carried out with:
a. central government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions;
e. society;
f. private sector;
g. universities; and
h. mass media.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. integration of data and information;
b. recovery of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration;
d. funding;
e. temporary shelter for victims;
f. referral assistance;
g. provision of sign language for disabilities;
h. provision of evidence and witnesses; and
i. followed up in accordance with applicable law.
Article 23
(1) The Regional Government conducts partnerships with the business world in protecting women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. providing financial support in prevention and handling of cases of violence against Women and children;
b. providing employment opportunities for women victims of violence; and
c. education and training for women and children victims of violence.
Article 24
Cooperation and partnerships as referred to in Article 22 and Article 23 are set forth in the form of Cooperation or partnership agreements in accordance with statutory provisions.
CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 25
(1) The community can participate actively in providing protection for women and children.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. conducting prevention and reporting cases of violence against women and children that occur in their residential environment;
b. providing emergency assistance if there is violence against women and children;
- 12 -
c. initiating the formation of women's and children's protection institutions at the regional, sub-district, village and village levels;
d. participating in protection of women and children through existing service institutions; and/or
e. assisting in the repatriation, social rehabilitation, and social reintegration process.
CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 26
Financing for implementation of protection of women and children is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with statutory provisions.
Article 27
(1) Funding for implementation of protection for women and children includes:
a. prevention of violence against women and children;
b. service institutions including service facilities and infrastructure;
c. medical services, which include doctor examinations, action costs, hospital costs, medication costs and medical support costs;
d. medicolegal services, which include examinations for visum et repertum, visum et repertum psychiatrikum, and Deoxyribonucleic Acid tests;
e. psychosocial services, consisting of counseling and psychological therapy, safe houses and safe house management;
f. legal services and assistance including assistance costs at police, prosecutor's office, and court;
g. operational service institutions, including outreach transportation, assistance transportation, and fulfillment of victim needs while at service institutions; and
h. service institution officers, including honorarium and capacity building.
(2) Management of funding as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with statutory provisions.
CHAPTER X
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 28
(1) Designated officials, as referred to in Article 16 paragraph (4) if they do not carry out obligations and responsibilities are subject to actions and/or administrative sanctions.
(2) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are in the form of:
a. oral reprimand;
b. written reprimand; and
c. other administrative sanctions in accordance with statutory provisions.
(3) Further provisions regarding the imposition of administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in a regent regulation.
- 13 -
CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bulukumba Regency.
Established in Bulukumba
on July 5, 2024
REGENT OF BULUKUMBA,
signed
MUCHTAR ALI YUSUF
Promulgated in Bulukumba
on July 5, 2024
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY,
signed
MUH. ALI SALENG
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY OF 2024 NUMBER 3
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE: B.HK.03.024.24.
- 14 -
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY
NUMBER 3 OF 2024
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia has mandated to provide protection for women and children, as well as provide equal rights for women to participate in contributing to various aspects of development. This is also reaffirmed in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government regarding the division of governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection. In line with this, Regional Government which has the principle of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy, also strives to realize the ideals contained in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
Based on this, the Regional Government of Bulukumba Regency has the desire to realize commitment in order to provide protection for women and children so that their rights can be fulfilled and realize equality and gender justice in all aspects in accordance with human dignity and dignity, as well as optimize women's empowerment, child protection, and gender mainstreaming in the region so that efforts need to be made involving all parties in various aspects of development.
In an effort to realize this commitment, the Regional Government of Bulukumba Regency establishes a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children that regulates clearly, firmly, and comprehensively while also being proof of the seriousness of the commitment of the Bulukumba Regency Government in protecting the rights of women and Children as well as providing a legal umbrella in fighting for their rights.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by the principle of humanity is the principle of humanity emphasizes respect and protection for the basic rights of every individual regardless of gender, age, or social status. This means that women and children have the same right to live without violence and treatment that degrades human dignity.
- 15 -
Letter b
What is meant by the principle of justice and gender equality is this principle emphasizes the need to address gender inequality which is often the root cause of acts of violence against women and children. Protection must ensure that women and children receive fair and equal treatment in the legal system and society without discrimination based on gender.
Letter c
What is meant by the principle of protection is proactive and preventive protection against acts of violence. This protection must be carried out through an approach that includes prevention, handling, rehabilitation, and support for victims and potential perpetrators so that violence does not occur again.
Letter d
What is meant by the principle of best interests for women and children is this principle emphasizes the interests and best rights of women and children as the top priority. Protection actions and policies must always prioritize their welfare and interests, including listening to their views and aspirations in the decision-making process.
Letter e
What is meant by the principle of non-discrimination is this principle affirms that protection must be carried out without discrimination based on gender, age, ethnic background, religion, or social status. Every individual has the same right to be protected from acts of violence, without exception
Letter f
What is meant by the principle of special treatment for vulnerable groups is treatment of a group of people who experience vulnerability or physical and non-physical limitations such as women, children, disabilities, pregnant women, elderly, minority groups, people with mental disorders and poor people.
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
- 16 -
Paragraph (3)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
Sufficiently clear.
Letter e
What is meant by "safe house facilitation" is a place that provides protection, assistance, and services for women and children who are victims of violence or need help. This house functions as a temporary, safe and confidential residence, where victims can receive psychological, legal, and social support for their recovery.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Letter a
What is meant by "Paralegal" is any person originating from the community, society, or Legal Aid Provider who has attended Paralegal training as evidenced by a certificate of having attended Paralegal training, does not work as an advocate, and does not independently accompany Legal Aid Recipients in court.
Letter b
What is meant by "women's and children's activists" is a person who works actively to promote the fulfillment of rights and protection of women and children, can come from women's and/or children's organizations.
- 17 -
Letter c
What is meant by "Health Workers" is any person who devotes themselves in the health field and has knowledge and/or skills through education in the health field which for certain types requires authority to carry out health efforts.
Letter d
What is meant by "observers of vulnerable groups" is a person who pays attention to any person or community group entitled to receive special treatment and protection related to their specificity who can come from communities or organizations observing vulnerable groups. Vulnerable groups as referred to in this regulation consist of women and children in conflict with the law, persons with disabilities, Indonesian migrant workers, the elderly and/or indigenous peoples of ammatoa Kajang.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
Article 16
Sufficiently clear.
Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.
Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
- 18 -
Article 20
Sufficiently clear.
Article 21
Sufficiently clear.
Article 22
Sufficiently clear.
Article 23
Sufficiently clear.
Article 24
Sufficiently clear.
Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.
Article 27
Sufficiently clear.
Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
Article 29
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULUKUMBA REGENCY NUMBER 3