MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI
WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI,

Considering: a. that in order to guarantee and protect the rights of women and children so they can participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence, discrimination and violations, protection efforts need to be undertaken;

b. that in order for protection efforts toward women and children to obtain optimal results, there needs to be concrete action from the regional government and community participation;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 9 Year 1956 concerning Formation of Large City Autonomous Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 20);

3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);

5. Law Number 8 Year 1981 concerning Criminal Procedure Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);

6. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

9. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

10. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

12. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 11, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

14. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Improving Women's Quality of Life;

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 15 Year 2010 concerning General Guidelines for Handling Children in Conflict with the Law;

20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Handling of Child Victims of Violence;

21. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);

22. Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 6 Year 2000 concerning Civil Servant Investigators (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2000 Number 7);

23. Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 11 Year 2008 concerning Formation of Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions of Bukittinggi City (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2008 Number 11), as amended by Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 9 Year 2013 (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2013 Number 9).

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
And
THE MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Bukittinggi City.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the regional government and regional people's representative council according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Bukittinggi.
5. Regional People's Representative Council of Bukittinggi City hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration.
6. Regional Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is one that has authority in the field of women's empowerment and family planning.
7. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
8. Customs are eternal behavioral patterns passed down from one generation to the next generation as heritage so that they are strongly integrated with community behavior patterns.
9. Non-Governmental Organization hereinafter abbreviated as LSM is an organization/institution formed by citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily of their own will and interested in and engaged in the field of social welfare business as a manifestation of community participation in improving the standard of living and welfare of the community that emphasizes voluntary service.
10. Social Organization is an institution/foundation/social association formed by the community whether legally incorporated or not legally incorporated that functions as a means of community participation in carrying out social welfare business.
11. Empowerment is a process, method and act of giving power and strength so that a person is able to explore positive potential and energy and have an impact on a better quality of life.
12. Woman is every person who is born, recognized by society and registered as a woman.

13. Protection of Women is all efforts to guarantee and protect the rights of women so they can live healthily, develop themselves and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from neglect, violence and discrimination whether in the form of preventive, repressive or postremedial protection (assistance and treatment).
14. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old, including a child still in the womb.
15. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children.
17. Household Scope is husband, wife and children, people who have family relations with husband, wife and children, whether due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, foster care, and guardianship who reside in the household, and/or people who work to help the household and reside in that household.
18. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
19. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent toward a child.
20. Neglected Child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
21. Child with Disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with their growth and development naturally.
22. Toddler is a child aged 1 (one) to 5 (five) years, in the early stages of human development.
23. School-Age Child is a child aged 6 (six) to 18 (eighteen) years.
24. Delinquent Child is a child who behaves deviantly from community norms, is detrimental/endangers their own health/safety, disturbs community peace and order and family and community life, but is still below the category that can be legally prosecuted/tried.

25. Child Who Becomes a Victim of Violence is a child who receives mistreatment such as being abused, humiliated physically, mentally and socially.
26. Child in Conflict with the Law is a child who conflicts with the law and a child victim of a criminal act.
27. Economically Exploited Child is a child who is forced and deceived to be employed by parents or others without being paid or being paid.
28. Child Who Becomes a Victim of Narcotics Abuse is a child who suffers from dependence on narcotics caused by narcotics abuse either of their own will or due to encouragement or coercion by others.
29. Child Trafficking is a criminal act or deed that fulfills one or more elements of recruitment, transfer, handover of a child using violence or threat of violence, fraud, kidnapping, confinement, abuse of power, exploitation of a position of vulnerability or debt bondage for the purpose of and/or resulting in exploiting the child.
30. Social Work Profession is a profession based on a framework of knowledge, values and technical skills and can be used as a vehicle in implementing social welfare business.
31. Child Care Center hereinafter abbreviated as TPA is a forum for guidance and welfare services for children aged 0-5 years whose parents do not have the ability and opportunity in child care, which is possible for playgroup services.
32. Playgroup is a forum for child welfare business prioritizing play activities and organizing pre-school education for children aged 3 years until entering basic education.
33. Marriage is a physical and spiritual bond between a man and a woman as husband and wife with the aim of forming a happy and eternal family (household) based on Belief in the One and Only God.
34. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
35. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.

36. Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in suffering or hardship for women, physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public realm or in private life.
37. Violence Against Children is acts of physical, sexual violence, emotional abuse and neglect of children as well as acts of exploitation and discrimination against children that make children sick physically and/or psychologically, depressed, emotionally undeveloped, feel excluded and lose self-confidence.
38. Acts of Domestic Violence is any act toward a person especially women that results in suffering or hardship physically, sexually, psychologically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion or unlawful deprivation of freedom within the household scope.
39. Victim of Domestic Violence is a person who experiences violence and/or threat of violence within the household scope.
40. Divorce is releasing the marriage bond from the husband's side by pronouncing a certain phrase such as "I divorce you".
41. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment Saayun Salangkah hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A Saayun Salangkah is one form of service facility for women and children in efforts to fulfill information and needs in the fields of education, health, economy, politics and law, protection and prevention of acts of violence and trafficking of women and children in Bukittinggi City.
42. Child-Friendly City hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a city that has a child rights-based development system through integration of government, community and business world commitments and resources that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure fulfillment of children's rights.
43. Child-Friendly City Task Force hereinafter abbreviated as Gugus Tugas KLA is a coordinative institution at the city level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize KLA.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of Protection of Women and Children is based on:
(1) Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
(2) Basic principles of children's rights, including non-discrimination, best interests of the child, right to life, survival and development, and respect for the child's opinion.
(3) Universal teachings that state that women and children are a very important part in the context of the continuity of a nation, not only viewed in religious rules, but in its implementation are human resources in the development of a nation.
(4) The worldview and philosophy of Minangkabau customs contained in the teachings of Adat Basandi Syarak, Syarak Basandi Kitabullah; Syarak Mangato Adat Mamakai, Alam Takambang Jadi Guru, and Anak dipangku kamanakan dibimbiang, urang kampuang dipatenggangkan.

Article 3

The objectives of this Regional Regulation are:
a. To protect women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate human rights.
b. To give clear responsibility to the government, community, family, ninik mamak and parents toward the rights of children and women.
c. To give clear boundaries to the role of mamak toward kemenakan and parents toward children.
d. To protect women and children from acts of violence, neglect, exploitation, and trafficking in persons and women's rights in case of divorce.
e. To contribute to the realization of gender equality and justice in various activities and improve the welfare of women and children in the Region.
f. To organize the structure and institutions of government and customary institutions in efforts to protect women and children.
g. As a guideline in making policies for the Regional Government and social institutions in matters relating to the protection of women and children in the Region.
h. To protect women and children domiciled in the Region from actions that violate their basic rights.
i. To provide guidance on the role of the Regional Government, community, parents and other parties that intersect with the interests of women and children.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

First Part
Rights and Obligations of Women

Article 4

Every woman has the right to:
a. Obtain protection from discrimination, exploitation (economic and social), neglect, cruelty, violence, abuse (physical, psychological, and sexual), injustice and other mistreatment.
b. Obtain equal opportunities and rights with men as human beings, to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, defense and security and equality in enjoying development results.
c. For working women:
1. obtain leave/rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months before the time of giving birth and 1.5 (one and a half) months after giving birth according to the calculation of an obstetrician or midwife, while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
2. obtain leave/rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months if experiencing miscarriage while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
3. obtain appropriate opportunities to provide breast milk to their children if this must be done during working hours, while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
d. Every woman who is married has the right to receive material and spiritual support from her husband.
e. Every woman who is left by her husband due to divorce proceedings must be given material support by her husband until there is a court decision in accordance with statutory regulations.
f. Every woman has the right to obtain decent work in accordance with dignity, honor and nature.
g. Obtain knowledge and skills useful for improving self-quality and family welfare.

Article 5

Every woman is obligated to:
a. Respect each other, love each other and help each other with all family members and relatives.
b. Manage the household especially as a good housewife in accordance with local customs and abilities.

c. Respect the husband and obey the husband as long as it does not conflict with religious values and customs.
d. Care for and educate children in accordance with religious values and customary norms.
e. Add knowledge, skills that are beneficial for family and community.
f. Comply with religious values and customary norms.

Second Part
Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 6

Every child has the right to:
a. Live, grow, develop and participate naturally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from acts of violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect.
b. Have a name as self-identity and citizenship status.
c. Worship according to their religion, think and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age, under parental guidance.
d. Know their parents, be cared for and raised by their own parents.
e. In the event that for some reason their parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development, or the child is in a neglected state, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by others in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
f. Obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs.
g. Obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents.
h. Receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.
i. Receive special and extraordinary education for children with disabilities and children who have excellence.
j. Express and be heard their opinions, receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their own development in accordance with moral values and propriety.
k. Rest and use leisure time, socialize with peers, play, recreate, and create in accordance with interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development.
l. Obtain rehabilitation, social assistance and recovery of social welfare standards for children with disabilities.
m. Have the right to receive protection from treatment during the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care, from discriminatory treatment, exploitation, whether economic or sexual, neglect, cruelty, violence, and abuse, injustice and other mistreatment.
n. Be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules showing that the separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration.
o. In the event of separation between child and parents, the child still has the right to:
1. meet directly and have regular personal relations with both parents;
2. receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both parents in accordance with abilities, talents and interests;
3. obtain living expenses from both parents; and
4. obtain other children's rights.
p. Obtain protection from abuse in political activities, involvement in armed conflict, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence, involvement in warfare and sexual crimes.
q. Obtain protection from being targets of abuse, torture or imposition of inhuman punishment or sanctions.
r. Obtain freedom in accordance with law.
s. Every child who is deprived of freedom has the right to:
1. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
2. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal efforts; and
3. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a closed session for the public.
t. Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.
u. Receive legal assistance and other assistance if becoming a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act.

Article 7

Every child is obligated to:
a. Respect parents, guardians and teachers.
b. Love family, community and care for friends.
c. Love the Homeland, Nation, and State.
d. Perform worship according to the teachings of their respective religions.
e. Implement noble ethics and morals.
f. Comply with all provisions deemed capable of damaging themselves and their future.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 8

The Regional Government is responsible for the implementation of protection of women and children actively.

Article 9

Protection of women includes:
a. Conducting socialization, education and anti-violence against women campaigns by involving all Regional Work Units, work partners and the community actively.
b. Ensuring gender mainstreaming programs in every Regional Work Unit, to guarantee equality between men and women, reflected in the Budget Plan of Regional Work Units.
c. Conducting early detection of cases of violence against women.
d. Providing service facilities for victims of violence against women, both services for physical victims and psychological victim services, through improvement of special facilities and facilities at Hospitals and at P2TP2A.
e. Requiring all Hospitals to be willing to accept women victims of violence for examination and undergo health care.
f. Providing women's rights in accordance with their dignity and worth as women.
g. Protecting female workers from acts of discrimination, exploitation and violence.
h. Requiring provision of special facilities and infrastructure for women according to criteria, in every government building, private office and other public facilities.
i. Requiring provision of lactation room facilities for government buildings that provide public services and other public facility places such as malls, supermarkets, doctor's practice places and the like.

Article 10

(1) Protection of children starts from in the womb until the age of 18 (eighteen) years.
(2) Protection of children in the womb, infants and toddlers includes:
a. protection of children in the womb, including ensuring children are born in a healthy state, to reduce maternal mortality rates and reduce child mortality rates;
b. ensuring every child is born with a medical process according to SOP from the Ministry of Health;
c. ensuring every child after birth, is conducted with the process of religious guidance adhered to by their parents;
d. provision of complete immunization facilities both at posyandu, puskesmas or government hospitals;
e. improving the quality and competence of cadres at Posyandu, to ensure correct procedures in order to guarantee the health of mothers and children including the immunization process;
f. providing proper facilities for every posyandu and Toddler Family Development (BKB) in every kelurahan;
g. ensuring the quality of knowledge of posyandu cadres and toddler family development cadres in accordance with government standards;
h. providing education to the community about becoming great parents, to ensure child health, both at posyandu, toddler family development together with government work partners and the community;
i. provision of playgrounds and child care centers managed by the regional government or organizations under the auspices of the Regional Government;
j. provision of Breastfeeding Corners in offices that have female workers; and
k. providing attention and affection from the family.
(3) Protection for school-age children:
a. prohibiting bullying acts toward children at school;
b. ensuring there are no acts of bullying between children, teachers to children, parents to children and community to children whether at school, at home or in the midst of the community;
c. providing education to schools, families and the community about child-friendly schools;
d. requiring every school at all levels to meet child-friendly school criteria;
e. receiving full attention and affection from family and community;
f. receiving religious guidance and local customs/culture including sumbang 12 (dua baleh);
g. receiving twelve years of compulsory education;

h. providing scholarship programs for underprivileged children and children who excel;
i. providing supporting facilities for extracurricular activities such as for sports subjects, arts and other local content as well as activity guidance teachers; and
j. prohibiting school children from being in internet cafes during school hours and after 18.00 WIB.
(4) Every person and/or any party is obligated to protect school-age children from acts of violence in the family, school and community environment.
(5) Protection of neglected children:
a. the regional government, NGOs/Social organizations and the community are obligated to provide protection for neglected children domiciled in the Region in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. the regional government ensures children do not live on the streets;
c. protection for neglected children whose parents do not have the ability and/or neglect and children who do not have parents, which is implemented through institutional and non-institutional services by the regional government and community;
d. the form of institutional services as referred to in letter (c), is implemented in a family atmosphere and in the child's nearest environment managed by the community and in the form of an institution;
e. the form of non-institutional services as referred to in letter (c) is implemented in a family atmosphere managed by the community and not in the form of an institution; and
f. community-owned institutions as referred to in letter (d) must meet requirements in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 11

The Regional Government together with the community is obligated and responsible to provide support for facilities and infrastructure in implementing protection of women and children.

Article 12

The Regional Government guarantees protection, maintenance, and welfare of children by paying attention to their rights and obligations.

Article 13

The Regional Government together with the community and business world are obligated to fulfill facilities and infrastructure in accordance with child-friendly city indicators.

Article 14

Family, caregivers, institutions, and customary institutions have the right to take action toward women and children in the context of implementing education, embracing religion, skills development, moral and ethical development, and entrepreneurship development for women and children in accordance with religious and customary norms.

Article 15

Family, caregivers, institutions and customary institutions are obligated to play an active role in providing the rights of women and children in accordance with religious and customary norms and applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
SYSTEM OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 16

(1) Protection of women and children is implemented by upholding universal values stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(2) Bureaucratic limitations must not hinder efforts to protect women and children.
(3) Every parent, adoptive parent, guardian, teaching/education personnel, expert personnel, caregiver at orphanages, and leaders of customary law community members are obligated to carry out obligations for the rights of children they care for and guide.
(4) Every head of family, head of clan, head of tribe, leader, or other designation of customary law community leader is obligated to fulfill their obligations toward women who are in their family, clan and tribe.

Article 17

(1) Protection of women and children is carried out in the form of protection:
a. preventive;
b. repressive; and
c. postremedial.
(2) Preventive protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is implemented through socialization and direction to parents, heads of families, housewives, guardians, teaching/education personnel, expert personnel, caregivers (owners and officers of orphanages) and customary law communities about their obligations in protecting women and children.
(3) Repressive protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is implemented through law enforcement by law enforcers to establish and implement legal sanctions on people who commit violations of certain child and women's rights.

(4) Postremedial protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is implemented through assistance efforts in law enforcement by lawyers, psychological guidance by psychologists and/or clergy, and placement of victims in safe houses.

Article 18

Protection of women and children must be implemented by parents, family, relatives, guardians, caregivers, teachers, Regional Government, and customary law communities in the Region.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIALIZATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 19

(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct socialization and education regarding protection of women and children by involving all elements of customary stakeholders, as well as universities and other community organizations in the Region.
(2) Socialization and education as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted through implementation of legal counseling, both with lecture methods, discussions, pamphlets, films, plays, randai, saluang, rabab, and other traditional arts.
(3) Financing of programs and activities for socialization and education on protection of women and children is budgeted in the APBD every year in accordance with regional financial capacity and laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION AGAINST VIOLATIONS OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Article 20

(1) Violations of women's rights, whether in physical, psychological forms, discriminatory treatment, and exploitation must receive legal protection and be prosecuted legally.
(2) In addition to the application of state law as referred to in paragraph (1), perpetrators of violations of women's rights may be subject to sanctions according to customs that live and develop in the midst of society.

Article 21

(1) If parents or guardians feel unable or neglect their obligations in child care, blood relatives, clan or tribe members may submit an application to the court in their legal area covering the area of the child's residence to revoke custody rights from the old parents or guardians and establish the applicant as the new guardian, either as foster parents or adoptive parents.

(2) If parents, relatives, clan, tribe, paruik or guardians neglect their obligations in child care and protection, based on reports from the community, an orphanage may submit an application to the court whose legal area covers the child's residence to revoke the custody of the old parents or guardians and appoint the orphanage concerned as the foster guardian or new adoptive parents.
(3) The new guardian or parents, whether individuals or orphanages appointed must have a religion that matches the religion of the child's parents.
(4) If a neglected child's parents' religion is not known, then the child is cared for by a person or social institution based on the religion of the local majority population.
(5) The appointment of new foster parents or adoptive parents does not sever legal relations with biological parents and all their relatives.
(6) Parents whose custody has been revoked toward a child, still have obligations in bearing the costs of caring for their child.

Article 22

(1) Violations of children's rights, whether in physical, psychological forms, discriminatory treatment, and exploitation must receive legal protection and be prosecuted legally.
(2) In addition to the application of state law as referred to in paragraph (1), perpetrators of violations of women's rights may be subject to sanctions according to customs that live and develop in the midst of society.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF HANDLING VICTIMS OF VIOLATIONS OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Article 23

(1) Complaint Handling Services for violations of women's and children's rights are implemented by P2TP2A, PPA Unit at Polres, Puskesmas, Government Hospitals, and Legal Aid Institutions.
(2) P2TP2A is formed by the Regional Government.
(3) P2TP2A management is formed by Mayor's Decree with a management period of 2 (two) years.
(4) In carrying out its main duties and functions P2TP2A is financed by APBD or other legal sources.
(5) Complaint Handling Services are conducted in the form of:
a. reporters (victims or family, community and/or institutions) come directly, by telephone and/or letter to report acts of violence;
b. reporters are referred by NGOs, Social organizations, community or mass media; and
c. in certain cases officers can visit victims (reporters) directly.

Article 24

(1) Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violations of women's and children's rights is accompanied by a lawyer provided by the regional government in the context of case handling.
(2) Assistance costs as referred to in paragraph (1) are budgeted in the APBD.

Article 25

Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violations of women's and children's rights receives free medical services at Puskesmas, government hospitals.

Article 26

Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violations of women's and children's rights in the context of rehabilitation is accompanied by a psychologist and/or clergy at government expense.

Article 27

(1) Every person who knows that a violation of women's and children's rights has occurred is obligated to report to law enforcers about the occurrence of such violation.
(2) Every person, blood relatives, clan members, saparuik, tribe members, village members, or nagari members are obligated to report to law enforcers if they know that a violation of women's and children's rights has occurred.

CHAPTER X
CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY

Article 28

(1) To realize fulfillment of children's rights in an integrated and systematic manner from all sectors sustainably, it is carried out through KLA development policies.
(2) Fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) is further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Article 29

(1) KLA development policy contains:
a. KLA concept;
b. children's rights; and
c. KLA development approach.
(2) KLA concept as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, includes:
a. definition;
b. objectives;
c. strategy; and
d. role of parties.

(3) KLA development approach as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c and paragraph (2) is further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Article 30

(1) KLA development policy is directed at fulfillment of children's rights divided into 5 (five) groups.
(2) Fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education and child-friendly schools, use of leisure time, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.
(3) Fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (2), its mechanism and implementation are further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Article 31

(1) In order to ensure effectiveness of KLA policy implementation in the Region, a KLA Task Force is formed.
(2) Implementation of KLA policy as referred to in paragraph (1), is established by Mayor's Decree.
(3) KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), has the main tasks of:
a. coordinating implementation of KLA policies and development;
b. establishing tasks of Task Force members;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication, information and education on KLA policies;
d. collecting baseline data;
e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
f. conducting dissemination of baseline data;
g. determining focus and program priorities in realizing KLA, adjusted to regional potential;
h. preparing 5 (five) year regional action plans for KLA and work mechanisms; and
i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once (1) a year.
(4) KLA Task Force membership is established by Mayor's Decree.

Article 32

(1) To assist the smooth implementation of KLA Task Force duties, a Secretariat is formed.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1), is tasked with providing technical and administrative support to the KLA Task Force.
(3) The KLA Task Force is domiciled at the SKPD that handles affairs of women's empowerment, family planning and child protection.
(4) Formation and membership of the KLA Task Force is established by Mayor's Decree.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 33

Mayor's Regulations that are the implementation of this Regional Regulation, are established at the latest 3 (three) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 34

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City.

Established in Bukittinggi
on the date of May 30, 2015

MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI,

signed,

ISMET AMZIS

Promulgated in Bukittinggi
on the date of June 1, 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BUKITTINGGI CITY,

signed,

YUEN KARNOVA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUKITTINGGI CITY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 4

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE: (4/2015)

ELUCIDATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

Protection of women and children, until now is still something that is widely discussed globally. There are still many, even in the most developed countries, violations of the rights of women and children are still ongoing until this moment. The understanding or view of some communities that see women and children as parties of lower status, or under the dominance of men until now still cannot be completely eliminated.

Realizing this, in line with national development priorities, the Regional Government of Bukittinggi strives to produce local policies formulated within the framework of regional regulations, a guideline or reference in empowerment and protection of women and children in a more institutionalized manner.

The purpose of formulating this Draft Regional Regulation, is as follows:
1. To protect women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate human rights.
2. To give clear responsibility to the government, community, family, ninik mamak, and parents toward the rights of children and women.
3. To give clear boundaries to the role of mamak toward kemenakan and parents toward children.
4. To protect women and children from acts of violence, neglect, exploitation, and trafficking in persons and women's rights in case of divorce.
5. To contribute to the realization of gender equality and justice in various activities and improve the welfare of women and children in Bukittinggi City.
6. To organize the structure and institutions of government and customary institutions in efforts to protect women and children.
7. As a guideline in making policies for the Regional Government and social institutions in matters relating to the protection of women and children in Bukittinggi City.
8. To protect women and children domiciled in Bukittinggi City from actions that violate their basic rights.
9. To provide guidance on the role of the Regional Government, community, parents and other parties that intersect with the interests of women and children.

With the presence of this Regional Regulation as a part of the national legal system concerning protection and empowerment of women and children, all forms of violations of their rights such as being neglected, exploited, discriminated against and even often experiencing domestic violence (KDRT), low quality of life, inability to contribute to the development movement, can be institutionally eliminated, eradicated in our region.

It can be affirmed that this Regional Regulation will later lay the basic rules regarding authority, rights and obligations of government, community and elements that intersect with children and women, by making local wisdom, customary values and the worldview of Minangkabau culture toward women and children as the main philosophical foundation, which can simply be expressed through customary expressions or expressions such as "bundo kanduang limpapeh rumah nan gadang", and "anak dipangku kemenakan dibimbing".

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Sufficiently clear.
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Sufficiently clear.
Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
Article 16
Sufficiently clear.
Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20
Sufficiently clear.
Article 21
Sufficiently clear.
Article 22
Sufficiently clear.
Article 23
Sufficiently clear.
Article 24
Sufficiently clear.
Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.
Article 27
Sufficiently clear.
Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
Article 29
Sufficiently clear.
Article 30
Sufficiently clear.
Article 31
Sufficiently clear.
Article 32
Sufficiently clear.
Article 33
Sufficiently clear.
Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUKITTINGGI CITY NUMBER 4