REGENT OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR
SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY NUMBER 3 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR,

Considering:
a. that all forms of violence or treatment that degrade the dignity and honor of women and children constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor must be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
b. that violence and treatment that degrades the dignity and honor of women and children must be subject to protection efforts;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children.

Noting:
1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235); as last amended by Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
4. Law Number 7 Year 2013 concerning Establishment of Penukal Abab Lematang Ilir Regency in South Sumatra Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2013 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5400);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679).
6. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;
7. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY
and
REGENT OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR

DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regency is Penukal Abab Lematang Ilir Regency.
2. Regency Government is the Regent as an element of regency government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Penukal Abab Lematang Ilir.
4. Regency Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regency Regional People's Representative Council in administering government affairs that are the authority of the regency region.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a child still in the womb.
6. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
7. Fulfillment of Children's Rights is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
8. Violence is any act that results in suffering or distress whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
9. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences suffering and/or distress either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the territory of Penukal Abab Lematang Ilir Regency.
10. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
11. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
12. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
13. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
14. Empowerment is strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and earn independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
15. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the victim's condition including physical, psychological and social health so that victims can carry out their roles properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
16. Social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so they can carry out social functions properly.
17. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from a regional area to their area of origin.
18. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
19. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence and is integrated with PPT that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of human trafficking crimes.

Article 2
Implementation of Protection for Women and Children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect and protection of human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Child;
e. right to life, survival, and development;
f. Empowerment; and
g. legal certainty.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of Women and Children;
b. maintain household integrity to realize a harmonious family;
c. prevent violence against Women and Children;
d. protect and provide a sense of security for Women and Children;
e. provide services to Women and Children victims of violence;
f. provide protection to reporters and witnesses; and
g. empower Women victims of violence.

CHAPTER II
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One
Women's Rights

Article 4
Every Woman has the right:
a. to live, maintain life and livelihood;
b. to form a family and continue offspring through legal marriage;
c. to develop herself through fulfillment of basic needs;
d. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, to improve quality of life and for the welfare of humanity;
e. to advance herself in fighting for her rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty and equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i. to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
j. to protection of self, family, honor, dignity and property under her control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from fear to do or not do something that is a human right;
k. to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;
l. to live prosperously physically and spiritually, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m. to social security that enables full development as a dignified human being;
n. to equality of position in law and government;
o. to work and a livelihood worthy of humanity;
p. in efforts to defend the state;
q. to communicate and obtain information to develop personal and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all available channels;
r. to embrace their respective religions and to worship according to their religion and beliefs; and
s. to obtain education.

Part Two
Fulfillment of Children's Rights

Paragraph 1
Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 5
Every Child has the right:
a. to birth registration;
b. to obtain health;
c. to obtain education; and
d. to social welfare.

Article 6
Every Child is obligated to:
a. respect parents, guardians and teachers;
b. love family, community and care for friends;
c. love homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship according to religion and beliefs;
e. study and develop themselves according to abilities and talents, interests; and
f. have noble character.

Paragraph 2
Birth Registration

Article 7
Birth registration of children as referred to in Article 5 letter a, the Regency Government is obligated to issue birth certificates in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Paragraph 3
Health

Article 8
(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the health sector as referred to in Article 5 letter b, the Regency Government is obligated to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health services for children.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services; and
b. exemption from cost burdens for malnourished children, Children with disabilities, children with special needs, street children, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child laborers, children victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance (NAPZA) abuse, Children who are victims of violence, such as neglect, economically and sexually exploited and victims of human trafficking.
(3) Exemption from cost burdens for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b are Children from poor families unless otherwise regulated according to health financing programs established by the government.

Article 9
The Regency Government together with the community, family and parents are obligated to ensure that Children born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Paragraph 4
Education

Article 10
(1) Implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the education sector as referred to in Article 5 letter c, the Regency Government guarantees the implementation of a 9 (nine) year compulsory education program.
(2) Every education unit organizer is obligated to provide opportunities for Children to obtain education services without discrimination.

Article 11
Every education unit organizer is prohibited from expelling Children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the Child's education.

Article 12
Every education unit organizer is obligated to coordinate with relevant child protection agencies if finding Children dropping out of school due to being victims of violence.

Article 13
Children with disabilities and Children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain education services:
a. formal;
b. non-formal;
c. informal;
d. special education; and
e. inclusive.

Article 14
Early Childhood Education for ages 0 (zero) to 3 (three) years and 4 (four) to 6 (six) years can be organized by:
a. Posyandu institutions;
b. Posyandu gardens;
c. Early Childhood Education Posts; and
d. similar Early Childhood Education unit institutions.

Paragraph 5
Social Welfare

Article 15
(1) Implementation of Protection and Empowerment of Children in the social welfare sector as referred to in Article 5 letter d includes:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. child victims of violence who are economically and sexually exploited;
c. neglected children;
d. child victims of kidnapping and child victims of human trafficking;
e. child victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance (NAPZA) abuse;
f. children infected with HIV/AIDS;
g. children who have no parents and are cared for by other parties or families who are unable;
h. street children;
i. child victims of natural disasters or social disasters;
j. children with physical and mental disabilities;
k. children of migrant worker families;
l. children living in or around prostitution locations; and
m. child victims of other maltreatment.
(2) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of ease of access to services:
a. health;
b. education;
c. legal aid;
d. assistance;
e. social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. empowerment;
h. social assistance; and/or
i. reintegration.
(3) Special infrastructure for persons with disabilities in public places.

Article 16
(1) The Regency Government is obligated to protect the fulfillment of rights of child workers in the informal sector.
(2) Child workers in the informal sector as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. domestic workers;
b. shoe shiners;
c. street vendors;
d. scavengers;
e. parking attendants;
f. children working in agriculture, animal husbandry and plantations;
g. children working in mining; and
h. other informal sector work employing Children.
(3) Every person employing Children in the informal sector is obligated to pay attention to requirements:
a. minimum age 15 (fifteen) years, except for the Worst Forms of Child Labor category minimum 18 (eighteen) years;
b. obtain written consent from parents/guardians of child workers;
c. have a written employment agreement between employer and parents/guardians of child workers and obtain validation from the authorized agency;
d. not employed at night;
e. maximum working time of 3 (three) hours per day;
f. not employed in places or environments that can interfere with the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the Child's health;
g. provide opportunities to obtain education according to talents and interests;
h. employ for light types of work; and
i. provide one day off per week.

Article 17
Fulfillment of rights of child workers in the informal sector as referred to in Article 16 paragraph (1) includes:
a. counseling to stakeholders about children's rights;
b. psychological, medical and legal service assistance and socio-economic reintegration;
c. family empowerment through provision of training, business capital stimulus and assistance;
d. scholarships to continue formal education to higher levels; and
e. non-formal education and skills training for those not pursuing formal education.

Part Three
Forms of Violence

Article 18
Forms of violence against Women and Children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Part Four
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children

Article 19
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against Women and Children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regency Government and coordinated by the technical Regional Apparatus.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. conducting guidance toward harmonious household integrity;
b. forming networks in efforts to prevent violence;
c. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
d. forming a violence prevention system;
e. socializing laws and regulations related to protection of Women and Children victims of violence; and
f. providing critical education regarding the rights of Women and Children to the community.

Article 20
Efforts to prevent violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) in addition to the Regency Government are also implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions; and
d. Non-Governmental Organizations.

Part Five
Handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Article 21
Implementation of Handling of Women and Children victims of violence is carried out with:
a. speed;
b. safety and comfort;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 22
Forms of handling Women and Children victims of violence as referred to in Article 21 include services:
a. complaints, consultation, and counseling;
b. assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. social rehabilitation;
e. legal; and
f. social reintegration.

Part Six
Financing

Article 23
Financing required for implementation of Protection of Women and Children is charged to:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. Other legal and non-binding funding sources in accordance with the provisions of applicable Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER III
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER (PPT)

Article 24
(1) Implementation of services for Women and Children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is an integrated part and constitutes one unit with PPT that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of human trafficking crimes.
(3) Implementation of services for Women and Children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing fast and free services to victims;
b. organizing protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal aid;
c. cooperating with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for victims;
d. networking with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperating with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or trauma centers owned by government, community or other institutions for victim health recovery;
e. providing ease, comfort and safety for victims;
f. maintaining victim confidentiality; and
g. providing fulfillment of legal aid for victims.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures and mechanisms for organizing PPT are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 25
Every Woman and Child victim of violence has the right:
a. to complaint handling;
b. to have their dignity respected as human beings;
c. to obtain protection from family, community, regional government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on court protection orders;
d. to health and psychological recovery from suffering experienced by victims;
e. to determine their own decisions;
f. to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
g. to obtain information;
h. to confidentiality of identity;
i. to social rehabilitation;
j. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of examination process in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
k. to spiritual guidance services.

Article 26
Women and children victims of violence in addition to having rights as referred to in Article 25, also receive special rights as follows:
a. right to survival;
b. to grow and develop;
c. to obtain equal protection; and
d. to participate in community life.

CHAPTER V
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 27
(1) The Regency Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, balance and effectiveness of integrated steps in implementing policies, programs, activities for Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by Regional Apparatus and PPT.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine progress and obstacles in implementing policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children.
(4) Monitoring is carried out periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus implementing policies and activities for Protection of Women and Children.
(5) Monitoring stages as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. planning
b. policy implementation;
c. program implementation; and
d. Protection of Women and Children activities every year.

Article 28
(1) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children is carried out at the end of each Budget year or if needed according to needs.
(2) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) are used as input material for formulating policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER VI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 29
(1) The Regent may appoint officials or related Regional Apparatus to conduct guidance and supervision of implementation of Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. provision of implementation instructions;
b. guidance;
c. supervision;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation of Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 30
(1) Community participation in organizing Protection of Women and children is as follows:
a. forming family partners at Village/Sub-district level by the community;
b. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
c. providing first aid to victims; and
d. reporting to authorized agencies if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. individuals;
b. community institutions;
c. non-governmental organizations;
d. educational institutions;
e. religious institutions;
f. private sector; and/or
g. mass media.

CHAPTER VIII
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS

Article 31
(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regency Government who are given special authority as Investigators to conduct investigations of criminal acts as regulated in the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are certain Civil Servants within the Regency Government appointed by authorized officials in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Authority of Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. receiving reports or complaints from a person about the existence of a criminal act;
b. taking first action at that time at the scene and conducting examination;
c. ordering a suspect to stop and examining the suspect's identification;
d. seizing objects or letters;
e. taking fingerprints and photographing a person;
f. summoning people to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bringing in experts needed in connection with case examination;
h. conducting cessation of investigation after receiving instructions from the Investigator that there is insufficient evidence or the incident is not a criminal act and subsequently through the investigator notifying this to the Public Prosecutor, suspect or family;
i. conducting other actions according to law that can be accounted for.
(4) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) notify the commencement of investigation and submit investigation results to the Public Prosecutor through the Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia Police Officer, in accordance with the provisions regulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER IX
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 32
Every person who intentionally commits or allows violence against women and children to occur and/or does not report the occurrence of violence against women and children is subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions regulated in Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 Year 2003 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 33
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by Placement in the Regional Gazette of Penukal Abab Lematang Ilir Regency.

Established in Talang Ubi
on date 3 - 1- - 2019
REGENT OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR,

HERI AMALINDO

Promulgated in Talang Ubi
on date 3 - 1- - 2019
REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY,

SYAHRON NAZIL

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 3

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY
SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE: (3-5/2019)

EXPLANATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY NUMBER YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL
Violence against women and children is a violation of human rights so their dignity and honor must be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. The fate of women and children victims of violence must be given attention by the regional government. The many cases of violence against women and children are often caused by factors developing in society, for example low economic levels, education, environments in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of such violence need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights.

For empowerment of victims of violence, the regency government forms an Integrated Service Center (PPT) which is a generic term that can be used by various institutions providing services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women's and Children's Empowerment (P2TP2A), Safe Houses, Child Social Protection Houses (RPSA), Trauma Center Protection Houses (RPTC), Women's Social Protection Houses (RPSW), Shelters, etc.

The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to protect women and children through implementing policies for protection of women and children applied by the government, establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children, forming PPT, ensuring implementation of ease of services to victims, seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process, and seeking creation of cooperation and coordination in efforts to protect women and children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Number 5
In accordance with Laws related to children that a child is every person under 18 years of age.

Article 2
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a process to be fair to men and women and equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, to be able to play roles and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, national defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter c
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is child protection is provided to all children without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
Letter d
What is meant by "best interests of the child" is all actions concerning children carried out by government, society, legislative bodies, then the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.
Letter e
What is meant by "right to life, child survival and child development" is as contained in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to education, right to play, right to create and recreate, and rights inherent in the child's life to obtain health standards, education and proper living standards for the child's physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social development.
Letter f
What is meant by "empowerment" is a process of increasing the role of society to participate in organizing protection for women and children victims of violence aimed at obtaining access and participation in the protection process for women and children broadly.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph 1
What is meant by "providing facilities and organizing comprehensive health services for children is aimed at ensuring every child obtains optimal health status from the womb carried out in stages adjusted to regional financial capacity and supported by community participation.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Letter a
What is meant by "physical violence" is an act that results in pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.
Letter b
What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Letter c
What is meant by "sexual violence" is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual relations and/or forced sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
Letter d
What is meant by "neglect" is an act that results in non-fulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social carried out by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care; an act of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care; an act of neglecting a person within the household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of agreement or contract they are obligated to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or an act that results in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Letter e
What is meant by "exploitation" is an act that exploits economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; an act with or without the victim's consent including prostitution, forced work or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of victims to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or indecency activities.
Letter f
What is meant by "other violence" is threats of violence including: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and coercion, including: a situation where a person/victim is made to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Letter a
What is meant by "fast" is immediate action taken without complications or simplified procedures.
Letter b
What is meant by "safe and comfortable" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, not disturbed, and served kindly, respectfully and appreciatively.
Letter c
What is meant by "empathy" is an act of appreciating, respecting, caring, being friendly, and making happy aimed at pleasing and comforting the victim's heart.
Letter d
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is handling of victims is provided to all victims without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
Letter e
What is meant by "guarantee of confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.
Letter f
What is meant by "easily accessible" is organization of services and assistance for everyone regardless of social status, so that such services are affordable for the underprivileged or relatively sufficient for the privileged.
Letter g
What is meant by "not charged" is service and assistance organization activities carried out by PPT are not charged to victims.

Article 22
Letter a
What is meant by "complaint, consultation, and counseling services" includes initial identification or recording of victims; case identification; and consent for action to be taken.
Letter b
What is meant by "assistance services" includes accompanying victims during examination and health recovery processes; accompanying victims during examination processes at police, prosecutor's office and court; monitoring victims' interests and rights in examination processes at police, prosecutor's office and court; maintaining victim privacy and confidentiality from all parties without interest, including reporting by mass media; providing a sense of security to victims; and providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
Letter c
What is meant by "medical rehabilitation services" includes first aid to victims; treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the victim's physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and referral to health services.
Letter d
What is meant by "social rehabilitation services" are services provided to restore the victim's traumatic condition. Forms of services are provided through social support through spiritual guidance to victims; and psychological recovery of victims.
Letter e
What is meant by "legal services" is to help victims undergo judicial processes by providing legal consultation covering information about victims' rights and judicial processes; accompanying victims at investigation, prosecution, and court hearing examination levels and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds properly.
Letter f
What is meant by "social reintegration services" aims to return victims to their families and social environment. Social reintegration services are carried out by the Regency Government by coordinating with relevant government and non-government agencies and institutions; and village community institutions and/or local community leaders.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PENUKAL ABAB LEMATANG ILIR REGENCY NUMBER 3