COPY
REGENT OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN
NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN,

Considering: a. that violence against women and children in Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency continues to increase which causes community members to be unsafe in carrying out their lives, so integrated protection efforts are needed;

b. that in order to optimize the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency, it is necessary to provide direction, foundation, and legal certainty to all parties involved in the implementation of protection of women and children;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence.

Considering: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age For Admission To Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

10. Law Number 22 Year 2008 concerning Establishment of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency in North Sumatra Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4868);

11. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

12. Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

14. Presidential Regulation Number 25 Year 2021 concerning Child-Friendly Regency/City Policy (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2021 Number 96);

15. Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 9 Year 2016 concerning Establishment of Regional Apparatus of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency (Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Year 2016 Number 9 Series D Number 09, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 09) as amended by Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 5 Year 2021 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 9 Year 2016 concerning Establishment of Regional Apparatus of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency (Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Year 2021 Number 5 Series D Number 05, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 05).

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY
and
REGENT OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administrator who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Labuhanbatu Selatan.
4. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that result in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
5. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering either physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of a person's freedom.
6. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a Child who is still in the womb.
7. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
8. Violence against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
9. Violence against Children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of Children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
10. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences violence and/or threat of violence.
11. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women will or has occurred.
12. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from acts of Violence and discrimination.
13. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the Victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that Violence against the Victim will, is or has occurred.
14. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying Victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy, integrated for strengthening and recovery of Violence Victims.
15. Gender is the difference in nature, role, function and status between Women and men which is not based on biological differences, but rather based on socio-cultural relations influenced by the broader structure of society.
16. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate Gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the region.
17. Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as Dinas PPPA is an office that administers the affairs of women's empowerment and Child Protection.
18. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated Service center in efforts to empower Women and Children established by the Regional Government with active community participation which includes information centers, consultation centers, complaint services, initial level health, counseling, legal assistance, repatriation and social reintegration, temporary shelter/safe house (shelter), and referral centers.
19. Safe House is a temporary shelter/protection house for Victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of Victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators, and is only known to interested parties such as certain personnel at UPT P2TP2A for reasons of safety and security of Victims.
20. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting Victims starting from complaints/identification, rehabilitation, health, Social Rehabilitation, advocacy to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or Victims.
21. Family is the smallest unit in Society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their Children, or father and Children, or mother and Children or blood Family in a straight line up or down to the third degree and/or if any up to the fourth degree.
22. Household is husband, wife, and Children, people who have Family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care, representation, and/or Household workers and reside in that Household.
23. Society is individuals, Families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
24. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency.
25. Social Rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out their social functions properly in community life.

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for Human Rights;
b. right to life, survival, and development;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Child;
e. justice and Gender equality; and
f. victim protection.

Article 3

This Regional Regulation is intended to provide a legal basis for the Regional Government in providing protection for Women and Children from acts of Violence.

Article 4

This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. respect and protect Human Rights;
b. guarantee the rights of every Woman and Child to survival, growth and development;
c. non-discrimination;
d. protect Women and Children from threats, fear, torture or treatment that degrades dignity, self-worth and human dignity;
e. prevent forms of violence against Women and Children;
f. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against Women and Children;
g. protect and provide a sense of security for Women and Children;
h. provide services to Women and Children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
i. protect and prevent all forms of discrimination against Women and Children in the region;
j. Women's Empowerment;
k. best interests of the Child; and
l. realize a region that is suitable for Women and Children.

Article 5

The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. forms of Violence;
b. rights of Victims;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
e. coordination and cooperation;
f. participation of Society and business world;
g. guidance and supervision;
h. reporting; and
i. sources of funds.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 6

Forms of Violence against Women and Children can be in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 7

Physical violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 8

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 9

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 10

Neglect as referred to in Article 6 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of Children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social carried out by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of Children as they should be carried out by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting people within the scope of their Household, even though according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the Victim is under the control of that person.

Article 11

Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the Victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or Service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the Victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 12

Every Victim has the right to receive:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. health services according to medical needs;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. special handling related to the confidentiality of Victims;
f. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
g. guarantees of rights related to status as a Family member or member of Society; and
h. spiritual guidance services.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One
General

Article 13

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. society;
c. family; and
d. parents or guardians.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 14

The Regional Government is obliged and responsible for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

Article 15

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to:
a. implement policies for protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence established by the government;
b. establish policies, programs, and activities for protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; and
c. cooperate with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health, hospitals, and various NGOs that care about Women and Children in the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

(2) The Regional Government is responsible for providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

(3) In order to carry out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the Regional Government establishes programs and activities for action on protection of Women and Children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

(4) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

(5) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), is further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 16

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of Society as referred to in Article 13 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.

(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. forming family partners at the Village/Sub-district level;
b. forming women and child protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of the rights of Women and Children;
d. providing first aid to Victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against Victims occurs in their environment.

(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

(4) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 17

The obligations of the Family and/or parents as referred to in Article 13 letters c and d have full responsibility to prevent all forms of Violence and protect Women and Children as Family members.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 18

In order to provide Services and protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A.

Part Two
Establishment of P2TP2A

Article 19

(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 18 consists of elements of Society, universities, professional organizations, community organizations concerned with Society.

(2) The establishment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent's decree.

(3) The implementation of Services to Victims is carried out in an integrated manner by Village/Sub-district P2TP2A, Sub-district P2TP2A, and Regency P2TP2A.

(4) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the task of:
a. receiving complaints/reports of Violence against Women and/or Children, consultation, and counseling;
b. receiving and sending to other Service units in a tiered manner;
c. providing legal assistance;
d. health;
e. Social Rehabilitation;
f. legal Services;
g. repatriation and social reintegration; and
h. providing protection to Victims, reporters and witnesses.

(5) P2TP2A can provide temporary services and protection in the form of a Safe House.

(6) In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a Safe House as referred to in paragraph (5), then Violence Victims are referred to P2TP2A that has a Safe House.

(7) P2TP2A consists of several Divisions consisting of:
a. Complaint Service division;
b. health Service division;
c. legal aid consultation; and
d. rehabilitation, Repatriation and Social Reintegration.

Article 20

(1) In carrying out the task of Service to Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (4), P2TP2A coordinates with Sub-district P2TP2A.

(2) The mechanism for implementing tasks as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in accordance with SOP.

(3) Further provisions regarding the duties of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Prevention Mechanism and Forms of P2TP2A Services

Article 21

The Regional Government prevents the occurrence of acts of Violence against Women and Children, through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations to the Society related to the protection of the rights of Women and Children;
b. conducting empowerment and awareness to Families, parents and Society by providing information, guidance and/or counseling;
c. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
d. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income increase and social Services;
e. opening employment opportunities for Women;
f. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
g. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
h. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about Women and Children;
i. opening complaint posts for protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; and
j. training P2TP2A members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing Violence against Women and Children.

Article 22

(1) Prevention of the occurrence of Violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 21, is carried out by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and Child Protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.

(2) Prevention of Violence by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner based on the regional action plan.

(3) Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 23

Forms of P2TP2A Services include:
a. medical Services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of Victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. psychosocial Services are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of Victims, including the provision of Safe Houses to protect Victims from various threats and intimidation for Victims and provide social support so that Victims have self-confidence, strength and independence, in solving their problems;
c. medico-legal Services are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
d. legal Services to assist Victims in undergoing legal processes; and
e. economic independence Services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that Victims can be independent.

Part Four
Assistance Mechanism by Persons and/or Institutions
Cooperating with P2TP2A

Article 24

(1) Assistance to Women and Children Victims of acts of Violence is carried out by persons and/or institutions cooperating with P2TP2A.

(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out according to SOP.

(3) Further provisions regarding assistance as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five
Services and Assistance

Article 25

The implementation of Services and assistance to Victims, is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Article 26

(1) Forms of Services provided to Women and Children Victims of Violence, are as follows:
a. complaint Services;
b. health Services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medico-legal;
f. identification Services; and
g. psychological Services.

(2) Forms of Services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented according to minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.

(3) In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other regency/city governments, Society, Families and parents.

(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for Services, and handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Six
Data and Information Management

Article 27

(1) The Regional Government through regional apparatus in charge of Women and Children is obliged to compile data and information regarding the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.

(2) Data and information as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. Women and Children who are Victims of acts of Violence;
b. fulfillment of the rights of Women and Children;
c. Women and Children at risk or vulnerable; and
d. Women and Children who require special protection.

(3) In managing data and information on Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (2), it is obligatory to:
a. compile data and information systems;
b. create disaggregated data;
c. conduct studies on the development of problems of Women and Children against acts of Violence; and
d. conduct periodic publication of data and information that can be accessed by the public.

(4) As material for completeness of data and information as referred to in paragraph (3), regional apparatus in charge of protection of Women and Children cooperate and request data from related agencies.

Article 28

(1) Data and information as referred to in Article 27 become material for formulating policies, programs, budgets, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.

(2) Formulation of policies, programs, budgets, monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the mechanism of:
a. making mapping, long-term, medium and short-term plans;
b. making agreements on the periodization of monthly and annual work meetings;
c. making agreements on data collection, mapping and presentation between Regional apparatus Organizations;
d. pouring agreements into programs and budgets; and
e. scheduling monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Article 29

(1) Regional apparatus in charge of Women and Children is obliged to formulate service policies regarding the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

(2) Formulation of service policies as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the mechanism of:
a. formulating case reporting policies related to Women and Children who are Victims of acts of Violence;
b. compiling reporting and referral mechanisms between regional apparatus organizations in charge of protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence with related agencies and with P2TP2A; and
c. compiling budgets for implementing policies on protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.

Part Seven
Fulfillment of Facilities and Infrastructure

Article 30

(1) Regional Government, Society and private sector provide facilities and infrastructure in the protection of Women and Children, including providing breastfeeding places for Children, child-friendly play rooms, recreation and creation places, Safe Houses, and forming Integrated Service Centers for Protection of Women and Children.

(2) Facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (1) must meet the following criteria:
a. guarantee safety, comfort and health;
b. motivate Children's creativity; and
c. contain educational elements.

(3) Provision of facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (2) for fulfillment of minimum service standards.

(4) Provision of facilities and infrastructure by the Regional Government is carried out in stages adjusted to the financial capacity of the Region.

Part Eight
Social Welfare

Article 31

(1) Fulfillment of social welfare of Women and Children aims to prevent, reduce vulnerability risks and handle Victims of acts of Violence.

(2) Fulfillment of social welfare of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by regional apparatus in charge of social issues.

Article 32

(1) Fulfillment of social welfare of Women and Children for prevention as referred to in Article 31 paragraph (1) includes:
a. increasing the role of Regional Government in Child protection including Children with special needs, Children with disabilities and other vulnerable Children;
b. increasing community awareness including Children regarding the protection and participation of Women and Children;
c. increasing the capacity of Society, Families, including Children and social welfare institutions, regarding Child protection;
d. increasing the capacity of protection services for Women and Children;
e. guarantee of continuity of education in accordance with the 12 (twelve) year Basic Education compulsory program; and
f. guarantee of obtaining basic health Services.

(2) Fulfillment of social welfare of Women and Children to reduce vulnerability risks, includes:
a. identification and/or early detection of vulnerable Women and Children;
b. mediation and counseling for vulnerable Women and Children;
c. services and facilitation of support for vulnerable Women and Children; and
d. care support for Children who need alternative care.

(3) Fulfillment of social welfare of Women and Children for handling Victims, includes:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Women and Children who are Victims;
b. referral services;
c. rehabilitation; and
d. reintegration.

(4) Handling of Child Victims as referred to in paragraph (3) has the right to receive protection from local mass media coverage both electronic and print to guarantee the future of Children.

Part Nine
Gender Mainstreaming

Article 33

To implement protection of Women and Children, the Regional Government implements Gender Mainstreaming which includes:
a. providing references for regional apparatus in formulating Gender integration strategies carried out through planning, formulation, implementation, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation of development policies, programs and activities;
b. developing Gender-based information systems;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and developing Gender Mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, and non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and social that pay attention to Gender aspects and are child-friendly;
e. implementing protection of Women especially protection against Victims of Violence, Women workers, Women Victims of trafficking in persons, elderly Women, and Women with disabilities, and areas affected by disasters; and
f. facilitating strengthening and developing networks of community institutions or organizations and the business world for the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming.

Article 34

(1) Every regional apparatus is obliged to conduct Gender-responsive budgeting planning.

(2) Gender-responsive budgeting planning as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by regional apparatus in the field of Women and Children.

Article 35

(1) The Regional Government may form a Gender Mainstreaming Working Group.

(2) The Working Group as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of regional apparatus and related vertical agencies as well as non-governmental institutions, universities, business sectors and religious-based institutions or Society working for the protection of Women and Children.

(3) The establishment of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2) is stipulated by Regent's Decree.

(4) Each member of the Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2) may appoint a Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point.

Article 36

(1) The duties of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in Article 35 paragraph (1), include:
a. facilitating the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to regional apparatus, Sub-districts, Sub-districts and Villages;
b. compiling work programs in the context of implementing Gender Mainstreaming;
c. developing work networks in accordance with duties and functions as well as authority to encourage the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming;
d. raising and discussing Gender issues that may cause gaps through Focus Group Discussions (FGD);
e. collecting, formulating SKPD, Camat, Lurah, and Village Head reports on the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in their respective work units; and
f. compiling and submitting reports on the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to the Regent.

(2) Further provisions regarding the duties of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Ten
Social Behavior Change in Favor of Children

Article 37

(1) Social behavior change is carried out with the aim of changing ways of thinking, attitudes and actions in accordance with parenting and education patterns that protect Children.

(2) Behavior change is intended to change policies, programs and budget allocations along with their action plans to change the social behavior of individuals, groups, government and non-government institutions to implement Child protection.

(3) Regional apparatus authorized to implement behavior change as regulated in paragraphs (1) and (2) are Regional apparatus in charge of social, religious, health, education, community empowerment, population, manpower, information and communication as well as child protection under the coordination of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of protection of Women and Children.

Article 38

Forms of behavior change that can be carried out to implement Child Protection as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) include:
a. developing Children according to their abilities, talents, and interests;
b. preventing marriage at child age;
c. caring for, maintaining, educating and protecting Children;
d. preventing brawls between students;
e. providing opportunities for mothers to provide exclusive breastfeeding for Children;
f. instilling noble character and respect for parents;
g. instilling cultural identity, local language, love for the environment; and
h. providing special protection to Children in emergency situations, Children in conflict with the law, Children from minority and isolated groups, Children exploited economically and/or sexually, Children who are trafficked, Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (drugs) abuse, Children victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, Children victims of Violence both physical and/or mental, Children with disabilities, and Children victims of mistreatment and neglect, Children victims of HIV/AIDS transmission and Children victims of social conflict.

Part Eleven
Child-Friendly Regency Development Policy

Article 39

(1) Child-Friendly Regency development aims to build Regional Government initiatives that lead to efforts to transform the concept of children's rights into policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.

(2) Child-Friendly Regency Development Policy as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on principles that include:
a. good governance;
b. non-discrimination;
c. culture and local wisdom;
d. best interests of the Child; and
e. respect for the views of Children;
f. inclusive; and
g. multicultural.

(3) Child-Friendly Regency Development Policy is directed at strengthening institutions for fulfillment of children's rights and special protection, including:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. rights to Family environment and alternative care;
c. rights to basic health and Child welfare;
d. rights to education, use of leisure time and cultural activities; and
e. rights to special protection.

(4) Further provisions regarding Child-Friendly Regency Development as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION

Part One
Coordination

Article 40

(1) The Regent coordinates protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence with:
a. government;
b. regency/city regional government;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; and
e. community institutions.

(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
c. education affairs;
d. social affairs;
e. legal affairs;
f. labor affairs; and
g. other affairs.

(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by Regional apparatus according to their authority.

Part Two
Cooperation

Article 41

(1) In certain cases the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. other regional governments;
b. police;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
e. social workers;
f. volunteer Companions;
g. spiritual counselors;
h. other law enforcers, to assist Victims in court proceedings;
i. national commission on anti-Violence against Women;
j. Indonesian child protection commission or Child Protection Institution; and/or
k. certain parties desired for the benefit of Victims.

(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health Services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. Social Rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER VII
PARTICIPATION OF SOCIETY AND BUSINESS WORLD

Article 42

(1) Everyone can participate in providing protection for Women and Children from acts of Violence.

(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be done by:
a. reporting acts of Violence against Women and/or Children;
b. providing first aid to Victims;
c. independently socializing the rights of Women and Children; and/or
d. forming independent social community institutions.

Article 43

(1) Social community institutions as referred to in Article 42 paragraph (2) letter d, implementing protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence must coordinate with P2TP2A.

(2) The Regional Government encourages the business world to participate in the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.

(3) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of:
a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of Violence against Women and Children; and
b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 44

(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out periodically by Regional apparatus that have the affairs of empowerment of Women and Children against acts of Violence.

(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.

(4) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 45

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 44, is carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence according to minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING

Article 46

(1) Regional apparatus in charge of the affairs of empowerment of Women and Children from acts of Violence reports the implementation of protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence to the Regent.

(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. Services; and
d. performance.

(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out at least every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER X
SOURCES OF FUNDS

Article 47

Funds for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 48

(1) The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region and is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 49

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency.

Stipulated in Kotapinang
on October 10, 2023

REGENT OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN,

signed

H. EDIMIN

Promulgated in Kotapinang
on October 10, 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY,

signed

HERI WAHYUDI M

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 7 SERIES D NUMBER 07

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE: (7-99/2023)

Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL SECTION,

signed

Y. ARIFIN, SH, MH
NIP.19810112 201101 1003

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Violence against Women and Children is a violation of Human Rights so that their dignity and dignity need to be protected and their right to life is guaranteed without discrimination. Based on empirical evidence it is revealed that Women and Children are groups that are often victims of violence. Many factors cause violence against Women and Children including the patriarchal cultural factor that still occurs widely in society which views Women as lower than men. In addition, wrong perceptions about violence against Women and Children are also still widely found, which consider violence as normal and as the right of the perpetrator. Violence against Women and Children can be seen from the type, perpetrator, place of occurrence, time, age and consequences of acts of violence. Violence against Women and Children above applies generally and has no relevance to the type of education, occupation and income, social position, religion and beliefs, ethnicity, ethnicity and race attached to men and Women. This means that in all types of social strata, violence against Women and Children can and continues to occur as long as the imbalance in the relationship between men and Women is still believed and manifested in social life.

In order to prevent and overcome Violence against Women and Children in Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency so that they are protected from Violence, threats of Violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and dignity, a legal umbrella is needed in the form of regional regulations.

So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so that institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee its implementation.

The formulation of this Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is intended to provide a legal basis for the Regional Government in providing protection for Women and Children in the Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency area.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights" is that the implementation of protection of Women and Children victims of violence is to ensure the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence as a manifestation of respect for human rights.

Letter b
What is meant by "right to life, survival, and development" are Rights as regulated in the provisions of the 1945 Constitution.

Letter c
What is meant by "Non-discriminatory" is an attitude and treatment towards victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d
What is meant by the principle of best interests of the Child is that in all actions concerning Children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.

Letter e
What is meant by "the principle of Gender equality and justice" is a process of equality and conditions for men and Women to obtain equal opportunities and rights as human beings, to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, national defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Letter f
What is meant by "the principle of protection of Victim rights" is protection of personal self, Family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
paragraph (1)
What is meant by "Gender Responsive Budgeting Planning" is budget planning that accommodates justice for Women and men in obtaining access, benefits, participation, decision making, controlling resources and equality of opportunities and opportunities to enjoy the results of development.

paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
paragraph (1)
What is meant by "Gender Mainstreaming Working Group" is a consultation forum for implementers and movers of Gender Mainstreaming from various agencies/institutions in the Region.

paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

paragraph (4)
What is meant by "Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point" is a regional apparatus apparatus that has the ability to conduct Gender Mainstreaming in their respective work units.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.

Letter b
Sufficiently clear.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
Sufficiently clear.

Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Letter h
Sufficiently clear.

Letter i
What is meant by "Children in emergency situations" includes conditions: Children who become refugees, Children victims of riots, Children victims of natural disasters, and Children in armed conflict situations.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN REGENCY NUMBER 07