- i
O
:
REGENT OF BATU BARA

NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE r
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BATU BARA REGENCY
:
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2016
REGARDING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN
AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BATU BARA,

Considering : a. b.
c.
d.
that every citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of Violence;
that Women and Children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence which constitutes acts that violate human rights and need to receive legal Protection;
that the implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence needs to be supported by institutions and regulations so that its implementation can be guaranteed;
that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
Considering :
1. * Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic
l

\
of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette
of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
4. Law Number 5 Year 2007 concerning the Establishment of
Batu Bara Regency in North Sumatra Province (State Gazette
of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 7, Supplement
to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4681);
5. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of
i
the Criminal Act of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic
of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette
of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
6. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of
Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic
of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette
of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

O
7. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
8. Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
10.Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures

and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/
or

Victims of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
11. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;

f
:
\
C
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
17.Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036);
18. Regional Regulation of Batu Bara Regency Number 1 Year 2009 concerning Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Batu Bara Regency Government;
With Mutual Agreement
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BATU BARA REGENCY and
REGENT OF BATU BARA
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
f
i
[
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by : 1. Region is Batu Bara Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the Regional Government and DPRD according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region. 4. Regent is the Regent of Batu Bara.
5. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
6. Child protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to Victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court protection orders.
7. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is recognized by law as a Woman.
8. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child who is still in the womb. 9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. 10. Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.

11. Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child.
12. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences

l
misery and/
or suffering as a result of

Violence and/
s
or threat of Violence.

13. Victim of Violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of Violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or Regional Government apparatus or by individuals.
14. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of Victims including physical, psychological, and sexual health so that Victims can perform their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
15.Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions normally.
16. Repatriation is an effort to return Victims of Violence from the Regional territory to the Region of origin.
17. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
18. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes

integrated services for witnesses and/Violence.
or Victims of acts of

19. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main tasks of integrated services for Women and Child Victims of Violence, including complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and Legal Assistance.

20. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units
in
reports/
providing complaint handling services, health services, Social Rehabilitation,
law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as Repatriation and
social reintegration for Women and Child Victims of Violence.
t
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES i
Article 2
Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence,
is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of Victims;
LJ
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. legal certainty.
Article 3
Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence aims to : a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. protect women and provide services to women and child victims of violence; and
c. empower women and child victims of violence.
CHAPTER III
< rr
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS Article 4
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right : a. to have their dignity respected as human beings; b. to receive protection from family, community,
Regional Government and/
or other parties either temporarily
or based on a protection order from the court;
c. to recovery of physical, psychological and sexual health according to the suffering experienced by victims of violence;

t.
:
r
l H .
d. to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
e. to accompaniment by social workers and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of legislation;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to determine their own decisions.
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 5
(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible for providing protection to women and child victims of violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) include :
a. implementing policies for protection of women and child victims of violence based on legislation;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for protection of women and child victims of violence;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence;
d. allocating budget in the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence;
e. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence.
Article 6
(1) The community is obligated and responsible for providing protection to women and child victims of violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;

d. providing information and/or reporting acts of
violence against women and children to the authorities; and
e. participating in handling victims of violence.
CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
:Article 7
(1) In implementing protection for women
and child victims of violence in the Region, the Regent may
establish PPT.
(2) The establishment and development of PPT is adjusted to
the development of priority needs, and the Region's financial capacity
as well as the institutional and personnel capacity
available in the Region.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may accommodate
institutions/work units that provide services for victims
of violence such as P2TP2A, Safe Houses, Child Social Protection Houses, Trauma Center Protection Houses, Women's Social Protection Houses, Shelters and other
service activities in accordance with applicable legislation.
(4) Forms of services implemented by PPT include :
a. complaints;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. legal assistance;
e. repatriation; and
!
f. social reintegration.
(5) In providing protection to women and child victims of violence, PPT is obligated to :
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to Victims;
b. organize Protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer companions required for Victims;
ih

di'
network with government or
private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of Victims and cooperate with witness and Victim Protection institutions, social Protection houses or government-owned trauma centers, community, or other institutions for victim health recovery;

:
r
e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for victims;
f. maintain victim confidentiality;
g. provide fulfillment of legal assistance for victims; h. in the case that integrated service implementation is carried out through networking, PPT remains responsible for the entire referral process of services required by victims.
(6) Provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (3) is implemented in accordance with SPM.
Article 8
(1) Community Institutions may establish PPT.
(2) In establishing PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), it is guided by the provisions of applicable legislation.

tii
CHAPTER VI
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS Article 9
SPM for Integrated Services for women and child victims of violence includes services for :
a. handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against women and children;
b. health services for women and child victims of violence;
c. Social Rehabilitation for women and child victims of violence; d. law enforcement and legal assistance for women and child victims of violence; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of violence.

S'
Article 10
SPM as referred to in Article 9 has performance indicators including :
a. coverage of women and child victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers
within integrated service units;
b. coverage of women and child victims of violence who receive health services by trained health personnel
at Community Health Centers and Hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for women and child
victims of violence within integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and child
—*
victims of violence within integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of violence
against women and children;
f. coverage of women and child victims of violence who receive legal assistance services;
g. coverage of repatriation services for women and child victims of violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for women and child victims of violence.
CHAPTER VII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 11
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies,
programs, and activities for Protection of Women and Child
Victims of Violence, the Regional Government conducts
monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in
the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of
Women and Child Victims of Violence in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Work Units

that implement policies, programs, activities for
Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence.
(4) Monitoring is conducted from planning to
implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of
Women and Child Victims of Violence for the current year.
Article 12
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities
»
for Protection of Women and Children is conducted every
end of fiscal year or if needed according to
requirements.
(2) The results of evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities
for Protection of Women and Children are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities
for Protection of Women and Children for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented
in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING
Article 13
(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports
on the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women
and Child Victims of Violence in the Region to the Governor
with a copy submitted to the State Minister
for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister
of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1)
is conducted annually.
CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 14
Funding for the implementation of Protection for Women and
Child Victims of Violence is sourced from :
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with
the provisions of legislation.
- I
CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 15
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over
>
the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women
and Child Victims of Violence in the Region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes
providing implementation instructions, guidance, supervision,
monitoring and evaluation of service implementation for
Women and Child Victims of Violence.
CHAPTER XI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 16
(1) In implementing Protection for Women
and Child Victims of Violence, the community may:
a. form family partners at the Village/Sub-district level by
the community;
b. conduct socialization of Women's and Children's rights
' independently;
c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to the competent authorities if
violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1)
is carried out by individuals, community social institutions,
non-governmental organizations, educational institutions,
religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.
CHAPTER XII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 17
In the event that PPT as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1)
has not been established, the existing P2TP2A shall continue to carry out
the tasks and functions of integrated services for Women and Child
Victims of Violence in the Region.
CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
r
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation
of this Regional Regulation with its placement in the Regional Gazette
i
of Batu Bara Regency
Established in Lima Puluh
on date ^ -jolt
REGENT OF BATU BARA,
i
OK ARYA ZULKARKAIN
Promulgated in Lima Puluh
on date 6
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BATU BARA REGENCY,
/—.ERWIN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BATU BARA REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 2-
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BATU BARA REGENCY NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE : (38/2016)
Copy in accordance with the original
HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
SIGNED
RENOLD ASMARA, AP, SH
NIP. 19751010 199603 1 002
EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BATU BARA REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2016
REGARDING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND
CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
The state has an obligation to provide protection to every c
citizen in accordance with the preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. that women and children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence and therefore need to receive protection. Violence against women and children constitutes human rights violations and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination.
Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life or body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
This regional regulation regulates protection efforts for women and child victims of violence, particularly in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and child victims of violence as well as to prevent and reduce acts of violence against women and children.
r
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Sufficiently clear.
i
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by "community institutions" are institutions
established by members of Indonesian citizen society
voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function
and activities to participate in development within
the framework of achieving national goals within the Unitary State
of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, consisting of
religious organizations, non-governmental organizations,
professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations,
mass media, and other forms of organizations.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
<
Article 9
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Sufficiently clear.
9Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
i
Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
v >Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
Article 16
Sufficiently clear.
Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.