No. 3, 2021
REGIONAL GAZETTE
PADANGSIDIMPUAN CITY
PEMKO-PSP. Women's Empowerment
and Child Protection in Padang
Sidimpuan City.
MAYOR OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN
NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN CITY NUMBER 3 YEAR 2021
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN,
Considering a. that women and children are creatures of Almighty God who have human rights guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, therefore women and children must be protected from all forms of violence and discrimination;
b. that violence against women and children in the Region tends to increase, therefore the Regional Government and/or the community need to play an active role optimally to provide protection, so that women and children are prevented and freed from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth;
c. that protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, so that regulation is needed as a basis for comprehensive and integrated implementation of protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in Padang Sidimpuan City;
Considering 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

2021, No. 3
-73-
3. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, Or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 4 of 2001 concerning Establishment of Padang Sidimpuan City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 84 Year 2001, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4111);
6. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
8. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
11. Government Regulation Number 10 of 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1983 Number 13, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3250) as amended by Government Regulation Number 45 of 1990 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 10 of 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1990 Number 61, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3424);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

2021, No. 3
-74-
13. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
14. Presidential Instruction Number 5 of 2014 concerning National Movement Against Sexual Crimes Against Children;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
16. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Evaluation of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
17. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 of 2011 concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
18. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 12 of 2011 concerning Indicators of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
19. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
20. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 Concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 157);
21. Regional Regulation of North Sumatra Province Number of 2004 concerning Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Number 18 Year 2004, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Series E Number 12);
22. Regional Regulation of North Sumatra Province Number 6 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children (Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Number 19 Year 2004, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Series E Number 13);
23. Regulation of the Governor of North Sumatra Number 17 of 2012 concerning Task Force for Child-Friendly Regency/City (KLA) of North Sumatra Province;
24. Decree of the Governor of North Sumatra Number 188-44/502/KPTT/2013, dated August 16, 2013 concerning Determination of Child-Friendly Regency/City Year 2013;

2021, No. 3
-75-
With Joint Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN CITY
and
MAYOR OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Padang Sidimpuan City.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional People's Representative Council according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Padang Sidimpuan.
5. Regional People's Representative Council hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD of Padang Sidimpuan City is the Regional People's Representative Institution which is positioned as an element of Regional Government Administration.
6. Regional Apparatus is an assistant element to the Mayor and the Regional People's Representative Council in administering government affairs that are the authority of the region.
7. Child is a person who has not reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including children still in the womb.
8. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System is the entire process of organizing women's empowerment and child protection carried out comprehensively, inclusively, and integratively from the stage of handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, to repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of crime and violence to their social environment.
9. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from violence and discrimination.

2021, No. 3
-76-
10. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
11. Victim is a person who suffers physical, mental, and/or economic loss caused by a criminal act.
12. Violence is any act that causes injury or death to another person or causes physical damage or property damage to another person.
13. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
14. Violence against children is any action that results or may result in suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
15. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or suffering as a result of violence and/or threats of violence.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and children, and mother and children and among those in their dependence.
18. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction to be able to carry out social functions properly.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional area to their area of origin.
20. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
21. Prevention is a direct effort made by the regional government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
22. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
23. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with established operational standards.
24. Child-Friendly City hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a city that has a child rights-based development system through integration of commitment and resources of government, community and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure fulfillment of children's rights.

2021, No. 3
-77-
25. Child-friendly city task force hereinafter abbreviated as KLA task force is a coordinative institution at the city level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize KLA.
29. Business Entity is an institution that daily carries out activities seeking profit and gain, but has a commitment to protecting women and children.
26. Business Entity is an institution that daily carries out activities seeking profit and gain, but has a commitment to protecting women and children
27. Social Welfare is a condition of fulfillment of material, spiritual, and social needs of citizens so they can live decently and are able to develop themselves, so they can carry out their social functions.
28. Gender mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
29. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, established by regional government or community-based, which includes: referral centers, business consultation centers, reproductive health consultation centers, legal consultation centers, integrated crisis centers (PKT), integrated service centers (PPT), trauma recovery centers (trauma centers), women's crisis centers (women crisis centers), training centers, science and technology information centers (PIPTEK), safe houses (shelters), transit houses, child helpline (TESA) 129, or other forms.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES
Article 2
The implementation of Women's and Child Protection is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims;
e. legal certainty;
f. legal protection;
g. empowerment.
CHAPTER III
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
Article 3
(1) The purpose of establishing this Regional Regulation is to provide a legal certainty foundation in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection activities in the Region.

2021, No. 3
-78-
(2) The implementation of Women's and Child Protection aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women, children, and family quality;
b. increase institutional capacity for women's empowerment and child protection including development of gender and child data systems;
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment;
d. provide guidance to regional governments in planning protection strategies for women and children; and
e. prevent violations of women's and children's rights.
CHAPTER IV
SCOPE OF WOMEN'S AND CHILD PROTECTION
Article 4
The scope of implementation of women's and child protection includes:
a. rights and obligations of women and children;
b. forms of violence;
c. prevention;
d. violence action services;
e. implementation of women's and child protection;
f. women's and child information data system;
g. children's forum;
h. institutions for implementing women's and child protection
i. Child-Friendly City;
j. community participation;
k. cooperation;
l. guidance and supervision;
m. funding;
n. criminal provisions; and
o. Closing Provisions.
CHAPTER V
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Part One
Rights of Women and Children
Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. obtain protection from discriminatory actions;
b. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
c. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence, and neglect;
d. obtain decent work according to her ability;

2021, No. 3
-79-
e. obtain work leave while receiving wages/salary in accordance with laws and regulations;
f. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education;
g. obtain special protection in carrying out work or profession against things that can threaten safety and or health related to women's reproductive function; and
h. ownership and management of joint property in marriage in accordance with laws and regulations.
(2) Every child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop and participate properly in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. obtain protection from discriminatory actions;
c. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
d. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence, and neglect;
e. to a name as self-identity and citizenship status;
f. obtain birth certificate free of charge;
g. to embrace religion and worship according to their religious teachings with guidance from parents/guardians;
h. not to be forced to change religion by foster parents, adoptive parents and by anyone;
i. to be recognized and know their parents, be raised and cared for by their own parents;
j. obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
k. obtain education and teaching according to their interests and talents;
l. obtain care, education, training, self-improvement and ability to participate in community and state life for children with physical, mental disabilities and special needs;
m. express and have their opinions heard; and
n. rest and utilize leisure time for self-development.
Part Two
Obligations of Regional Government
Article 6
(1) The obligations of the Regional Government in efforts to protect women include:
a. establish and implement policies, programs and activities for protection of women's rights;
b. cooperate with the community and/or Community Organizations in implementing women's protection in accordance with laws and regulations;
c. conduct rehabilitation and empowerment of women who are victims of violence;

2021, No. 3
-80-
d. provide special protection to women victims of violence and trafficking in persons; and
e. take preventive actions to prevent violations of women's rights.
(2) The obligations of the Regional Government in efforts to protect children include:
a. be responsible for respecting the fulfillment of children's rights without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status, birth order, and physical and/or mental condition;
b. be obligated and responsible to implement and support national policy in implementing child protection in the region;
c. the policy as referred to in letter b can be realized through regional efforts to build child-friendly regencies/cities;
d. be obligated and responsible to provide support for facilities, infrastructure, and availability of human resources in implementing child protection;
e. guarantee the protection, maintenance, and welfare of children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons who are legally responsible for the child;
f. supervise the implementation of child protection.
g. guarantee children to use their rights in expressing opinions according to the child's age and level of intelligence.
Part Three
Community Obligations
Article 7
(1) Community obligations in efforts to protect women and children:
a. participate in prevention and provide support for development of prevention programs for violations of women's and children's rights;
b. provide information and/or report violations of women's and children's rights to the authorities; and
c. supervise the law enforcement process for cases of violations of women's and children's rights.
(2) Community obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) are based on laws and regulations and local wisdom values of the local community.
(3) Community obligations and responsibilities for child protection are carried out through community role activities in implementing child protection.
(4) Community obligations and responsibilities for child protection are carried out through community role activities in implementing child protection.
(5) Community obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (4) are carried out by involving community organizations, academics, and child advocates.

2021, No. 3
-81-
Part Four
Family Obligations
Article 8
Families in efforts to protect women's rights are obligated to:
a. protect women from conflict and domestic violence that degrades women's dignity;
b. provide equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural; and
c. prevent violations of women's rights in the household.
Article 9
(1) Families in efforts to protect children's rights are obligated to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children according to their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. prevent marriage at child age;
d. provide character education and instill moral values in children.
(2) In the event that parents are absent, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to some reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may transfer to the family.
CHAPTER VI
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 10
Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence; and/or
d. domestic neglect.
Article 11
Physical violence as referred to in Article 10 letter a results in:
a. the victim becoming ill or seriously injured;
b. death of the victim; and
c. causing disease or hindrance to carrying out work, position or livelihood or daily activities.
Article 12
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

2021, No. 3
-82-
Article 13
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c is in the form of:
a. acts of sexual harassment;
b. forced unnatural or unwanted sexual relations; and/or
c. forced sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
Article 14
Domestic neglect as referred to in Article 10 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in unfulfillment of children's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to agreement or contract they are obligated to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION
Article 15
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the PPPA Office.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. building networks and working together with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health, hospitals, various NGOs that care about women and children;
b. building community and family participation and concern for prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization about laws and regulations related to protection of women and child victims of violence;
e. providing critical education about the rights of women and children as victims of violence to the community; and

2021, No. 3
-83-
f. opening complaint posts for protection of women and children from acts of violence.
Article 16
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 16, is carried out by the PPPA Office and related regional apparatus/institutions in the fields of:
a. education;
b. employment;
c. health;
d. social;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by the PPPA Office and related regional apparatus/institutions as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and continuous manner.
CHAPTER VIII
VICTIM SERVICES FOR ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 17
Implementation of Victim Recovery Activities Includes:
a. health services;
b. victim assistance;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance; and
e. resocialization;
Article 18
(1) Health Services are provided by health workers at government, regional government, and community health facilities, including private, by providing treatment and health recovery services for victims.
(2) Victim assistance is provided by health workers, social workers, volunteer companions, and/or spiritual counselors by providing counseling, spiritual guidance and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims.
(3) Counseling is provided by social workers, volunteer companions, by listening empathetically and exploring problems for psychological strengthening of victims.
(4) Spiritual guidance is provided by spiritual counselors by providing explanations regarding their rights and obligations, as well as strengthening faith and piety according to the religion and beliefs they adhere to.
(5) Victim resocialization is carried out by social institutions and social institutions so that victims can return to carrying out their social functions in society.
CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILD PROTECTION

2021, No. 3
-84-
Article 19
Those responsible for implementing women's and child protection are as follows:
a. Mayor of Padang Sidimpuan as Protector of Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
b. Head of OPD, Director of General Hospital, Chairperson of Women's Organizations Association as Director of Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
c. Head of the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Padang Sidimpuan City as Chairperson Responsible for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
d. Head of the Social Service Office of Padang Sidimpuan City as Vice Chairperson Responsible for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
e. Chief of Padang Sidimpuan Police as Vice Chairperson Responsible for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
f. Head of Women's Empowerment Division as Coordinator Responsible for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
g. Head of Child Protection Division as Secretary Responsible for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
h. Head of Section for Handling and Protection of Violence Victims and Head of Child Protection Section as Service Section for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
i. Advocate/Peradi as Legal Assistance Section for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
j. Head of Section for Improving Women's Quality of Life and Head of Child Growth and Development Section as Network Development Section for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
k. Head of Section for Handling Social Problems of Children with Special Needs and Head of Women's Rights Protection Section as Reporting Section for Women's and Child Protection Implementation;
CHAPTER X
WOMEN'S AND CHILD INFORMATION DATA SYSTEM
Article 20
(1) Information system is a system for collecting, preparing, storing, processing, analyzing and/or disseminating information.
(2) Gender and Child Data System is the institutionalization of gender and child data administration consisting of components of regulations, institutions, and mechanisms in ministries/institutions and regions for planning, implementation, evaluation, and reporting of results of gender-responsive and child-caring development policies/programs/activities.
(3) Gender Data is data regarding relational relationships in status, roles and conditions between men and women.

2021, No. 3
-85-
(4) Disaggregated Data is data disaggregated by sex, age, status and condition of women in all fields of development including health, education, economy and employment, politics and decision-making, law and socio-culture and violence.
(5) Types of gender and child data:
a. gender data:
1. gender data in economic field including gender issues in labor, cooperatives and SMEs, industry and trade, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and marine affairs, transportation, science and technology and infrastructure;
2. gender data in political, social and legal fields;
3. women's rights protection data; and
4. family welfare and resilience development data.
b. child data:
1. civil rights and freedoms;
2. family environment and alternative care;
3. basic health and welfare;
4. education, leisure time utilization and cultural activities; and
5. special protection.
(6) Gender analysis is a process of systematically analyzing disaggregated data by sex with the intention of identifying gender issues and factors that can influence development, especially related to gender equality issues that are development goals.
Article 21
(1) Guidelines for Implementation of Gender and Child Data System are intended as a reference for ministries/institutions and regions in providing and utilizing disaggregated data for planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of gender-responsive and child-caring development policies/programs/activities.
(2) Increase availability and utilization of gender and child data, information in preparation, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programs/activities.
Article 22
(1) Guidelines for Implementation of Gender and Child Data System aim to:
a. strengthen and encourage institutionalization (regulations, institutions, mechanisms) of data systems disaggregated by sex and age in ministries/institutions and regions, that are reliable, can be presented quickly, accurately, comprehensively, and up-to-date;
b. build or strengthen coordination mechanisms between ministries/institutions and regions in implementing collection of disaggregated data;
c. increase availability and utilization of disaggregated data for planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of results of gender-responsive and child-caring development policies/programs/activities in ministries/institutions and regions.

2021, No. 3
-86-
(2) Implementation of Electronic-Based Gender and Child Data System of Padang Sidimpuan City includes sending, verification, inputting and publication of data
(3) Utilization of Gender and Child Data System of Padang Sidimpuan City consists of:
a. regional apparatus within the Padang Sidimpuan City Government;
b. agencies located in Padang Sidimpuan City; and
c. general public/public.
Article 23
(1) Gender Mainstreaming or abbreviated as PUG is a strategy carried out rationally and systematically to achieve and realize gender equality and gender justice in a number of aspects of human life (household, community and State), through policies and programs that take into account the experiences and aspirations, needs and problems of women and men in planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all policies in various lives and development.
(2) In efforts to accelerate gender mainstreaming institutionalization in all SKPD, PUG Working Groups are formed.
(3) Members of PUG Working Group are all heads/leaders of SKPD.
(4) The Mayor appoints the head of Bapeda as chairman of PUG Working Group and the head of SKPD in charge of women's empowerment as Secretary of PUG Working Group.
(5) Formation of PUG Working Group is established by Mayor's Decree.
Article 24
PUG Working Group as referred to in article 23 has the task of:
a. promoting and facilitating PUG to each SKPD;
b. conducting socialization and advocacy of PUG to Sub-district Heads, Village Heads and Sub-district Heads;
c. preparing work programs every year;
d. encouraging realization of gender-responsive planning and budgeting;
e. preparing PUG Working Group work plans every year;
f. being responsible to the Mayor through the Deputy Mayor;
g. formulating policy recommendations to the Mayor;
h. preparing Gender Profile;
i. monitoring implementation of PUG in each agency;
j. establishing technical teams to conduct analysis of regional budgets;
k. preparing Regional Action Plan (RANDA) for PUG and;
l. encouraging implementation of selection and determination of Focal Points in each SKPD.
Article 25
1. PUG Focal Point in each SKPD consists of officials and/or staff in charge of planning and/or programs.

2021, No. 3
-87-
2. PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), has the task of:
a. promoting gender mainstreaming in work units;
b. facilitating preparation of Gender-responsive SKPD work plans and budgeting;
c. conducting training, socialization, advocacy of gender mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the SKPD;
d. encouraging implementation of gender analysis of policies, programs, and activities in work units; and
e. facilitating preparation of gender data in each SKPD;
3. PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), is selected and determined by the head/leader of SKPD.
Article 26
(1) Regional Apparatus/Agencies submit reports on women's and child information data system to the Mayor through the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Padang Sidimpuan City.
(2) Implementation reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted annually and/or at any time if necessary.
Article 27
(1) Every person, community institution, university and business world has the right to utilize the women's and child information data system of Padang Sidimpuan City by citing the data.
(2) Every person, community institution, university and business world can partner as data providers or users, gender and child information to the operator of women's and child information data system of Padang Sidimpuan City for subsequent verification, inputting and publication.
CHAPTER XI
CHILDREN'S FORUM
Article 28
(1) Regional Government is obligated to form a children's forum at Padang Sidimpuan City level as participation through children's forum.
(2) Children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) represents children, both representation of children's geographic domicile, components of children's socio-cultural groups and children's educational background and accommodates the interests of children with special needs.
(3) In every formulation of policies related to children, the Regional Government must consider and accommodate children's opinions submitted through children's forum.
(4) Formation of children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by Mayor's Decree.
(5) Funding sources for implementation of children's forum activities can come from:
a. contributions from children's forum members;

2021, No. 3
-88-
b. donations from the community/private parties that are legal and non-binding;
c. assistance from the City Government; and/or
d. other funding sources in accordance with laws and regulations.
Article 29
(1) Formation of Padang Sidimpuan City Children's Forum, participants in the meeting to form regency/city children's forum are delegates or representatives of sub-district children's forum at least one boy and one girl, the number of representatives is adjusted to the needs and number of sub-districts in Padang Sidimpuan City area
(2) Formation of Sub-district Children's Forum, participants in the meeting to form Sub-district Children's Forum are delegates or representatives of village/sub-district children's forum at least one boy and one girl. The number of representatives is adjusted to the needs and number of villages/sub-districts in the sub-district area
(3) Formation of Village/Sub-district Children's Forum, children are invited representing their respective activity groups, at least one boy and one girl from each children's activity group, then the child representatives from the activity groups become the main participants in the formation of Village/Sub-district Children's Forum.
CHAPTER XII
INSTITUTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING WOMEN'S AND CHILD PROTECTION
Article 30
In order to implement Women's and Child Protection, the following are formed:
a. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A);
b. Family Welfare Consultation Institution; and
c. Other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of laws and regulations.
Article 31
(1) In order to handle family psychosocial problems, recovery of family psychosocial conditions and strengthening family resilience, Family Welfare Consultation Institutions are formed in the region.
(2) Regarding Family Welfare Consultation Institution, the Mayor has the following authorities:
a. implement policies for organizing Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
b. implement norms, standards, procedures, and criteria regarding Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
c. implement service standards for Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
d. implement and process institutional data of Family Welfare Consultation Institution;

2021, No. 3
-89-
e. implement capacity strengthening of human resources and institutions of Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
f. provide facilitation of service facilities and infrastructure for Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
g. implement family welfare cooperation;
h. implement coordination with related agencies, business world and community; and/or
i. implement monitoring and evaluation.
Article 32
(1) Family Welfare Consultation Institution services are organized by prioritizing strategies to build networks and partnerships
(2) Types of Family Welfare Consultation Institution services consist of:
a. consultation;
b. counseling;
c. information;
d. advocacy;
e. referral; and
f. outreach
(3) Networks and partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. potential and sources of social welfare;
b. Hospitals;
c. Indonesian National Police;
d. Bureau/Institution/Legal Aid Post;
e. Trauma Center Protection House;
f. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
g. other public services that can be used as networks and partnerships of Family Welfare Consultation Institution.
(4) Networks and partnerships as referred to in paragraph (2) are conducted through:
a. cooperation;
b. coordination; and/or;
c. collaboration;
(5) Further provisions regarding Family Welfare Consultation Institution are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.
Article 33
(1) Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) is under the coordination of regional work units (SKPD) or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have authority in formulating policies related to women's empowerment and child protection.
Article 34
Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) functions as:
a. information center for women and children;

2021, No. 3
-90-
b. service center for women and victims of violence; and
c. empowerment center for women and children.
Article 35
(1) Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) at City Level is formed based on Mayor's Decree and Sub-district Head's Decree for sub-district level.
(2) Membership of Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A) can come from regional apparatus elements, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding P2TP2A are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.
Article 36
Family Learning Center (PUSPAGA) is a form of prevention service under the coordination of the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as a manifestation of state concern in improving family life and family resilience through education or parenting programs, parenting skills, child protection skills, ability to increase child participation in families and counseling program services for children and families.
CHAPTER XIII
CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY
Part One
Principles and Objectives
Article 37
To ensure fulfillment of children's rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from violence and discrimination, real efforts are needed in an integrated manner between Regional Government, community and business world through development of Child-Friendly City.
Article 38
Development of Child-Friendly City as referred to in Article 37 is implemented based on the following principles:
a. good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information openness, and rule of law;
b. non-discrimination, namely not distinguishing ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical or psychological condition of children, or other factors;
c. best interests of children, namely making what is best for children as the main consideration in every policy, program, and activity;
d. right to life, survival, and development of children, namely guaranteeing children's right to life, survival and development to the maximum extent possible; and

2021, No. 3
-91-
e. respect for children's views, namely recognizing and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion, is given the opportunity to express their views freely on everything that affects them.
Article 39
Development of Child-Friendly City is directed at fulfillment of children's rights which include:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time utilization, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.
Article 40
(1) In order to realize Child-Friendly City, stages of Child-Friendly City development are prepared which include:
a. preparation;
b. planning;
c. implementation;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.
(2) In each stage of Child-Friendly City development, children's views obtained through child consultation must be considered.
Article 41
(1) To make Child-Friendly City development effective, a Child-Friendly City Task Force is formed which is established by Mayor's Decree.
(2) Membership of Child-Friendly City Task Force can come from Regional Government, child representatives, business world, religious leaders, community leaders and other parties as needed.
Article 42
(1) The main tasks of Child-Friendly City Task Force are as follows:
a. coordinate various Child-Friendly City development efforts;
b. prepare Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development;
c. conduct socialization, advocacy and communication of Child-Friendly City development;
d. monitor implementation of policies, programs and activities in the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development;
e. conduct evaluation at the end of each year on implementation of policies, programs and activities in the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development; and
f. submit reports to the Mayor.
(2) Further provisions regarding Child-Friendly City Task Force are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

2021, No. 3
-92-
CHAPTER XIV
FUNDING
Article 43
(1) Regional Government is obligated to provide budget for implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs and activities.
(2) Financing for implementation of women's empowerment and child protection activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and
b. other legal and non-binding sources based on provisions of laws and regulations.
CHAPTER XV
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 44
(1) Community can participate in implementation activities of women's empowerment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals, community groups and community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be in the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.
CHAPTER XVI
COOPERATION
Article 45
(1) Regional cooperation is joint effort between regions with other regions, between regions with third parties, and/or between regions and institutions or regional governments abroad based on consideration of efficiency and effectiveness of public services and mutual benefit.
(2) Regional cooperation with third parties, hereinafter abbreviated as KSDPK is joint effort carried out by regions with third parties in order to administer government affairs that are regional authority to improve community welfare and accelerate fulfillment of public services.
(3) In order to achieve the goal of protecting women's and children's rights from acts of violence, regional government cooperates with:
a. other provinces;
b. regencies/cities; and
c. non-governmental institutions
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (3) includes:
a. exchange of data and information
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence

2021, No. 3
-93-
c. repatriation and social reintegration, and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses followed up in accordance with applicable law.
Article 46
Regional government organizes services for victims in the form of:
a. facilitating formation of UPT P2TP2A in each regency/city;
b. facilitating facilities and infrastructure of UPT P3TP2A;
c. facilitating Coordination Forum for Protection of Violence Victims as a network for handling victims.
CHAPTER XVII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 47
(1) Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. formation of policies and rules that serve as guidelines and standards in implementing women's empowerment and child protection;
b. technical guidance and training, including:
1. providing training for government officials and law enforcers on prevention and handling of violence;
2. providing training for religious leaders, community leaders, traditional leaders, educators, journalists and media managers in order to prevent violence against women and children;
3. providing training to health workers who provide health services to women and child victims of violence at health centers, integrated service units and general hospitals;
4. providing training to social rehabilitation officers and spiritual guidance officers in order to protect women and child victims of violence; and
5. providing training to PUG working groups and focal points of each Regional Apparatus for preparation of activity programs based on gender-responsive planning and budgeting.
c. provision of facilities and infrastructure in implementing women's empowerment and child protection.
d. facilitation of formation of women and child-caring villages;
e. provision of information through print and electronic media related to protection of women and children.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. monitoring implemented in the form of submission of implementation reports of women's empowerment and child protection programs by Heads of Regional Apparatus to the Mayor periodically once every 3 (three) months; and

2021, No. 3
-94-
b. evaluation of implementation of women's empowerment and child protection periodically once every 3 (three) months carried out by related Regional Apparatus/institutions
(4) Supervision results as referred to in paragraph (3) are material for evaluation of women's empowerment and child protection program policies.
(5) Further provisions regarding guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.
CHAPTER XVIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 48
Every person who commits criminal acts/violence as referred to in Article 11, Article 12, Article 13, and Article 14 is threatened with criminal punishment in accordance with provisions of Laws and Regulations.
CHAPTER XIX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 49
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Padang Sidimpuan City.
Established in Padang Sidimpuan
on March 16, 2021
MAYOR OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN,
Signed.
IRSAN EFENDI NASUTION
Promulgated in Padang Sidimpuan
on March 17, 2021
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF
PADANG SIDIMPUAN CITY,
Signed.
LETNAN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN CITY YEAR 2001 NUMBER 3
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PADANG SIDIMPUAN CITY, NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE: (3-40/2021)
Copy in accordance with the original
LEGAL SECTION,
MHD. ERWIN, S.H.
NIP. 19720525 200312 1 006