- 1 -
REGENT OF PAKPAK BHARAT
PROVINCE OF NORTH SUMATERA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF PAKPAK BHARAT,

Considering: a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against humanity;
b. that in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of women and children and improve quality of life, it is necessary to regulate the duties, authorities, and responsibilities of Regional Government in the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of all Form of Discrimination Againts Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 9 Year 2003 concerning Establishment of South Nias Regency, Pakpak Bharat Regency and Humbang Hasundutan Regency in North Sumatera Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4272);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 2 -
6. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance Between Central Government and Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
7. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
8. Law number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
11. Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2007 concerning Coordination Forum for Implementation of Cooperation in Prevention and Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence;
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 3 -
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence.

With Joint Approval of
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY and
REGENT OF PAKPAK BHARAT

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Pakpak Bharat Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Head as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pakpak Bharat.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Social Service is the Social Service of Pakpak Bharat Regency.
6. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion that is direct or indirect based on differentiation of humans on the basis of religion, tribe, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs resulting in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
7. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or vulnerable position, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
8. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age including those in the womb.
9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence against women is any action that results in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 4 -
11. Violence against children is any act against children that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child committed by parties who should be responsible for that child or those who have power over that child, who should be trustworthy, such as parents, close family, teachers and companions.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of victims including physical, psychological, and sexual health so that victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
14. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out social functions naturally.
15. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional area to the area of origin.
16. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
17. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by regional government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
18. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
19. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of violence.
20. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an Integrated Service Unit established by regional government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
21. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children and mother and her children.
24. Household is family members and relatives such as grandchildren, nephews/nieces, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, husbands, wives, cousins and so on and non-relatives such as domestic workers, drivers and so on who live and settle in one house.
25. Local wisdom (local wisdom) is truth that has become traditional or established in an area, local wisdom is a combination of sacred religious values and various existing values.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 5 -

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
Protection of women and children victims of violence is organized based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality and justice;
c. non-discriminatory;
d. protection of victims' rights;
e. legal certainty.

Article 3
(1) The purpose of organizing protection of women and children victims of violence is to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect, provide security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize intact, harmonious and prosperous households.
(2) Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic neglect;
e. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER III
VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 4
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. respect for dignity as a human being;
b. protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
c. health services according to medical needs;
d. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
e. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of examination process in accordance with the provisions of legislation;
f. spiritual guidance services;
g. determine their own decisions.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 6 -

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 5
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family;
d. parents.

Article 6
(1) Regional Government is obligated and responsible for providing protection to women and children victims of violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of regional government as referred to in Article 5 letter a include:
a. implementing policies for protection of women and children victims of violence based on legislation;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence;
d. facilitating assistance, legal aid and legal services according to victims' needs;
e. allocating budget for organizing protection of women and children from victims of violence according to regional financial capacity; and;
f. fostering and supervising the organization of protection of women and children victims of violence.
(3) In order to carry out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and action activities for protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for OPD in implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(4) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.
(2) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties;
c. participating in handling victims of violence;
d. providing protection to victims; and
e. providing emergency assistance.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 7 -

Article 8
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 9
(1) To prevent acts of violence against women and children, regional government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents, and communities by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), regional government conducts efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of formal, non-formal and informal education;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern for prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 10
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 9, is implemented by OPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. health;
b. education;
c. social affairs;
d. women's empowerment and child protection;
e. peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by OPD as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the regional action plan.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONS

Article 11
(1) In organizing protection of women and children victims of violence, regional government may establish an Integrated Service Center (PPT).
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 8 -
(2) The establishment and development of PPT is adjusted to the development of priority needs, and regional financial capacity as well as the capacity of existing personnel institutions in the region.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may accommodate institutions/work units that provide services for victims of violence such as P2TP2A, Safe Houses, Social Protection Houses for Children, Trauma Center Houses, Social Protection Houses for Women, Shelters and other service activities in accordance with applicable legislation.
(4) Forms of services implemented by PPT, include:
a. complaints;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. legal aid;
e. repatriation;
f. social reintegration.
(5) In providing protection to women and children victims of violence, PPT is obligated to:
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to victims;
b. organize protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal aid;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer companions needed for victims;
d. network with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperate with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or trauma centers owned by government, community or other institutions for health recovery of victims;
e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for victims;
f. maintain victim confidentiality;
g. provide fulfillment of legal aid for victims;
h. in the case that integrated service organization is conducted through networking, PPT remains responsible for the entire referral service process needed by victims.
(6) Provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (3) is implemented in accordance with SPM.

CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS

Article 12
SPM for integrated services for women and children victims of violence, includes services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of victims of violence against women and children;
b. health services for women and children victims of violence;
c. social rehabilitation for women and children victims of violence;
d. law enforcement and legal aid for women and children victims of violence;
e. repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of violence.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 9 -

Article 13
SPM as referred to in Article 12 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling, health services, social rehabilitation services, spiritual guidance services conducted by trained officers within integrated service units;
b. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children;
c. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal aid services;
d. coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence; and
e. coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 14
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated steps in implementing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence, Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine developments and obstacles in implementing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence in the region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of regional apparatus units that implement policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Monitoring is conducted from planning to implementation of policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children victims of violence for the current year.

Article 15
(1) Evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children is conducted every evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children is conducted every end of fiscal year or if needed according to needs.
(2) Results of evaluation of implementation of policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children are used as input material for formulation of policies, programs, and activities for protection of women and children for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 10 -

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING

Article 16
(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports on implementation of SPM for integrated services for women and children victims of violence to the Governor with copies submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted annually.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING

Article 17
Funding for organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence, is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 18
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for women and children victims of violence in the Region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing implementation instructions, guidance, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of implementation of services for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 19
In organizing protection of women and children victims of violence, the community may:
a. form family partners at the village level by the community;
b. conduct socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
c. provide first aid to victims;
d. participate with authorized agencies if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
e. community participation is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 11 -

CHAPTER XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 20
In the event that PPT as referred to in Article 11 has not been established, the existing P2TP2A, continues to carry out the duties and functions of integrated services for women and children victims of violence in the region.

CHAPTER IV
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 21
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pakpak Bharat Regency.

Established in Salak
on 10 April 2017
REGENT OF PAKPAK BHARAT,

signed

REMIGO YOLANDO BERUTU

Promulgated in Salak
on 11 April 2017
REGIONAL SECRETARY
OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY,

signed

SAHAT BANUREA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY
NORTH SUMATERA PROVINCE (2/41/2017)
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 12 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The national objective of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, as regulated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution in the fourth paragraph states includes: (1) protecting the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian territory, (2) advancing general welfare, (3) educating the nation's life and (4) participating in implementing world order based on (a) independence, (b) lasting peace, and (c) social justice.
The State of the Republic of Indonesia is a State of Law (rechtstaat) and not a state of power (machstaat), so that all actions of its citizens, including those in the form of violence, committed by both men and women, are also regulated by law.
The rights of women and children are recognized as Human Rights (HAM), which must be upheld and respected by all parties, but in reality there are still many women and children who become victims of violence. The Central Government's commitment to protect children and women is reflected in the legislation below it.
Various acts of violence both against women and children inside and outside the household continue to increase from time to time. This condition, if without serious handling will destroy household life, society, nation and state. Therefore, the government of Pakpak Bharat Regency is obligated to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence which is an implementation of various legislation, including Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons.
Protection of women and children from acts of violence is the obligation of Regional Government as regulated in Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government which states that: "in carrying out regional autonomy has the obligation to protect the community, maintain national unity, unity and harmony as well as the integrity of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia."
On that basis, the Government of Pakpak Bharat Regency has taken steps as an effort to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence, but has not been able to provide maximum and adequate protection against acts of violence that occur in the social life of society, especially to women and children
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id
- 13 -
due to the still low understanding of society regarding the rights of women and children, handling has not been well coordinated, implementation has not been continuous and so on. Therefore, a regulation in the form of a Regional Regulation concerning protection of women and children from acts of violence is needed to answer while providing legal certainty in the protection of women and children from acts of violence that occur.
With the enactment of this Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, in Pakpak Bharat Regency in particular, handling, rehabilitation and reintegration can be carried out properly and more smoothly in the process of prevention and handling of violence against women and children which in its implementation the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, communities and also the participation of the business world in preventing violence against women and children from beloved Pakpak Bharat Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter a
The principle of humanity becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence, constitutes respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (second principle of Pancasila)

Letter b
The principle of gender equality and justice, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as humans so they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, governmental activities and equality in enjoying development results.

Letter c
The principle of non-discrimination, that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence does not differentiate based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.

Letter d
The principle of protection of victims' rights, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities and Regional Government to fulfill the rights of women and children victims of acts of violence as regulated in legislation.

Letter e
The principle of legal certainty is the best interest for women and children, which is a principle specific to women and children themselves such as examples, how the interests of child victims of violence to undergo sanctions imposed on them, or how children will face perpetrators in court, must be stated in accordance with the interests of child victims of violence.
Likewise for women victims of violence who want to be given freedom according to their interests, women want to forget the perpetrator who is nota bene a person they once loved, and so on. So we as a society or as law enforcement apparatus need to give opportunities to children and women to express their interests regarding everything related to the perpetrator and how to overcome the impact of violence that befalls them.

Article 3
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (2)
Letter a
What is meant by "physical violence" is an act that results in pain, illness, serious injury such as slapping, hitting, spitting, pulling hair/pulling hair, kicking, burning with hot objects, hitting/injuring with weapons and or resulting in bodily disability of a person, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.

Letter b
What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person. Psychological violence can be in the form of emotional abuse, hurtful comments even degrading self-esteem, isolating the wife from the outside world, threatening/frightening as a means of imposing will.

Letter c
What is meant by "Sexual violence" is violence against sexuality which includes isolation (distancing) of the wife from her spiritual needs, forcing sexual relations, forcing one's own sexual preferences or not paying attention to the satisfaction of the wife.
Sexual violence can also take the form of forced sexual relations committed against people residing within the scope of the household, forced sexual relations against someone within the scope of their household with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Letter d
What is meant by "Economic Neglect" is neglecting the economic needs of wife and children or family or relatives such as not providing for the wife or spending the wife's money, not giving or withholding the salary of domestic workers or drivers including acts of limiting or prohibiting family members from working properly.

Letter e
What is meant by "Restriction of movement" is limiting the movement of wife or children to develop their potential both for economic and social purposes such as prohibiting gathering or socializing with society and limiting the movement of relatives such as preventing domestic workers and drivers from communicating or relating with their families.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Regional Action Plan is the stage of programs and activities for organizing protection of women and children victims of acts of violence including forms of worst work for children that must be carried out by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PAKPAK BHARAT REGENCY NUMBER 126
jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id

jdih.pakpakbharatkab.go.id