REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN
REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN
WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE
WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION
PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY
PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY
NUMBER 2
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF GOD
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN,
REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN,
Considering: a. that
that to guarantee women's empowerment and
to guarantee women's empowerment and
child protection in accordance with human dignity and worth
child protection in accordance with human dignity and worth
child protection in accordance with human dignity and worth
and to receive protection from
and to receive protection from
and to receive protection from
violence, discrimination, and other violations;
violence, discrimination, and other violations;
violence, discrimination, and other violations;
b. that
that in order to prevent and overcome
in order to prevent and overcome
acts of violence against women and children
acts of violence against women and children
acts of violence against women and children
in efforts to improve the quality of life of women
in efforts to improve the quality of life of women
in efforts to improve the quality of life of women
and children, the role of Regional Government needs to be enhanced
and children, the role of Regional Government needs to be enhanced
and children, the role of Regional Government needs to be enhanced
and the Community in women's empowerment and
and the Community in women's empowerment and
and the Community in women's empowerment and
child protection;
child protection;
c. that
that to provide legal certainty in
to provide legal certainty in
implementing women's empowerment and
implementing women's empowerment and
implementing women's empowerment and
child protection as well as carrying out mandatory affairs
child protection as well as carrying out mandatory affairs
child protection as well as carrying out mandatory affairs
of regional government, there needs to be regulation in
of regional government, there needs to be regulation in
of regional government, there needs to be regulation in
the form of Regional Regulation
the form of Regional Regulation;
d. that based on the considerations as that based on the considerations as
that based on the considerations as
referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary
referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary
referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary
to establish a Regional Regulation concerning
to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment
Women's Empowerment
and Child Protection;
and Child Protection;
In view of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the
Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of
1945 Constitution of the Republic of
Indonesia;
Indonesia;
2. Law
Law Number 12 of 1956 concerning
of 1956 concerning
Establishment of Autonomous Regency Regions Within
Establishment of Autonomous Regency Regions Within
Establishment of Autonomous Regency Regions Within
Central West Sumatra Provincial Region
Central West Sumatra Provincial Region
Central West Sumatra Provincial Region
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956
Year 1956
Number 25) as amended by Emergency Law
Number 25) as amended by Emergency Law Number 21 of
Number 21 of
1957 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1957
1957 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1957
1957 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1957
Number 77) and Law
Number 77) and Law Number 58 of 1958
Law Number 58 of 1958
Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discriminations Against Woman) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3277);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law
Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to
State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
7. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
8. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244 Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
9. Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293);
10. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
11. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2010 Concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of
Violence;
12. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 11 of
2011 Concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly
Regencies/Cities;
13. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products;
14. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of
2017 Concerning Governance of Technical Implementation Units for
Protection of Women and Children;
With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY
And
REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pesisir Selatan Regency
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pesisir Selatan.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Pesisir Selatan Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus Organization hereinafter abbreviated as OPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of the Regional Government of Pesisir Selatan Regency.
6. Women's Empowerment is an effort of Protection, strengthening of human rights, improving quality of life, and increasing women's participation in development.
7. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences acts of violence and/or threats of violence including physical, sexual, psychological, economic and/or social violence, in the family, community and/or society, in conflict situations, post-conflict, and the state.
9. Protection of women is all efforts to guarantee and protect women's rights so they can live healthily and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive protection from neglect,
violence and discrimination, whether in the form of preventive, repressive or post-remedial protection (assistance and treatment).
10. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive Protection from Violence and discrimination.
11. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development policy programs.
12. Prevention is direct efforts carried out by the Regional Government, community and parents and/or family to prevent violations of the rights of women and Children.
13. Gender responsive is consistent and systematic attention to differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers in achieving gender equality.
14. Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point is a Regional Apparatus Organization official who has the ability to implement gender mainstreaming in their respective work units.
15. Recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of violence to be more empowered, both physically, psychologically, socially, economically, culturally and politically.
16. Violence is any act and/or threat of act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, psychological, sexual or neglect.
17. Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
18. Violence against Children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
19. Gender Equality is equal conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings to play roles and participate in all fields.
20. Gender Justice is fair treatment of women and men, so that justice for women and men is realized, steps are needed to stop things that politically and socio-culturally can hinder women and men from being able to play roles and enjoy the results of their roles, and the experiences, problems, needs, interests and aspirations of women and men are different.
21. Service is action that must be taken immediately to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
22. Safe House is temporary housing used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and children, or father and children, or mother and
children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
25. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
26. Children's Forum is a forum for Child participation formed with the aim of facilitating children's involvement in decision-making processes and enjoying changes concerning their lives both directly and indirectly, which is carried out with the approval and will of all Children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of thinking maturity.
27. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a Regency that has a Child rights-based development system through integration of government commitment and resources, community and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure fulfillment of Children's rights.
28. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an institution established by the regional government to provide services to women and children experiencing criminal and civil problems.
Article 2
Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. gender equality and justice;
c. non-discrimination;
d. local wisdom;
e. best interests of women and children;
f. law enforcement and legal certainty; and
g. Respect for children's opinions.
Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee fulfillment of the rights of women and children in the region;
b. prevent actions, decisions and policies that violate the rights of women and children;
c. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
d. protect and provide security for victims of violence;
e. provide services to victims of violence; and
f. implement comprehensive recovery for victims of violence.
Article 4
The scope of regulation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection includes:
a. improving the quality of life of women;
b. protection of women and children;
c. improving family quality;
d. gender and Child data system;
e. fulfillment of Children's rights;
f. guidance and supervision; and
g. financing.
CHAPTER II
IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF LIFE OF WOMEN
Part One
General
Article 5
(1) In order to improve the quality of life of women, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. respecting and guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Region;
c. forming a Gender Mainstreaming working group in the Region;
d. increasing Women's Empowerment in roles, quality and capacity in the fields of;
1. politics;
2. law;
3. social; and
4. economy.
e. strengthening and developing institutions providing Women's Empowerment services in the Region;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPD in accordance with their duties and functions.
Part Two
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Region
Article 6
(1) The Regent is responsible for implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Region.
(2) The responsibility of the Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to the Vice Regent.
Article 7
In implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Region as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter b, the Regent establishes the OPD in charge of Women's Empowerment as coordinator of Gender Mainstreaming implementation.
Part Three
Formation of Gender Mainstreaming Working Group in the Region
Article 8
(1) In efforts to accelerate institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming in all OPDs, a Gender Mainstreaming working group is formed in the Region.
(2) Members of the Gender Mainstreaming working group are all heads/leaders of OPDs.
(3) The Regent appoints the Head of Bappeda as Chair of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming Working Group and the Head of the OPD in charge of Women's Empowerment as Head of the Secretariat of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming Working Group.
(4) Formation of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group is stipulated by Regent's Decree.
Article 9
The Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter c has the tasks of:
a. promoting and facilitating Gender Mainstreaming to each OPD;
b. implementing socialization and advocacy of Gender Mainstreaming to Sub-district Heads and Village Heads;
c. preparing work programs every year;
d. encouraging realization of Gender Responsive planning and budgeting;
e. preparing work plans for the Gender Mainstreaming working group every year;
f. being responsible to the Regent through the Vice Regent;
g. formulating gender mainstreaming policy recommendations to the Regent;
h. preparing Regional Gender Profiles;
i. monitoring implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in each OPD;
j. establishing a technical team to conduct analysis of Regional budgets;
k. preparing regional action plans on Gender Mainstreaming in the Region; and
l. encouraging implementation of selection and appointment of focal points in each OPD.
Article 10
(1) The Technical Team as referred to in Article 9 letter j consists of officials who understand gender responsive budget analysis.
(2) The Regional Gender Mainstreaming regional action plan as referred to in Article 9 letter k contains:
a. Gender mainstreaming in regional legislation;
b. Gender mainstreaming in the regional development cycle;
c. strengthening Gender Mainstreaming institutions in the Region; and
d. strengthening community participation in the Region.
Article 11
(1) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point in each OPD as referred to in Article 9 letter l consists of officials and/or staff in charge of planning and/or programs.
(2) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1) has the tasks of:
a. promoting Gender Mainstreaming in the work unit;
b. facilitating preparation of gender responsive OPD work plans and budgets;
c. implementing training, socialization, advocacy of Gender Mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the OPD;
d. reporting implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to OPD leadership;
e. encouraging implementation of gender analysis of policies, programs, and activities in the work unit; and
f. facilitating preparation of gender data in each OPD;
(3) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1) is selected and appointed by the OPD leadership.
Part Four
Increasing the Role, Quality, and Capacity of Women in the Political Field
Article 12
Efforts to increase the role, quality and capacity of women in the political field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 1 include:
a. implementing socialization to increase women's political participation in general elections;
b. implementing programs that encourage the level of women's involvement in political processes and public positions;
c. facilitating women's self-development in organizing, associating and assembling;
d. involving women in decision-making concerning women's interests;
Part Five
Increasing the Role, Quality, and Capacity of Women in the Legal Field
Article 13
Efforts to increase the role, quality and capacity of women in the legal field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 2 include:
a. conducting socialization to increase women's legal knowledge and awareness;
b. mapping and reviewing gender-biased policies;
c. involving women's organizations in the process of formulating and discussing Regional legal products related to women's participation;
Part Six
Increasing the Role, Quality, and Capacity of Women in the Social Field
Article 14
Efforts to increase the role, quality and capacity of women in the social field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 3 include:
a. increasing knowledge and skills to encourage fulfillment of education according to potential;
b. increasing and fulfilling quality of health for women;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about planning independent, healthy and prosperous families including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
d. increasing women's awareness of the impact of early marriage;
e. facilitating and seeking preservation of customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for women's advancement;
f. increasing women's awareness and knowledge of planning independent, healthy and prosperous families;
g. implementing programs to reduce maternal mortality rates;
h. encouraging formation of women's organizations in the Region;
Part Seven
Increasing the Role, Quality, and Capacity of Women in the Economic Field
Article 15
Efforts to increase the role, quality and capacity of women in the economic field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 4 include:
a. implementing programs, activities, training to improve women's skills and expertise in order to realize improvement of women's welfare;
b. facilitating business capital strengthening for women with weak economies;
c. marketing products from businesses of women with weak economies;
d. training to develop women's capabilities through economic empowerment of pre-prosperous families;
e. comprehensive entrepreneurship training for women.
CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
General
Paragraph 1
Regional Government
Article 16
(1) The role of Regional Government in efforts to Protect Women and Children:
a. establishing and implementing policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children;
b. making efforts to prevent acts of violence against women including criminal acts of trafficking in persons;
c. increasing effectiveness of services for women and Child victims of violence;
d. increasing efforts to protect women and Child workers;
e. strengthening and developing institutions providing Protection services for Women and Children;
f. cooperating with the Government, other Regional Governments, private parties, business world and/or Community non-governmental organizations in efforts to prevent acts of violence against women and Children;
g. involving the active role of families, ninik mamak, bundo kanduang, customary leaders, religious leaders, the Community, and institutions in the field of Protection of Women and Children;
(2) The role of Regional Government in efforts to protect women as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPD in accordance with their duties and functions and may coordinate with relevant agencies.
Paragraph 2
Community
Article 17
(1) Community participation in efforts to Protect Women and Children:
a. participating in prevention and providing support for development of prevention programs for violations of the rights of women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting violations of the rights of women and children to authorized parties; and
c. supervising the law enforcement process for cases of violations of the rights of women and children.
(2) Ninik mamak, religious scholars and intellectuals as well as bundo kanduang are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and children.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) is based on legislation and local wisdom values of the local community.
Paragraph 3
Parents and Family
Article 18
The family's role in efforts to protect women's rights is:
a. protecting women from conflict and domestic violence that degrades women's dignity;
b. providing equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural; and
c. preventing violations of women's rights in the household.
Article 19
(1) Parents' role in efforts to protect children's rights is:
a. caring for, maintaining, educating, and protecting children;
b. developing children according to their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. providing formal and non-formal education;
d. guiding children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics and morals as well as customs; and
e. preventing marriage at child age.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or for some reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may transfer to the family.
Part Two
Prevention of Acts of Violence against Women and Children
Paragraph 1
Regional Government
Article 20
(1) In order to prevent acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government:
a. implements socialization regarding prevention of violence against women and children by optimizing the role of customary, cultural, religious and community organizations;
b. provides guidelines on handling acts of violence against women and children;
c. involves community participation in recovery and reintegration;
d. develops an integrated database and information system on acts of violence against women and children;
e. develops family empowerment programs;
f. strengthens the function of community organizations working in the field of women's empowerment and child protection; and
g. provides comfortable and safe public facilities for women and children.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPDs whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual;
g. informatics and communication; and
h. peace and order.
(3) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPDs in accordance with their field of duty in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan.
Paragraph 2
Community
Article 21
In order to prevent acts of violence against women and Children, the community:
a. monitors various conditions occurring in their environment that may cause violations of the rights of women and children;
b. increases awareness of violations of the rights of women and children;
c. strengthens the role of community, religious and family environment organizations; and
d. prevents unregistered marriages and marriage at child age.
Paragraph 3
Parents and Family
Article 22
In order to prevent acts of violence against women and children, parents and family:
a. protect women and children from various violations of rights in the household;
b. encourage formation of harmonious, educative and democratic families;
c. provide good examples to children according to religious and customary teachings;
d. supervise children in activities inside or outside the home; and
e. provide opportunities for children to dialogue and express opinions democratically.
Part Three
Effectiveness of Services for Women and Children
Paragraph 1
General
Article 23
(1) In order to implement Protection of Women and Children in the Region, the Regional Government establishes UPTD PPA in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
(2) UPTD PPA functions to provide services to women and Children experiencing criminal and/or civil problems.
(3) The scope of UPTD PPA services as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. complaint services;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. assistance;
f. law enforcement and legal aid; and
g. repatriation and social reintegration.
(4) In carrying out its functions, UPTD PPA is obliged to:
a. provide services and handling as quickly as possible to women and children experiencing problems;
b. provide convenience, comfort, safety and free of charge to women and children experiencing problems;
c. maintain confidentiality of women and children experiencing problems;
d. guarantee justice and legal certainty for women and children experiencing problems.
(5) UPTD PPA is responsible to the OPD that administers government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
Article 24
(1) Implementation of UPTD PPA services is integrative, either in the form of one roof or networked to provide optimal services to women and children experiencing problems.
(2) In the event that integrated service implementation is conducted under one roof, UPTD PPA is responsible for implementing the entire process in one unit to provide services needed by women and children experiencing problems.
(3) In the event that integrated service implementation is conducted in a network, UPTD PPA is responsible for the entire referral process for services needed by women and children experiencing problems.
(4) Every element within the UPTD PPA environment in carrying out its duties must apply the principles of coordination, integration, synchronization, accountability and openness, both within the UPTD PPA environment, and in relations between OPDs, relevant agencies, and community elements.
(5) Further provisions regarding the organization and work procedures of UPTD PPA as referred to in Article 23 and Article 24 paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) are stipulated by Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph 2
Complaint Services
Article 25
Complaint services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (3) letter a may be coordinated by UPTD PPA with relevant agencies consisting of:
a. hospitals;
b. community health centers;
c. integrated service centers for women's empowerment and children
d. trauma center shelters;
e. women crisis centres;
f. advisory boards for marriage guidance and preservation;
g. police;
h. prosecutor's office;
i. courts;
j. ministry of religion; and/or
k. legal aid organizations;
Article 26
(1) Complaints of acts of violence against women and children may be made by reporters consisting of victims, victims' families, the community and/or community organizations in the field of protection of women and children.
(2) Reporters as referred to in paragraph (1) may make complaints:
a. directly;
b. by telephone; and/or
c. by letter.
(3) In addition to complaint services submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions as referred to in Article 25 are also authorized to handle victims of acts of violence against women obtained through other information.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for handling complaint services as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph 3
Health Rehabilitation
Article 27
(1) Health rehabilitation as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (3) letter b is an effort that includes aspects of:
a. promotive, improving health status to increase further;
b. preventive, preventing from contracting disease;
c. curative, curing someone from illness physically and psychologically;
d. rehabilitative, maintaining someone who has not fully recovered to return to fitness as before.
(2) Health rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted comprehensively, accessible 24 (twenty-four) hours, quality and conducted in accordance with health service standards.
(3) Women and Child victims of violence have the right to free health services, including:
a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial counseling; and
d. Visum et Repertum.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for implementing health services as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph 4
Social Rehabilitation
Article 28
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (3) letter c is aimed at restoring and developing the capacity of women and children experiencing social dysfunction due to criminal and/or civil problems to be able to carry out their social functions in society normally.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes services for:
a. counseling;
b. provision of safe houses; and
c. spiritual guidance.
(3) In implementing services as referred to in paragraph (2), UPTD PPA may cooperate with women crisis centres and/or social community organizations that already exist.
Article 29
(1) Counseling services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (2) letter a aim to:
a. help women and Child victims of violence recognize their problems and find effective ways to overcome them themselves;
b. empower women and children experiencing criminal and/or civil problems to determine their future;
c. provide moral support to women and children experiencing criminal and/or civil problems in facing the process they are going through; and
d. make women and children experiencing criminal and/or civil problems feel accepted in the community environment.
(2) Counseling services are provided by gender-responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of:
a. counselors;
b. psychologists; and/or
c. psychiatrists.
(3) Counseling services are conducted in a place that guarantees security, comfort and confidentiality of information from women victims of violence.
(4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; and
d. site visits.
Article 30
(1) The Regional Government may provide safe houses for women and children experiencing criminal and/or civil problems.
(2) Safe house provision services aim to protect women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems from intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.
(3) The location of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.
(4) Criteria for women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems who need safe houses include:
a. life threatened;
b. receiving rejection from family or community;
c. requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far; and/or
d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house.
Article 31
(1) Spiritual guidance as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (2) letter c aims for psychological recovery.
(2) Spiritual guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on the principles of:
a. not imposing any religion or belief; and
b. leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self determination).
(3) Spiritual guidance is conducted by spiritual guidance officers.
Paragraph 5
Law Enforcement and Legal Aid
Article 32
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (3) letter f are actions by law enforcement officials to implement legislation in handling criminal and/or civil problems against women
and children, especially to provide sanctions to perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
(2) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted by prioritizing the best interests of victims.
(3) Types of legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. legal aid in the reporting process and preparation of examination reports;
b. legal aid in the prosecution process at the prosecutor's office;
c. legal aid in the examination process in court;
d. legal aid in the court hearing decision process until there is a final legal decision; and
e. legal aid in the mediation process.
(4) The Regional Government provides legal aid to women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems based on the provisions of legislation.
(5) In providing legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3), UPTD PPA may cooperate with legal aid institutions, women crisis centers, advocates and/or other gender-sensitive legal assistants.
Paragraph 6
Repatriation and Social Reintegration
Article 33
(1) Repatriation is aimed at returning women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems to their place of origin.
(2) Repatriation of women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems is accompanied by social reintegration efforts.
Article 34
(1) Social reintegration is conducted in order to reunite women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
(2) Social reintegration is aimed so that:
a. women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems can continue their social life; and
b. women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems can have a decent life.
(3) Social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted after victims receive social rehabilitation services.
Article 35
UPTD PPA implements repatriation and social reintegration of women and children as victims of criminal and/or civil problems in accordance with legislation.
CHAPTER IV
IMPROVING FAMILY QUALITY
Article 36
(1) In order to improve family quality, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. making efforts to improve family quality to realize gender equality and Children's rights;
b. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and Children's rights; and
c. strengthening and developing institutions providing family quality improvement services in the Region.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPD in accordance with their duties and functions.
Article 37
The Regional Government makes efforts to improve family quality as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter a including:
a. guidance;
b. counseling; and
c. supervision.
Article 38
Guidance as referred to in Article 37 letter a includes:
a. growth and development of toddlers;
b. protection of adolescent reproductive health;
c. maturation of marriage age;
d. birth regulation; and
e. improving the health quality of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers.
Article 39
Counseling as referred to in Article 37 letter b includes:
a. conducting outreach to improve women's quality of life;
b. conducting pre-marital counseling.
c. facilitating implementation of family development;
Article 40
Supervision as referred to in Article 37 letter c includes:
a. evaluating toddler growth and development data;
b. evaluating post-marriage data.
Article 41
Provision of services for families as referred to in Article 36 paragraph (1) letter b includes:
a. communication, information and education;
b. recording and reporting of family planning services;
c. adequate health service facilities and infrastructure; and
d. lactation rooms in every public facility.
Article 42
Communication, information and education as referred to in Article 41 letter a is a communication activity to increase knowledge and improve the attitudes and behavior of families and communities in population and family planning programs.
Article 43
(1) Agencies and private parties that provide public services are required to provide lactation rooms.
(2) Lactation rooms as referred to in paragraph (1) are proper and adequate rooms.
(3) Agency heads who do not provide lactation rooms as referred to in paragraph (1) are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning; and/or
b. employment sanctions based on the provisions of Legislation.
(4) Private parties who do not provide lactation rooms as referred to in paragraph (2) are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. limitation of business activities;
c. freezing of business activities;
d. administrative fines; and/or
e. revocation of permits.
CHAPTER V
GENDER AND CHILD DATA SYSTEM
Part One
General
Article 44
(1) In order to prepare planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, as well as gender-responsive and child-caring development policy making, the regional government implements a gender and child data system.
(2) To implement the gender and child data system, accurate and accountable disaggregated data is required.
Part Two
Implementation of gender and child data system
Article 45
(1) In implementing the gender and child data system in the region as referred to in article 44, the Regent forms a gender and child disaggregated data working group.
(2) Members of the disaggregated data working group forum as referred to in paragraph (1) are coordinators from all OPDs.
(3) The Regent appoints the head of Bappeda as chair of the gender and child disaggregated data working group and the head of the OPD in charge of women's empowerment as secretary of the disaggregated data working group.
(4) Formation of the gender and child disaggregated data working group is stipulated by Regent's Decree.
Article 46
The regional disaggregated data working group as referred to in article 44 has the tasks of:
a. preparing work plans for the gender and child disaggregated data working group using measurable indicators and targets for certain periods to be used for monitoring and evaluation of gender and child disaggregated data working group activities;
b. improving cross-sector cooperation in strengthening data produced related to data procurement and utilization;
c. implementing coordination and synchronization with relevant agencies in preparing gender and child data for the regency level; and
d. collecting, processing, preparing and improving data quality and presenting data in regional apparatus organizations and subsequently making it secondary data on Gender and Child data on an ongoing basis.
CHAPTER VI
FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General
Article 47
(1) The Regional Government in efforts to fulfill Children's rights is responsible for:
a. establishing and implementing policies and programs/activities for fulfillment of Children's rights;
b. respecting and guaranteeing the human rights of every Child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of Children, birth order of Children, and physical and/or mental condition;
c. strengthening and developing institutions providing family quality improvement services in realizing Children's rights;
d. guaranteeing Protection, maintenance, and welfare of Children taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or others legally responsible for Children;
e. providing facilities and infrastructure in implementing fulfillment of Children's rights;
f. guaranteeing Children's rights to express opinions according to the age and intelligence level of Children;
g. conducting supervision and guidance in implementing fulfillment of Children's rights;
h. cooperating with private parties and/or NGOs in implementing Child Protection;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to Protect Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by OPD in accordance with their duties and functions.
Part Two
Birth Registration and Child Identity
Article 48
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to implement Child birth registration with issuance of birth certificates.
(2) Birth certificates as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented free of charge.
Article 49
(1) To encourage increased data collection, protection and public services and to realize the best for children, every child under 17 years of age must have a child identity card.
(2) Child identity cards are issued by the OPD for population and civil registration.
Part Three
Education
Article 50
The Regional Government guarantees implementation of compulsory education programs for Children in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
Article 51
(1) Every education unit organizer is required to provide opportunities for Children to obtain education services without discrimination.
(2) Every education unit organizer is prohibited from expelling Children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of Children's education.
(3) In the event that Child victims of Violence experience dropping out of school, then child victims of violence are provided formal or non-formal education, in this case conducted by education unit organizers and coordinated with UPTD PPA.
Article 52
(1) Every Child has the right to obtain education and teaching in developing their personality and intelligence level according to their interests and talents.
(2) Every Child has the right to receive Protection in education units from sexual crimes and Violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.
Article 53
(1) Children with disabilities and Children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including inclusive education programs.
(2) The regional government provides teaching staff for inclusive education in every education unit.
Part Four
Health and Social
Article 54
(1) The Regional Government is required to provide comprehensive health services for Children, so that every Child obtains optimal health status from the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b. exemption from cost burdens for malnourished children, children with disabilities, children with special needs, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, children victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse, children who are victims of violence, and child victims of trafficking in persons;
(3) The Regional Government, community, family and parents are required to ensure that Children born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.
Article 55
(1) Promotive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at improving health status more optimally.
(2) Promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted by providing socialization or outreach to the community regarding healthy lifestyles including:
a. the importance of exclusive breast milk for babies;
b. the importance of immunization for toddlers;
c. clean living patterns;
d. the importance of nutritious food; and
e. dangers of drugs and smoking.
(3) In addition to promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may conduct other activities in implementing health.
Article 56
(1) Preventive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing disease or health problems.
(2) Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted by:
a. requiring mothers to provide exclusive breastfeeding to babies up to 6 (six) months of age;
b. providing free immunization and vitamins to babies and toddlers;
c. providing nutritious food to toddlers from underprivileged families;
d. optimizing the role of posyandu for health services for mothers and toddlers;
e. conducting periodic health examinations;
f. providing sanitation facilities and clean water in every school; and
g. providing special breastfeeding facilities or breastfeeding corner rooms in government agencies or business world.
Article 57
(1) Curative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing disease from becoming more severe through treatment.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented free of charge for children from underprivileged families.
Article 58
(1) Rehabilitative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 54 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at maintaining and restoring conditions after illness.
(2) Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through periodic health examinations.
Article 59
The Regional Government is required to implement Social Welfare for:
a. Children in conflict with the law;
b. Child victims of violence who are exploited economically and sexually, neglected children, child victims of kidnapping and child victims of trafficking in persons;
c. Children who do not have parents and are cared for by parties or families who are unable;
d. Child victims of natural disasters or social disasters; and
e. Children with disabilities.
Part Five
Manpower
Article 60
The Regional Government conducts periodic supervision of every person/entity that employs Children in efforts to Protect child workers.
Article 61
(1) Every person/entity is prohibited from employing and involving Children in the worst forms of work.
(2) The worst forms of work referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. all work in the form of slavery or the like;
b. all work that exploits, provides, or offers Children for prostitution, pornography production, pornographic performances, or gambling;
c. all work that exploits, provides, or involves Children for production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropics, and other addictive substances; and/or
d. all work that endangers the health, safety, or morals of Children.
Part Six
Children's Forum
Article 62
(1) In implementing fulfillment of children's rights to express opinions and participate, the Regional Government facilitates formation of Children's Forums.
(2) Children's Forums as referred to in paragraph (1) are representations of Children in the Region, both representation of Children's geographic domicile, components of Children's socio-cultural groups and Children's educational backgrounds.
(3) Children's Forums may be formed at Regency, Sub-district and Village levels.
(4) In every formulation of policies related to Children, the Regional Government is required to consider and accommodate Children's opinions submitted through Children's participation Forums.
(5) Further provisions regarding formation of Children's Forums as referred to in paragraphs (1) through (3) are stipulated by Regent's Decree.
Part Seven
Child-Friendly Regency
Article 63
(1) In order to fulfill Children's rights in an integrated, systematic and sustainable manner, the Regional Government establishes a KLA Development policy.
(2) KLA Development policy contains:
a. KLA concept concerning objectives, strategies and roles of related parties;
b. Children's rights; and
c. KLA development approach.
Article 64
(1) KLA development policy is directed at fulfillment of Children's rights divided into 5 (five) groups, including:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time utilization, and cultural activities; and
e. Special protection.
(2) Further provisions regarding KLA development policy as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.
Article 65
(1) In order to ensure effectiveness of KLA policy implementation in the Region, a KLA Task Force is formed.
(2) Formation and membership composition of the KLA Task Force is stipulated by Regent's Decree.
(3) The Regent appoints the head of Bappeda as KLA Task Force and the head of the OPD in charge of women's empowerment as secretary of the KLA Task Force;
(4) The KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) has the main tasks of:
a. coordinating implementation of KLA policies and development;
b. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication information and education of KLA policies;
c. collecting basic data for KLA development;
d. conducting needs analysis sourced from basic data;
e. disseminating basic data;
f. determining focus and program priorities in realizing KLA, adjusted to regional potential;
g. preparing 5 (five) year Child-Friendly City regional action plans and work mechanisms; and
h. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once (1) a year.
Article 66
In carrying out its duties, the KLA Task Force may coordinate and cooperate with UPTD PPA and other institutions that provide Protection and Child services.
CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 67
(1) The Regional Government is required to conduct guidance and supervision of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) Regional Government guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards, by facilitating formation of policies and regulations used as guidelines and standards in implementing women's empowerment and child protection.
b. technical guidance and training, including:
1. providing training for government officials and law enforcers on prevention and handling of violence;
2. providing training for religious leaders, community leaders, customary leaders, educators, journalists and media managers in preventing violence against women and children;
3. providing training to health workers who provide health services to women and child victims of violence at health centers, integrated service units and general hospitals;
4. providing training to social rehabilitation officers and spiritual guidance officers in protecting women and child victims of violence; and
5. providing training to PUG working groups and focal points of each OPD for preparing activity programs based on gender responsive planning and budgeting.
c. Provision of facilities, the Regional Government provides facilities, facilities and infrastructure in implementing women's empowerment and child protection.
d. facilitating formation of women and child-caring villages;
e. Provision of information through print and electronic media related to protection of women and children.
(3) Supervision conducted by the Regional Government referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. Monitoring, in the form of:
1. OPD leaders in accordance with their duties and functions are required to submit reports on implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs to the Regent.
2. Reports as referred to are submitted periodically once (1) every 3 (three) months.
b. Evaluation, conducted in the form of:
1. The Regent conducts supervision and evaluation of implementation of women's empowerment and child protection periodically once (1) every 3 (three) months.
2. In conducting supervision and evaluation, the Regent may appoint OPDs in accordance with their duties and functions.
3. Supervision and evaluation results are evaluation material for women's empowerment and child protection program policies.
(4) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) in order to realize the objectives of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection are regulated by Regent's Regulation.
CHAPTER VIII
FINANCING
Article 68
(1) The Regional Government is required to provide budget for implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs and activities through the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or other regional financial sources according to regional financial capacity
(2) Financing for implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
CHAPTER IX
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 69
In order to ensure effectiveness and efficiency of implementation of protection services for women and children, before UPTD PPA is formed, the duties and functions of UPTD PPA are implemented by the OPD that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 70
Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.
Article 71
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pesisir Selatan Regency.

Stipulated in Painan
on 16 June 2017
REGENT OF PESISIR SELATAN,

signed
HENDRAJONI
Promulgated in Painan
on 16 June 2017
REGIONAL SECRETARY
PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY,

signed
ERIZON
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER: 2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE: (2/30/2017)
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
I. GENERAL
Children are a trust and gift from God Almighty, which we must always protect because in them is inherent dignity, worth, and rights as human beings that must be upheld. Children's human rights are part of human rights contained in the 1945 Constitution and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. From the perspective of national and state life, children are the nation's future and the next generation of the nation's ideals, so that every child has the right to survival, growth, and development, participation and the right to protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.
Likewise with women, women are expected to give birth to healthy, strong, resilient, noble, potential and quality children. Through women's roles in family, society and state, resilient generations will be born who will continue the nation's ideals.
As Indonesian citizens, women also have the right to improve quality and develop themselves according to their abilities, dignity and worth.
As assets and hopes of the nation and state, children need to be given protection and safeguarded from all forms of acts of violence that will hinder their growth and development. Likewise with women, women need to be protected from acts of discrimination and acts of violence whether physical, psychological, mental, sexual and neglect. Because their physique is weaker than men and adults and because of women's nature itself, women and children often become objects of venting desires, anger, economic exploitation, violence (physical, psychological and sexual), cruelty, neglect, and so on.
To realize protection of women and children, support from legislation is needed that can guarantee its implementation.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child emphasizes that efforts must be made to prevent children from being kidnapped, smuggled and sold. In following up on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Government established Law Number 23 of 2002 as amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Child Protection.
Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights has included children's rights, implementation of obligations and responsibilities of parents, family, community, government, and state. Child protection in all aspects is part of national development activities, especially in advancing national and state life.
Parents, family, and community are responsible for safeguarding and maintaining these human rights in accordance with obligations imposed by law. Likewise in implementing child protection, the State, Government and Regional Government are responsible for providing facilities and accessibility for children, especially in ensuring their growth and development optimally and directedly.
That in order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, and efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life, it is deemed necessary to implement a gender mainstreaming strategy into all national development processes, because it is an inseparable part of functional activities of all organizations and institutions in the Region, therefore it is necessary to encourage, make effective, and optimize gender mainstreaming efforts in an integrated and coordinated manner.
Although protection of women's and children's rights has been regulated in national-level legislation, because fulfillment of women's and children's constitutional rights and improvement of women's and children's quality of life is one of the mandatory affairs that is the duty, authority and responsibility of Regional Government, then in providing protection to women and children, the Government of Pesisir Selatan Regency needs to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
Letter a
What is meant by respect for the rights of women and children as regulated by legislation concerning the rights of women and children.
Letter b
What is meant by gender equality is equal conditions and positions for men and women to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings, to be able to play roles and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, educational, national defense and security activities and equality in enjoying development results with balanced impacts.
What is meant by gender justice is fair conditions and treatment of women and men, so that justice for women and men is realized, steps are needed to stop things that politically and socio-culturally can hinder women and men from being able to play roles and enjoy the results of their roles.
Letter c
What is meant by non-discrimination is that every woman and child without exception has the right to receive services related to violence experienced, no one may be rejected or given priority over others except on certain emergency considerations.
Letter d
What is meant by local wisdom is good cultural values that exist in a society.
Letter e
What is meant by best interests of women and children is that in all actions concerning women and children carried out by government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of women and children must be the primary consideration.
Letter f
Sufficiently clear.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
Article 6
Sufficiently clear.
Article 7
Sufficiently clear.
Article 8
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
What is meant by gender responsive planning is planning to achieve gender equality and justice, conducted through integration of experiences, aspirations, needs, potential and problem solving of women and men.
What is meant by gender responsive budgeting is the use or utilization of budgets from various funding sources to achieve gender equality and justice.
Letter e
Sufficiently clear.
Letter f
Sufficiently clear.
Letter g
Sufficiently clear.
Letter h
Sufficiently clear.
Letter i
Sufficiently clear.
Letter j
Sufficiently clear.
Letter k
Sufficiently clear.
Letter l
Sufficiently clear.
Article 10
Sufficiently clear
Article 11
Sufficiently clear
Article 12
Sufficiently clear
Article 13
Sufficiently clear
Article 14
Sufficiently clear
Article 15
Sufficiently clear
Article 16
Sufficiently clear
Article 17
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear
Paragraph (2)
What is meant by Ninik Mamak is a man from a clan who is respected and becomes "tampek baiyo dan bamolah" (deliberation place) even though still young. In this case includes mamak kepala jurai and mamak kepala waris in the clan, whether he is a religious scholar, intellectual, community leader, laborer, farmer or even an official.
What is meant by Religious scholars are leaders of Minangkabau society in religious matters, namely people who are considered pious. A pious person is someone who has extensive knowledge and has faith, their existence in society is very much needed. This is expressed in Minangkabau custom: custom based on sharia, sharia based on the book of Allah. The existence of religious scholars in Minangkabau society covers Islam/sharia.
What is meant by Intellectuals are community leaders who have extensive knowledge and insight and thinking that can find solutions to every problem faced by Minangkabau society. Intellectuals are a collection of smart, knowledgeable, clever people, scholars, and people who quickly understand, are good at finding problem solutions and have broad thinking.
What is meant by Bundo Kanduang is a term for women in Minangkabau, bundo means mother and kanduang means true. Bundo kanduang means, true mother who has maternal and leadership qualities.
Article 18
Sufficiently clear.
Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20
Sufficiently clear.
Article 21
Sufficiently clear.
Article 22
Sufficiently clear.
Article 23
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
Sufficiently clear.
Letter c
Sufficiently clear.
Letter d
Sufficiently clear.
Letter e
What is meant by assistance is all actions taken in the form of complaint services, health, advocacy and legal aid, social rehabilitation including spiritual guidance, counseling, psychological therapy and economic empowerment, repatriation and social reintegration for strengthening and advocacy as well as recovery of victims of violence.
Article 24
Sufficiently clear.
Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.
Article 27
Paragraph (1)
Letter a
What is meant by promotive aspect is improving health status to increase further, for example providing early breastfeeding initiation (IMD) and exclusive breastfeeding which can help increase immunity to disease because of colostrum and nutrients contained in breast milk, so children are not easily affected by disease.
Letter b
What is meant by preventive aspect is preventing from contracting disease or keeping healthy people healthy, for example washing hands before eating and after defecating will prevent diarrhea.
Letter c
What is meant by curative aspect is the process of curing someone from illness physically and psychologically.
Letter d
What is meant by rehabilitative aspect is the process of maintaining someone who has recovered (not 100% recovered) to return to fitness as before.
Paragraph (2)
What is meant by health rehabilitation conducted comprehensively is health rehabilitation conducted in promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative ways and able to answer.
Paragraph (3)
Letter a
What is meant by medical services are services provided to reduce impact and prevent further injury, suffering and cost threats. includes:
1. physical examination and treatment of physical injuries;
2. treatment of psychological disorders;
3. treatment for prevention of sexually transmitted diseases;
4. treatment for HIV prevention; and
5. reproductive health services.
Letter b
What is meant by medicolegal services are services concerning management of various aspects related to medical services for legal purposes, for example collection of evidence on victims and preparation of VeR, including:
1. visum et repertum (VeR) and psychological et repertum;
2. doctor's certificate; or
3. medical records
What is meant by Visum et Repertum is a statement made by a doctor at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of medical examination of humans, whether alive or dead or parts or suspected parts of the human body, based on their knowledge and under oath, for judicial purposes.
Letter c
What is meant by Psychosocial counseling is service by conducting counseling/handling psychological trauma, providing assistance during victim handling process, coordinating patient referrals and evaluating completeness of victim case record documents, including:
1. assistance from psychologists or social workers during victim handling process; and
2. counseling/handling psychological trauma.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 28
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
What is meant by women crisis centre is an integrated service center initiated by the community spread throughout the region, most of whose services are provided for women and child victims of violence such as domestic violence, sexual violence and violence against children.
Article 29
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Letter a
What is meant by Counselor is a trained officer who conducts counseling, namely providing assistance by someone who is expert/trained in such a way that the victim's psychological self-understanding and ability increases in solving problems faced.
Letter b
What is meant by Psychologist is personnel who have the ability to conduct psychological recovery for women and child victims of violence.
Letter c
What is meant by Psychiatrist is a specialist medical profession tasked with handling mental disorder problems.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 30
Sufficiently clear.
Article 31
Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear.
Letter b
What is meant by leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self determination) is that the counselor conveys complete information and allows the victim to make the final decision.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 32
Sufficiently clear.
Article 33
Sufficiently clear.
Article 34
Sufficiently clear.
Article 35
Sufficiently clear.
Article 36
Sufficiently clear
Article 37
Sufficiently clear
Article 38
Sufficiently clear
Article 39
Sufficiently clear
Article 40
Sufficiently clear
Article 41
Sufficiently clear
Article 42
Sufficiently clear
Article 43
Sufficiently clear
Article 44
Paragraph (1)
Gender and child data system is institutionalization of gender and child implementation consisting of regulatory components, institutions and mechanisms in the region for planning, implementation, evaluation and reporting of gender responsive and child-caring development policy/program/activity results.
Paragraph (2)
What is meant by disaggregated data is data disaggregated by sex and age.
Article 45
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by gender and child disaggregated data working group is a communication forum in the region for sharing experiences and facilitating access related to efforts to provide disaggregated data and gender analysis.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 46
Sufficiently clear.
Article 47
Sufficiently clear.
Article 48
Sufficiently clear.
Article 49
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by child identity card is official child identity as proof of identity of children under 17 years of age and unmarried issued by the Population and Civil Registration Office.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.
Article 50
Sufficiently clear.
Article 51
Sufficiently clear.
Article 52
Sufficiently clear.
Article 53
Paragraph (1)
What is meant by children with disabilities and special needs are children who experience limitations/abnormalities whether physical, mental-intellectual, social, or emotional that significantly affect their growth and development process compared to other children their age.
What is meant by formal education is systematic, structured, tiered activities starting from elementary school to higher education and equivalent, including academic and general study activities, specialization programs, and professional training conducted continuously.
What is meant by non-formal education is an education path outside formal education that can be implemented in a structured and tiered manner.
What is meant by informal education is family education path (tutoring, home schooling, private) and environment. Education is implemented by providing examples, building will, and developing creativity of students in the learning process.
What is meant by inclusive education is an education service system that includes children with special needs learning together with their peers in regular schools closest to their residence.
Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently Clear.
Article 54
Sufficiently clear.
Article 55
Sufficiently clear.
Article 56
Sufficiently clear.
Article 57
Sufficiently clear.
Article 58
Sufficiently clear.
Article 59
Sufficiently clear.
Article 60
Sufficiently clear.
Article 61
Sufficiently clear.
Article 62
Sufficiently clear.
Article 63
Sufficiently clear.
Article 64
Sufficiently clear.
Article 65
Sufficiently clear.
Article 66
Sufficiently clear.
Article 67
Sufficiently clear.
Article 68
Sufficiently clear.
Article 69
Sufficiently clear.
Article 70
Sufficiently clear.
Article 71
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESISIR SELATAN REGENCY NUMBER: 2