MAYOR OF PALEMBANG
PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALEMBANG CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
MAYOR OF PALEMBANG,

Considering: a. that every citizen has the right to obtain protection and guarantee of their human rights, and has the right to receive fair treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in achieving life welfare;

b. that laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children in regulating efforts for women and children to be protected from acts of violence in the region require regulations that can guarantee their implementation;

c. that all forms of acts of violence against citizens, especially women and children, constitute a form of violation of human rights so that the state, government, society, and family are obligated and responsible for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 28 Year 1959 concerning Formation of Level II Regions Including Municipal Cities, Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);

3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law 23

Year 2002 .....

- 2 -

Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);

9. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

10. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 1 Year 2022 concerning Financial Relations between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 6757);

11. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

12. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;

14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 903);

16. Regional Regulation Number 16 Year 2010 concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of South Sumatra Province Year 2010 Number 3 Series E);

17. Regional .....

- 3 -

17. Regional Regulation Number 3 Year 2017 concerning Implementation of Family Resilience Development (Regional Gazette of South Sumatra Province Year 2017 Number 3);

With Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PALEMBANG CITY
and
MAYOR OF PALEMBANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. City is Palembang City.
2. City Government is Palembang City Government.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Palembang.
4. Regional Apparatus is the Regional Apparatus within the City Government.
5. Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Community Empowerment is the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Community Empowerment of Palembang City.
6. Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPT PPA is a Technical Implementation Unit established by the government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
7. Women are all women who are both inside and outside the household.
8. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old including a child still in the womb.
9. Acts of Violence are any actions that result in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
10. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of acts of violence.
11. Reporter is a person, family, and community who sees and hears that acts of violence have occurred against women or any woman who becomes a victim of acts of violence by others.
12. Protection of Women and Children in Conflict with the Law is a form of service that must be implemented by law enforcement officers or security officers to provide a sense of security, both physical and psychological to victims or witnesses from threats, disturbances, terror, and violence from any party given at the stage of investigation, inquiry, prosecution and examination at court hearings.

13. Protection .....

- 5 -

27. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their child, or father and his child, or mother and her child or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.

28. Family Resilience is the dynamic condition of a family that has tenacity and toughness and contains physical material and spiritual mental abilities to live independently and develop themselves and their families to live harmoniously in improving physical and spiritual welfare.

29. Society is a group of citizens who inhabit an administrative area of government (at the level of Neighborhood Association, Citizens Association, Village and Sub-district) that is official and cooperates in life for a sufficiently long time and obeys existing rules.

30. Religious Leaders consist of Ustadz/Ustadzah, Ulama, Pastors, Priests, Monks, Pedanda/Pandita/Sulinggih and other religious leaders who have gender sensitivity/awareness.

31. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy in order to provide strengthening and self-recovery for victims of violence established in a decision of an authorized official.

Article 2

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is implemented based on the principles of:

a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. local wisdom;
d. non-discrimination;
e. best interests for women and children;
f. active participation; and
g. restoring the situation.

Article 3

The regulation of protection of women and children from acts of violence aims to:

a. prevent violence against women and children;
b. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children;
c. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence; and
d. empower women victims of violence.

Article 4

The scope of regulation of protection of women and children from acts of violence includes:

a. forms of acts of violence;
b. rights and obligations;
c. protection of women and children;
d. guidance and supervision; and
e. funding.

CHAPTER II .....

- 6 -

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 5

Forms of acts of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 6

(1) The form of physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is that physical violence is any act that results in pain according to medical experts, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

(2) The form of psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is that psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

(3) The form of sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is that sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, in an unnatural manner or disliked by one party for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

(4) The form of neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is that neglect is an act of releasing and or abandoning responsibility for attention, care, education and livelihood toward every person who is a family member.

(5) The form of exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e is that exploitation is utilizing all forms of potential both physical, psychological and intelligence in women or children for economic gain or personal pleasure of the perpetrator.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS

First Section
Rights of Women and Children

Article 7

Women and children from acts of violence receive the following rights:

a. the right to have their dignity respected as human beings;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of identity;
f. the right to restitution;
g. the right .....

- 7 -

g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of children to education;
j. the right to obtain facilities in the judicial process; and
k. the right to assistance.

Second Section
Obligations of Government, Society and Family

Paragraph 1
City Government

Article 8

(1) In efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence, the City Government is obligated to:
a. guarantee the rights of women and children without discrimination in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. establish and implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children;
c. facilitate the formation of community organizations concerned with women and children;
d. cooperate with the community and/or community organizations and the private sector in organizing protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. rehabilitate and empower women and children who are victims of acts of violence;
f. provide special protection to women and children victims of various acts of violence; and
g. take preventive actions in order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children.

(2) Responsibility in efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by regional apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

(3) Further provisions regarding the obligations of the City Government as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Paragraph 2
Society

Article 9

(1) Participate in prevention and provide support for the development of prevention programs for violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.

(2) Provide information and/or report violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence to the authorities.

(3) Monitor the law enforcement process for cases of violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.

(4) Small .....

- 8 -

(4) Small group units in society consisting of religious scholars, intellectuals, customary community units are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.

(5) Community Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) means that community responsibility is based on laws and regulations and the values of local wisdom of the local community.

Paragraph 3
Family

Article 10

The family in efforts to protect the rights of women and children is responsible for:

a. protecting women and children from conflict and violence in the household that degrades the dignity of women and children;
b. providing equal opportunities for women and children to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural matters; and
c. preventing violations of the rights of women and children in the household.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

First Section
Prevention

Article 11

(1) In order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children, the City Government:
a. conducts socialization regarding prevention of violence against women and children by optimizing the role of community units, community leaders, religious leaders, community organizations and mass media;
b. provides guidelines on handling acts of violence against women and children;
c. develops databases and integrated information systems regarding acts of violence against women and children;
d. strengthens the function of community organizations engaged in protection and advocacy for women and children; and
e. provides public facilities that are comfortable and safe for women and children.

(2) The responsibility of the City Government in efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by regional apparatus for women and children in accordance with their duties and functions.

(3) Further provisions regarding planning for prevention of violations of the rights of women and children are integrated by the City Government into regional development planning.

Article 12 .....

- 9 -

Article 12

In order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence, society:
a. actively plays a role in monitoring various conditions occurring in their environment that can cause violations of the rights of women and children;
b. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment; and
c. prevents undocumented marriages and child marriages.

Article 13

In order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence, the family:
a. protects women and children from various violations of rights in the household;
b. encourages the formation of harmonious, educative, independent and fully responsible families; and
c. becomes a place for initial counseling and mediation for every family member suspected of violations of the rights of women and children.

Second Section
Handling

Article 14

(1) Implementation of handling of women and children victims of acts of violence includes:
a. handling complaints of victims of violence;
b. health services; and
c. law enforcement and legal assistance.

(2) Implementation of handling of women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through integrated services.

(3) Integrated services as referred to in paragraph (2) for women and children victims of acts of violence are carried out with the principles of:
a. responsive;
b. non-discriminatory;
c. equal and respectful relationships;
d. maintaining confidentiality;
e. providing a sense of security and comfort;
f. respecting individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respecting the choices and decisions of victims;
i. sensitive to the background and condition of victims;
j. using appropriate language understood by victims;
k. fast and simple;
l. empathetic;
m. fulfillment of the rights of women and children; and
n. legal certainty.

Article 15 .....

- 10 -

Article 15

Handling of women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) letter a is implemented by:

a. hospitals;
b. community health centers;
c. Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children;
d. Safe houses;
e. Women Crisis Centre;
f. Marriage Advisory, Guidance and Preservation Agency;
g. Police;
h. Prosecutor's Office;
i. Courts;
j. Ministry of Law and Human Rights;
k. Legal Aid Institutions; and
l. Other Institutions.

Article 16

(1) Complaints of acts of violence against women and children can be made by reporters consisting of victims, families, communities and/or community organizations.

(2) Reporters as referred to in paragraph (1) can make complaints:
a. directly or direct findings;
b. through telephone or the like; and
c. through letters.

(3) In addition to handling complaints submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions are also authorized to handle women and children victims of acts of violence obtained through other information.

(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for complaint handling services are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 17

(1) Health services in handling women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) letter b for women and children victims of acts of violence are carried out comprehensively, accessible 24 hours, quality and carried out with maximum health service standards.

(2) Women and children victims of acts of violence have rights to health services, including:
a. medical services;
b. medico-legal services; and
c. psychosocial counseling.

(3) Medical services as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a, are in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.

(4) Medico-legal services as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b, are a form of medical services for the purposes of proof in the field of law.

(5) Services .....

- 12 -

(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. counseling services;
b. provision of safe houses;
c. spiritual guidance; and
d. economic recovery.

(3) Implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2), is organized by:
a. UPT PPA is tasked with implementing operational technical activities in its working area in providing services for women and children victims of acts of violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems;
b. the position of UPT PPA is under and responsible to the Head of the Office that organizes government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection at the city level; and
c. religious institutions.

Article 21

(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter a aim to:
a. help victims recognize their problems and find effective ways to overcome them themselves;
b. empower victims to determine their future;
c. provide moral support for victims in facing the legal process they are undergoing; and
d. make victims feel accepted in the community environment.

(2) Counseling services are carried out by gender-responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of:
a. counselors who already have certificates;
b. psychologists; and
c. psychiatrists.

(3) Counseling services are carried out in places that guarantee a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information from victims.

(4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; and
d. site visits.

Article 22

(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter b, the City Government can provide safe houses for women and victims of acts of violence in the form of intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.

(2) The location of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.

(3) Criteria for women and children victims of acts of violence who need safe houses include:
a. their lives are threatened;
b. receiving rejection from family or community;
c. requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far; and
d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house.

(4). Implementation .....

- 15 -

CHAPTER VII
CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Palembang City.

Enacted in Palembang
November 2022

MAYOR OF PALEMBANG,

[signature]

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PALEMBANG CITY YEAR 2022 NUMBER [number]

SECRETARIAT OF PALEMBANG CITY REGIONAL REGULATION, SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE: (1.U.t/2022)