
REGENT OF SEMARANG
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
SEMARANG DISTRICT REGIONAL REGULATIONS
NUMBER 1 OF 2015
ABOUT
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF SEMARANG,
Considering: a. that women's empowerment is carried out so that women can actualize their potential
optimally to participate in appropriate development
with its capacity;
b. that women are national assets who play a role in the process of passing on and creating generations
quality needs to be guaranteed for fulfillment
their rights and protection from acts of violence and
discrimination in order to build society,
race and country;
c. that based on Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Government
The area mentioned in essence is empowerment
women are an obligatory matter that must be done
organized by local government;
d. that based on Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government in the Attachment it is stated
that the division of government affairs into sectors
women's empowerment with one of the sub-affairs
is the protection of women;
e. that based on the considerations as intended in letters a, b, c and d it is necessary
establish Regional Regulations regarding Empowerment and
Protection of Women;
Bearing in mind: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Inner Regency Regions
Central Java Province Environment;
3. Law Number 67 of 1958 concerning Changes in the Regional Boundaries of the Salatiga Municipality and the Swantantra Level II Semarang Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1958 Number 118, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1652);
4. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
5. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention Concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
6. Law Number 13 of 1998 concerning the Welfare of the Elderly (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 190, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3796);
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165 Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 2 of 2002 concerning the State Police of the Republic of Indonesia (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4168);
9. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
10. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
11. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5589), as amended by Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2014 concerning Amendments to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 246);
12. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
13. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
14. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
15. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
16. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
17. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Convention Concerning the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
18. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for the Development and Supervision of Regional Government Implementation (State Gazette of 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
19. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation in the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
20. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Governments and Regency/City Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
21. Presidential Decree Number 88 of 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
22. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management, as amended several times, most recently with Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 of 2011 concerning the Second Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management;
23. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2008 concerning Improvement Guidelines
Women's Quality of Life;
24. Regulation of the Minister of State for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation Guidelines
Protection of Women;
25. State Minister for Women's Empowerment Regulation Number 4 of 2008 concerning Empowerment Guidelines
Community Institutions;
26. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementing Mainstreaming
Gender in the Region as amended by
Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 67 of 2011
on Changes to the Regulations of the Minister of the Interior
Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions;
27. Semarang Regency Regional Regulation Number 16 of 2008 concerning Existing Government Affairs
Authority of the Semarang Regency Regional Government
(Semarang Regency Regional Gazette 2008
Number 16, Supplement to Regency Regional Gazette
Semarang Number 14);
With Mutual Consent
REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF SEMARANG DISTRICT And
REGENT OF SEMARANG
DECIDE :
To enact: REGIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
CHAPTER I
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Semarang Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional People's Representative Council according to the principle of autonomy and assistance duties with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as intended in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of Regional Government administration.
4. Semarang Regency Regional People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated to DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration.
5. The Regent is the Regent of Semarang.
6. The Regional Apparatus Work Unit in charge, hereinafter referred to as the SKPD in charge, is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit which has main duties and functions in accordance with the related field.
7. Human Rights are a set of rights attached to the nature and existence of humans as creatures of the Almighty God and are His gifts that must be respected, upheld and protected by the country, the law, the Government, and everyone for the sake of honor and the protection of human dignity and dignity.
8. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental, spiritual, social, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in fulfilling their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
10. Discrimination against women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of gender which has the effect or aim of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights and freedoms
basic freedoms in the political, economic, socio-cultural, civil or any other fields by women, regardless of their marital status on the basis of equality between men and women.
11. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women which occurs as a result of and can change by the social and cultural conditions of society.
12. Gender equality is equal conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and security activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
13. Communities are individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. The family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children.
15. Labor is every person who is able to do work to produce goods and/or services either to meet their own needs or for the community.
16. Worker/Labourer is every person who works by receiving wages or other forms of compensation.
CHAPTER II
SCOPE
Article 2
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. basis and purpose;
b. women's rights;
c. obligations and responsibilities of local government;
d. women's empowerment;
e. women's protection;
f. the implementation of women's protection;
g. women's empowerment and protection strategies;
h. mechanisms for implementing women's empowerment and protection; i. financing;
j. construction and supervision;
k. transition provisions; And
l. closing.
BAB III
BASIS AND PURPOSE
Article 3
Women's Empowerment and Protection is carried out based on the following principles:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender justice and equality;
c. non-discrimination; And
d. women's best interests.
Article 4
The purpose of this Regional Regulation is:
a. empowering women both individually and in groups and society at large to be able to live more independently; and b. prevent and handle the risk of violence and vulnerability of women so that their survival can be fulfilled in accordance with the principles of equality and justice.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve their standard of living;
b. fulfill basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue offspring;
c. develop his personality, to obtain education, and improve the quality of his life in order to become a person who is faithful, devout, responsible, has noble character, happiness and prosperity in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, a sense of peace, and the freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. involved in every stage of the development process;
f. free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
g. obtain personal protection, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
h. obtain well-being and a decent life;
i. participate in politics;
j. perform legal acts; and
k. free to choose a partner in marriage.
(2) Every wife during marriage has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband for all matters relating to her married life, relationship with her children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities with her ex-husband for all matters relating to children by taking into account the best interests of the child.
BAB V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 6
(1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible for the empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Efforts to empower and protect women as intended in paragraph (1) include:
a. determining policies, programs and activities;
b. establishing implementation guidelines;
c. service delivery; And
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) Efforts to empower and protect women as intended in paragraph (2) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
BAB VI
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 7
Women's empowerment is directed at obtaining opportunities and rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. Ekonomi;
b. socio-cultural;
c. political; And
d. law.

Article 8
Women's empowerment in the economic sector as intended in Article 7 letter a is implemented through:
a. providing skills and job training;
b. facilitating the formation of productive economic business groups;  c. facilitating the strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;  d. facilitation and capital assistance; And
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 9
Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as intended in Article 7 letter b is implemented through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of education in stages in accordance with the potential to improve social status;
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts, especially in the field of reproductive health;
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning, including access to consultation services and marriage registration; And
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and develop science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.
Article 10
(1) Empowerment of women in the political field as intended in Article 7 letter c includes:
a. inclusion of women in decision making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; And
d. self-development through organizations to associate, gather and express opinions.
(2) Women's empowerment in the political field as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Article 11
(1) Empowerment of women in the legal field as intended in Article 7 letter d includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal sector through communication, information and education services;
b. facilitating access and legal consultation services.
(2) Empowerment of women in the legal field as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
BAB VII
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 12
(1) Women's protection includes:
a. social protection;
b. economic protection;
c. legal protection.
(2) Social protection as intended in paragraph (1) letter a is to guarantee the survival of women in the form of social protection to ensure the fulfillment of the needs of a decent life.
(3) Economic protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is to prevent and handle the risk of vulnerability resulting from social shocks and vulnerabilities of a person, family, group and/or community for the survival of women.
(4) Legal protection as intended in paragraph (1) letter c is implemented in terms of providing protection to women who are witnesses and victims of acts of violence and discrimination.
CHAPTER VIII
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S PROTECTION
Part One
General
Article 13
The implementation of women's protection is given to:
a. women workers / laborers;
b. elderly women;
c. women with disabilities;
d. homeless women;
e. female domestic workers;
f. female head of family;
g. female former prison inmates;  h. women disaster victims;
i. female commercial sex workers; and
j. women victims of violence.
Part Two
Female Worker/Labor
Article 14
(1) Implementation of protection for women workers/laborers as intended in Article 13 letter a to provide protection from acts of economic exploitation and cruel, inhumane treatment and to ensure proper reward for work.
(2) Women workers/laborers as intended in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security;
c. access to information and legal consultation services;
d. opportunities to gain knowledge and skills to improve status; And
e. witnesses and victims.
Part Three
Elderly Women
Article 15
(1) Implementation of protection for elderly women as intended in Article 13 letter b in order to extend life expectancy so that they can carry out their social functions and play a reasonable active role in their social life.
(2) Elderly women as intended in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. basic health services to maintain and improve health status including gerontological/geriatric services;
b. use of facilities and accessibility of public facilities and infrastructure; and c. government administration services.
Part Four
Women with Disabilities
Article 16
(1) Implementation of protection for women with disabilities as intended in Article 13 letter c in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, including freedom from cruel, inhumane, degrading treatment and freedom from exploitation.
(2) Women with disabilities as intended in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. guarantee of personal continuity and self-development; b. participation in the fields of education, health, work, politics, sports, arts and culture as well as the use of information and communication technology;  c. accessibility of information, legal aid, mobility, social services; and d. Early intervention efforts include treatment and rehabilitation to increase function and capacity.
Part Five
Homeless Women
Article 17
(1) Implementation of protection for homeless women as intended in Article 13 letter d in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the lack of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. adequate housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration records;
d. opportunities to acquire skills to improve economic status; And
e. access to information and legal consultation services.
Part Six
Female Domestic Workers
Article 18
(1) Implementation of protection for female domestic workers as intended in Article 13 letter e in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel, inhumane, degrading human dignity and exploitation in work relations.
(2) Female domestic workers as intended in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security;
c. access to information and legal consultation services; And
d. the opportunity to acquire knowledge and skills to improve economic status.
Part Seven
Female Head of Family
Article 19
(1) Implementation of protection for women heads of families as intended in Article 13 letter f in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, negative stigma and economic empowerment for women heads of families.
(2) Female heads of families as intended in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. acts of discrimination and efforts to weaken women's function as economic support for the family;
b. strengthening abilities and recognition as head of the family in the community; And
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.
Part Eight
Women Former Inmates
Correctional Institution
Article 20
(1) Implementation of protection for women who are former residents of correctional institutions as intended in Article 13 letter g in order to provide protection from obstacles to adapting to community life, so that they can carry out normal lives.
(2) Women who are former residents of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
b. the opportunity to acquire knowledge and skills to improve economic status.
Part Nine
Women Disaster Victims
Article 21
(1) Implementation of protection for women victims of disasters as intended in Article 13 letter h in order to provide protection during disasters and after disasters.
(2) Women who are disaster victims as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. access to adequate housing;
b. health services;
c. information access and legal consultation services; And
d. post-disaster recovery.
Part Ten
Female Commercial Sex Workers
Article 22
(1) Implementation of protection for female commercial sex workers as intended in Article 13 letter i in order to provide health protection and increase life skills as capital to improve social status.
(2) Protection for female commercial sex workers as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provide life skills abilities;
b. facilitating reproductive health services; And
c. prevent human trafficking.
Part Eleven
Women Victims of Violence
Article 23
(1) Implementation of Protection for Women Victims of Violence as intended in Article 13 letter j in order to provide legal protection and/or health restoration.
(2) Protection for Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. legal aid;
b. assistance after an act of violence occurs;
c. social rehabilitation and reintegration; And
d. health services .
BAB IX
EMPOWERMENT AND STRATEGY
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 24
(1) Empowerment and protection of women is carried out by integrating gender mainstreaming and gender disaggregated data in an integrated manner based on applicable laws and regulations.
(2) To empower and protect women, an Integrated Working and Service Group is established which is determined by a Regent's Decree.
(3) Women's empowerment and protection is coordinated by the Agency that handles Women's Empowerment.
CHAPTER X
MECHANISMS FOR ORGANIZING EMPOWERMENT
AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 25
The mechanism for implementing women's empowerment and protection is carried out through the following stages:
a. formulating program and activity planning policies; b. program and activity budgeting;
c. implementation of programs and activities; And
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
Article 26
(1) The formulation of program and activity planning policies as intended in Article 25 letter a is carried out through:
a. mapping, collecting, processing and presenting data;  b. coordinating and synchronizing the preparation of program and activity planning with the relevant SKPD; And
c. determining programs and activities in planning documents.
(2) The formulation of program and activity planning policies is further regulated in minimum service standards and standard operational procedures.
(3) The formulation of program planning policies and activities for the empowerment and protection of women is coordinated by the SKPD in charge of regional development planning.
(4) Program and activity budgeting as intended in Article 25 letter b is implemented through general budget policies as outlined in the APBD.
(5) Implementation of programs and activities as intended in Article 25 letter c is carried out through:
a. implementation of programs and activities contained in the SKPD budget document; And
b. coordinating and synchronizing the implementation of programs and activities with related SKPD.
(6) Implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as intended in Article 25 letter d is carried out through:
a. carry out regular monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs and activities that have been implemented; And
b. make regular reports.
BAB XI
FINANCING
Article 27
All costs for implementing program planning policies and activities related to Women's Empowerment and Protection are sourced from: a. State budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; And
c. Other sources that are valid and non-binding
CHAPTER XII.
CONSTRUCTION AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) The Regent or SKPD in charge of women's empowerment carries out guidance and supervision over women's empowerment and protection.
(2) The form of guidance as intended in paragraph (1) is as follows:
a. provide outreach to the community and business world regarding policies for empowering and protecting women;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding women's empowerment and protection, and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitating capacity building of institutions administering women's empowerment and protection;
d. facilitation of women's participation forums and women's organizations;  e. facilitating rehabilitation and reintegration services for women who are victims of disasters and victims of violence;
f. coordinating the participation of the business world and other institutions, including international assistance for the empowerment and protection of women; And
g. giving appreciation to the community and the business world, both individually and institutionally, who have made efforts to empower and protect women.
(3) The form of supervision as intended in paragraph (1) may take the form of monitoring and evaluation activities regarding the empowerment and protection of women.
CHAPTER XIII.
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 29
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all provisions of regional legislation relating to the Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection that currently exist, will remain in effect as long as they do not conflict with the provisions of this Regional Regulation.
CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING
Article 30
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone is aware, this Regional Regulation is ordered to be promulgated by placing it in the Semarang Regency Regional Gazette.
Stipulated in Ungaran on 18-02-2015
REGENT OF SEMARANG,
TTD
MUNDJIRIN
Promulgated in Ungaran
On 02-23-2015
REGIONAL SECRETARY
SEMARANG DISTRICT,
TTD
GUNAWAN WIBISONO
SEMARANG DISTRICT REGIONAL GAZETTE OF 2015 NUMBER 1
NOREG REGIONAL REGULATIONS SEMARANG DISTRICT CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE (1 / 2015)
EXPLANATION
UP
SEMARANG DISTRICT REGIONAL REGULATIONS
NUMBER 1 OF 2015
ABOUT
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the authority of regional governments to regulate and manage government affairs themselves which is directed at accelerating the realization of community welfare through improving services, empowerment and community participation. The authority of the Regional Government is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.
The implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare by always paying attention to the interests and aspirations that grow within the community. Therefore, government affairs related to basic services such as basic education, health, meeting minimum living needs and basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled.
Human rights are basic rights that are naturally inherent in humans, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and must not be ignored, reduced or taken away by anyone. In the context of upholding human rights (HAM), to ensure justice for every individual, strive to prevent all forms of treatment that is unequal or deemed to be detrimental to other parties, whether between individuals and individuals, between groups of individuals, between individuals and between the government and society, including the process of marginalization of women which makes women vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in the domestic and public spheres.
Women have the same and equal rights as men, however, in some discriminatory conditions, the government must carry out affirmative action so that the rights of women and girls in vulnerable groups need to receive protection so that they do not experience violence and can live a decent life in accordance with the humanitarian principles of equality and justice.
Women's empowerment and women's protection are carried out in the context of realizing gender equality and justice.  To carry out these matters, efforts are needed to increase women's resource capacity and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender disaggregated data.
The Semarang Regency Government, as the party that has the authority to regulate and protect the citizens of Semarang Regency, considers it necessary to continuously implement and formulate regulations to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and protection of women in Semarang Regency.
It is hoped that this Regional Regulation will be able to encourage efforts to improve the physical and mental condition of women in fulfilling their rights and living needs as part of human rights in various fields of development, increase the commitment and effectiveness of regional governments in implementing policies, programs and activities and encourage the institutional capacity of government and society to improve the quality of life of women.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
article 1
Quite clear.
Article 2
Quite clear.
Article 3
Quite clear.
Article 4
Quite clear.
Article 5
Sentence (1)
letter a
Quite clear.
letter b
Quite clear.
letter c
Quite clear.
letter d
Quite clear.
hooray e
What is meant by the stages of the development process
is through the preparation of a Development Plan
Regional Medium Term (RPJMD), Strategic Plan
(RENSTRA), Regional Government Work Plan (RKPD),
and Work Plan (RENJA).
letter f
Quite clear.
letter g
Quite clear.
letter h
Quite clear.
letter i
Quite clear.
letter j
Quite clear.
letter k
Quite clear.
Sentence (2)
Quite clear.
Sentence (3)
Quite clear.
Article 6
Quite clear.
Article 7
Quite clear.
Article 8
letter a
The category of women who take part in skills and work training is based on the age group 19 years and over, seen from the level of education (above high school) in accordance with Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.
letter b
Quite clear.
letter c
Quite clear.
letter d
Quite clear.
hooray e
Quite clear.
Article 9
Quite clear.
Article 10
Quite clear.
Article 11
Quite clear.
Article 12
Quite clear.
Article 13
Quite clear.
Article 14
Sentence (1)
Quite clear.
Sentence (2)
letter a
Quite clear.
letter b
Which is included in the social security of the workforce
are old age insurance, work accident insurance, and
death guarantee.
letter c
Quite clear.
letter d
What is meant by increasing status is
status in job level, for example from
regular staff/staff become expert staff
tiered.
hooray e
What is meant by witness is someone who can
provide information for purposes of interest
inquiry, investigation, prosecution, and
examination in court regarding a case
crimes that he heard for himself, saw for himself, and/
or he experienced it himself, including witnesses
reporter.
What is meant by victim is someone who
experiencing physical, mental, and/or suffering
economic losses resulting from an action
criminal.
Witnesses and victims will receive protection
law.
Article 15
Sentence (1)
Elderly is someone who has reached 60 years and above.
Sentence (2)
letter a
Gerontology is a science that studies aspects
existing in the elderly (physical, mental and
psychosocial), while Geriatrics is a science
who studies diseases in the elderly
(degenerative).
letter b
Quite clear.
letter c
Quite clear.
Article 16
Women with disabilities are women who experience physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with their normal activities and social interactions.
Article 17
Homeless women are women who do not have a permanent residence and for various reasons have to live under bridges, public parks, roadsides or various other public facilities to sleep and carry out daily life.
Article 18
A female domestic worker is a person who works for someone or several people in the household to do household work for a wage.
Article 19
Female heads of families are women who, for various reasons, are abandoned by their husbands, and ultimately act or contribute and function in carrying out their roles and responsibilities as heads of the family.
Article 20
Women who are former residents of community institutions are women who have served time in correctional institutions.
Article 21
Women disaster victims are women who suffer or die as a result of natural and social disasters.
Post-disaster recovery includes victim psychology services, health services, residential facilities, facilitation of public facilities and infrastructure and restoration of economic access as well as population data services and legal aid.
Article 22
Female commercial sex workers are women who work as sex workers of their own accord and/or are prostituted.  Improving life skills for commercial sex workers is intended to provide additional knowledge through training and skills according to their talents and abilities so that they can live more independently and obtain decent work to improve their standard of living and change their social status so that they do not become commercial sex workers because this work is not legalized.
The protection of commercial sex workers in this Regional Regulation is not intended to legalize the existence of commercial sex workers, but to provide protection to commercial sex workers in various sectors.
Article 23
Quite clear
Article 24
Sentence (1)
Gender Mainstreaming, hereinafter abbreviated as PUG, is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development policies, programs and activities. PUG is a strategy that can reduce gender gaps to achieve gender equality by using a gender perspective in the development process, women's empowerment is an affirmative strategy to achieve gender equality which aims to increase the fulfillment of women's rights to protection from acts of violence and discrimination.
Sentence (2)
Integrated services can be in the form of an Integrated Service Center for the Empowerment of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, which is a form of service vehicle for women and children in an effort to fulfill information and needs in the fields of education, health, economics, politics, law, fulfillment and prevention of acts of violence and trafficking against women and children.
Sentence (3)
Quite clear.
Sentence (4)
Quite clear.
Article 25
Quite clear.
Article 26
Quite clear.
Article 27
Quite clear.
Article 28
Quite clear.
Article 29
Quite clear.
Article 30
Quite clear.
ADDITIONAL REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SEMARANG DISTRICT NUMBER 1
