



 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST	ACT 22 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

COMMONWEALTHOFDOMINICA
ARRAN€iEMENT OF SECTIONS
 
273
 

 
ECTJOU





1.	Shorttitle.
 

PART I PRELIMINARY
 
2.	Interpretation.
3.	Persons entitled to apply under this Act.

PART II PROTECTION ORDERS
4.	Application for Protection Order.
S.	Grant of Protection Order on an er-pane application.
6.	Duration and discharge of Protection Order.
PART III
occu ATION ORDERS
7.	Application for a grant of Occupation Order.
8.	Grnnt of Occupation Order on rim er-parfe application.
9.	Effect of Occupation Order.
10.	Variation or discharge of Occupation Order.
PART tV TENANCY ORDERS
11.	Tenancy Order.
12.	Grant of Tenancy Order on an ez parte application.
13.	Effect of Tenancy Order.
14.	Power to discharge Tenancy Order and revest tenancy.
 



 
zooi		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
PART V
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OCCUPATION ORDERS AND TENANCY ORDERS


IS.	Procedure relating to Occupation Orders rind Tenancy
Orders.
16. Ancillary order mspecting fuminire.


INTERIM oRDERs
!7. Intcrim Orders.

PART VR
PROCEEDINGS IN RESPECT OF AN APPLICATION FOR AN ORDER
18.	Dete oùhcaring of application.
19.	Notice of proceedings.
20.	Absence of respondcnt.
21.	Absence of applicanc
22.	Explanaüon of Œders.
23.	Serv'tco of Orders.
24.	Service otftcr thsa pcrsoaal service.
25.	Respondcnt to have noücc.

PART VIII
ENFORCEMZNT OF ORDERS
26.	Beach of Orders.
 



 
2001		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
AC7 22
 

 

 





SECTIOX
 
PART IX
POLICE POWERS OF ENTRY AND ARREST
 
27.	Duties of police otRcers.
28.	Issue of Warrant.
29.	Police powers of entry and arrest without warrant.
30.	Duty of police officer to assist victims.
31.	Powers of arrest where Order is in force.
32.	Existing Criminal law toapply.
33.	Refactory witnesses.
34.	Magistrate's Cede of Procedure Act.
PARTX GENERAL
35.	Conduct of proceedings.
36.	Evidence.
37.	Standard of prnof.
38.	Restriction of publication of reports of proceedings.
39.	Order by consent.  	Counselling.
4t.	Appeals.
42.	Protection of mortgage.
43.	Rules of Court.
 	Power to make Regulations.
SCHEDULE.
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

COMMONWEALTH OF DOMINICA
ACT No. 22 or 2001




I assent



•	VERNON L. SHAW
President

29th January, 2002.
›in ncz vO PROVIDE PROTECTION IN CASES INYOLVING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND FOR MATTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH, AND INCIDENTAL THERETO.
(Ciazetted 31st January, 2002.)
BE IT ENACTED by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Dominica as follows:

 
PART I PRELIMINARY
1.	This Act may be cited as the -
PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT 2tiiil.
 




Shon litle,
 




 
278	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
2.	In this Act -
“applicant" means a person described in section 3 who applies or on whose behalf an application is made, pursuant to this Act, for an order:
“child" means a penon under the age of eighteen years who ordinarilyorperiodicallyresideswiththeapplicant,whether ornotthechildisachildoftheapplicantandthe respondent oreitherofthem,and includes an adopted child, stepchild, or a child who is treated as a child of the family but not a person who is or has been married;
“Coun”meansaFainilyCourt.High Court ora courtofsummary
JHfiStliCtlOR,
“common law spouse" means an unmarried person who has lived with or is living with an unmarried person of the opposite sex as husband or wife although not legally married to that person;
“dependant" means a person over the age of eighteen years who by reasonof physical or mental disability, ageor infirmity is reliant on either the applicant or respondent for his welfare;
“domestic violence”includes physical, sexual, emotional or psy- chological or financial abuse committed by a person against a spouse, child, any other person who is a member of the household, dependant or parent of a child of that household;
“emotional orpsychological abuse" means a pattern of behaviour of any kind, the purpose of which is to undermine the emotional or mental well-being of a person including -
(aj persistent intimidation by the use of abusive or threatening language;
(I›) penistent following of the person from place to place;
fc)  depriving the person of the use of his property;
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTICYIOLENCE
 
AC'I' 22
 

 
(d} the watching or besetting of the place where the person resides, works, carries on business or hap- pens to be;
e)	interfering with or damaging the property of the

the forced confinement of the person;
(,g)  persistent telephoning of the person at the person's
place of residence or worki and
{h} making unwelcome and repeated or intimidatory contact with achild, dependantorelderly relative of the person;
“es pane application” means an application made without notice
to the respondent;
“financial abuse” means a pattern of behaviour of a kind, the purpose of which is to exercise coercive control over, or exploit or limit a person's access to financial resources so as to ensure financial dependence;
“household residence” means -
(aJ in relation to both spouses, the dwelling-house that is used habitually by both parties or either of them as the only or principal family residence together with any land, buildings or improvements appurte- nant thereto and wholly or mainly used for the purposes of the household;
(b} in relation to a man and a woman who arg no longer spouses, the dwelling-house thnt was last used habitually by either of them, before or after they ceased to be spouses, as the only or principal family residence, together with any land, buildings, orim- provements appurtenantthereto and used wholly or mainly for the purposes of the household;
“Ministefi’ means the Minister to whom responsibility for Com- munity Development and Gender Affairs is assigned;
 



 
2B0	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC YIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
“Occupation Orde7’ means an order made under section 7 and includes an interim order made under that section;
“parent"meansapersonwho is a parent orgrandparent in relation to a child, dependant, spouse or respondent as the case may be-
(nj	by blood;
(b}	by marriage; or
(c j	by adoption;
“physical abuse” means any act or omission which causes or is intended to cause -
(a)	physical injury; or
(b)	raosonobie apprehension of physical injury.
“prescribed person” means a spouse of the respondent, a parent, a child or dependant of that person;
“Protection Order” means an order made under section 4 and includes an interim order made under that section;
“respondent” means a person against whomanapplicntion for an order is made or granted pursuant to this Act;
“sexual abuse” includes sexual contact of any kind that is made by force or threat and the commission of or an attempt to commit any of the offences under the Sexual Offences Act, 1598;
“spouse” includes a former spouse, common law ipouse and former common law spouse;
‘tenancy Order” means an order made under section I I and includes an interim order made under thiit section;
‘Tenant”, in relation to any dwelling-house, includes any person-
(a}		whose tenancy hasexpired or has been determined; and -
 




 
2001		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
281
 

 

 
(bj who is for the time being deemedunderorby vimie of any enactment or rule of law tocontinue to be the tenant of the dwelling-house,
and the term tenancy has a corresponding meaning;

"Tisitingrelationship"meansanon-habitationalrelationshipwhich  is otherwise similar to the relationship between husband and wife.
3.	(1) An application for a Protection Order under this Act
may be made by -

(a)	the spouse of the respondent being the spouse in respect of whom the allegedconduct has been, or is likely to be engaged in by the respondent;
«	{b j a person who hos a child in common with the respondent and that person is being subjected to or is likely to be subjected to domestic violence by the respondent;
(c} where the alleged conduct involves a child or dependant -
(i)	aperson with whomthechildor dependant ordinarily orperiodically resides;
 	a parent or guardian ofthechildor depend- ants
(W)	where the dependant is not mentally disa- bled, the dependant;
 










Act.
 
(in)


 
a person experienced or qualified in social welfare and approved by the Minister by Order published in the Gazette-,
a police officer, or
a person holding the office or performing the duties ofa probation officer or anurse;
 



 
282	20lll	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
(d)	a parent or sibling by blood or marriage of either the spouse or respondent not being n member of the household; or
(e)	a person who is or has been in a visiting relation- ship with the respondent for a period exceeding twelve months.
(2)	An application for an Occupation Order may be made by applicants described in subsection (1) (a), (c) and (d).
(3)	An application for a Tenancy Order may be made by the respondent's spouse as mentioned in subsection (I) {aJ or a parent or guardian of a child or a dependant, where the parent. guardian, child or dependant is subjecttothe alleged conduct and the spouse is unwilling to mnke an application.

PART II PROTECTION ORDERS
Applicaci» ror	4.	(I)	Application may be made to the Court in nccortlance
^'•’””"”"	“°	with Form I of the Schedule for a Protection Order -
(aj	prohibiting the respondent-
(i)	from entering or remaining in the house- hold residence of any prescribed person;
(ii)	from entering or remaining in any area specified in the order, being an area in which the household residence of a pre- scribed person is located;
(iii)	from entering the place of work or educa- tion of any prescribed person;
(iv)	from entering and remaining in any place
where a prescribed person happens to bet
(bj	directing that the respon6ent-
 




2001	PROTECTION AGAINST	ACT 22
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

(i) returns to the applicant specified property
thatisinhispossessionorunderhiscontrol;
  pays compensation for monetary loss in- curred by an applicant as a direct rtsult of conduct that amounted to domestic vio- lence;
  pays interim monetary relief to the appli- cant forthebenefitofthe applicantandany child, where there is no existing order relating to maintenance until such time as an obligation for support is determined, pursuant to ony other written lnw;
 
my)





 
immediately vacates any place or resi- dence for a specified period, whether or nottheresidenceisjointlyownedor leased by the respondent and the applicant, or solely owned or leased by the respondent or the applicant;
relinquishes to tha police any Fuearm li- cence. firearm or other weapon which he may have in his possession or control and which may or may not have been used;
 
(vi)	mnkes or continues to make payments in respect of rent or mortgage payments for premises occupied by the applicant for a reasonable period;
(vii)	ensures thatreasonab)ecazc is provided in respect of a child or dependant;
 
(vM)
 
or the applicant or both, receive profes- sional counselling or therapy from any person or agency or from a programme approved by the Minister in writing;
 




 
284	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC YIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
  directing that the order be applied for the benefit of a child or dependant of the applicant or respondent;
(d)	prohibitingtherespondentfromtaking possession of, damaging, converting or otherwise dealing with, property that the applicant may have an interest in, or is reasonably used by the applicant, as the case may be:
  prohibiting the respondent from molesting apre- scribed person by-
(i)	watching or besetting the prescribed per- son's household residence, place of work or education;
(ü)  following orstalking theprescribedperson
i*amyp1ace;
 
(iü)
 
making persistenttelephone calls to a pre- scribed person;
 
(iv)	using abusive language to or behaving to- wards a prescribed person in any other manner which is of such nature and degree as to cause annoyance to, or result in ill- treatment of the prescribed person; or
(v)	causing or encouraging another penon to engage in conduct referred to in paragraph

 

 
Fonn 2.
 
(2)	On hearing an application under subsection (1) the Court may make a Protection Order in accordance with Form 2 of the Schedule if it is satisfied that-
(a) the respondent has used or threatened io use violence against, or caused physical or mental injury to, aprescribedpersonandislikely iodoso again; OF
 



 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
(bj having regard to all the circumstances, the order is necessary for the protection of a prescribed person,
and the Court may, if it thinks fit, attach a power of arrest to the Protection Order.
(3)	Where the Court makes an order which, directs the payment of compensation under subsection (l)(b j(i“i j, such com- pensation shall include, but not be limited to-
(aj loss of earning;
(b} medical and dental expenses;
(c) moving and accommodation expenses;
(d} reasonable legal costs, including the cost of an application pursuant to this Act.
(4)	Where the Court makes an order which, directs counselling under subsection(l)(6)(viii) the order shall specify-
n) that the Court receive written notification from the counsellor or therapist of sessions missed without reasonable excuse; and
(b} the date by which thecounsellor or thernpist shall submit a report to the Court in respect of the counselling or thempy, such report to include a prognosis for recovery.
(5)	TheCourt shall havejurisdictiontoawardcompensa- tion not exceeding ten thousand dollars and the payment of such compensation shall be received by the Court on behalf of the applicant.
(6)	Where the Court makes an order which, -

(aJ directs that the respondent vacate any place or residence; or
(b1 directs the respondent to retum to the applicant
 




 
286
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOIYIESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
specified property that is in his possession or

the Court may, in that same order, if it thinks necessary and notwithstandingnnyotherlaw,directthe policetoremovethe respondenteitherimmediatelyorwithinaspecifiedtimefromthe said placeor residence, or to accompany the applicant, as the case may be,eitherimmediately or within aspecified time to specifiedpremisestosupervisetheremovalofpropertybelong- ing totheapplicantandtoensuretheprotectionofthat person.
5.	(1) A Protection Order may be made on an ez parfe application if the Court is satisfied that the delay that would be caused by proceeding on notice would or might entail-
nJ risk to the personal snfety of aprescribed person;

 











Durstion aad
 
(b} serions injury or undue hardship.
(2)	Any Protection Order made on an e.rpnrfe applica- tion shall be an interim order.
(3)	Where a Protection Order is grunted on an en parle application, the respondent may apply immediately for it to be discharged.
6.	(1) A Protection Order shall cease to have effect if a party to the proceedings in which it was mnde applies to the Court for it to be discharged and the Court is satisfied that it should be discharged.
(2)	Acopy of an application under subsection(l)shallbe served personally on each person who was a p:irty to the proceedings in which the Protection order was made.
(3)	In determining whether to discharge a Protection Order the Court shall have regard to ihe matters referred to in section I(2).
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT  22
 
287
 

 

 
PART 111 OCCUPATION ORDERS
7.	(1) Application may be made to the Court in accordance with Form 5 ofthe Schedule for an Occupation Ordergrnnting the prescribed person or persons named in the otder the right to live in the household residence.
(2)	Subject to subsection (3) and section 15 tire Court may, on an application under subsection(1), make an Occupation Order in accordance with Form 6 granting to the prescribed person or persons for such period or periods and on such terms md subject to such conditions as the Court thinks fii, the right to occupy the household residence or any other premises forming part of the household residence.
(3)	The Court shall not make an order under subsection
•	(2) unless it is satisfied that such an order -
(n) is necessary for the protection of a prescribed
person; or
(b} is in the best interest of a child or dependent.
8.	(1) An Occupation Order may be made on an ez pane application if the Court is satisfied that -
{a} the respondent has used violence against or caused physical or mental injury to a prescribed person; and
(b j the delay that would be caused by proceedings on notice could or might expose the prescribed person to physical injury.
(7-) Any Occupation Order made on un ez paMe applica- tion shall be an interim order.
(3) Where the Court grants an Occupation Order on an ex parte application, the Court shall at the same time make an interim Protection Or‹lerun1ess it considers that there are special reasons why such an interim order should not be made.
 




grant of Occupation
Order.





Fonn6.












Order on en nr• pone opplicdlion.
 



 
2B9
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
(4)	An Occupation Order wiiich is made on an erportr application while the prescribed person concerned and the re- spondentarelivingtogetherinthesamehouseholdresidenceshall

 



















 
discharge of












Tenancy Ordnr.
 
{a) on its discharge by the Coun;
(6) on the discharge of an interim Protection Order made pursuant to subsection (3): or
(cj ’in any other case, at the expiration of a period of fourteen days after the date on which the Occu- pation Order was made.
(5} Where an Occupation Order is made on an in pair application,therespondentmayapply immediately foritsvariation or discharge.
9.	Where an Occupation Order is made the prescribed person to which it relates shall be entitled, to the exclusion of the respondent personally to occupy the household residence io which that Order relates.
lti. The Court may, if it thinks fit on an application of either
party in accordance with Fomi 7 of the Schedule, make an order-	 
{o) extending or reducing any period specified by the
Court pursuant to section 8(2); or
f6) varying or discharging any terms and conditions imposed by the Court pursuant to that subsection.
PART IV TENANCY ORDERS
11. (l) An application may be made to the Court in accord- ance with Form 9 of the Schedule for an order vesting in the applicant the tenancy of any dwelling-house which, at the time of the making of the order-
 




 
2001		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
289
 

 

 
(a) the respondent is either the sole tenant or a tenant holdirigjoiritlyorincommon with the zipplicant; and
{f›J is the household residence of the applicant or the respondent.
(2)	Subject to section 15, theCourt may make an order in accordance with Form 10ofthe Schedule on an application under subsection (1) if the Court is satisfied that such an order-
a)	is necessary for the protection of the applicant;or
(b} is in the best interest of a child or a dependant.
12. (I) A Tenancy Order may be made on an ez pnrte application if the Court is satisfied that-
{a} the respondent has used violence against or caused physical or mental injury to the applicant, or any orher prescribed person;and
(b j the delay that would be caused by proceeding on notice wouldormightexposetheapplicantorany
•	other prescribed person as the case may be, to physical injury.
(2)	Any Tenancy Order made on an ex parte application shall be an Interim Order.
(3)	Where the Court makes a Tenancy Order on an er pane application the Court shall, at the same time, make an interim Protection Order unless theCourt considers that there are special reasons why such an Order should not be made.
(4)	A Tenancy Order which is made on an e.v parte application while the applicant and the respondent are living together in the same household residence shrill expire-
(a)	on its discharge by fhe Court;
(b)	on the discharge of an interim Protection Order mude under subsection (3);
 







Schcduk. FomI0




dmvclopmcnC plan.
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
{cJ in any other case, at the expirntion of a period of fourteen days after the date on which the Ten- ancy Order was made.
(5)	WTierc a Tenancy Order is made on an ex pane applicationtherespondentmayapplyimmediately forvariation or discharge of that order.
Effect of Tenancy	13. (1) Where a Tenancy Order is made the applicant shall, e’	unlessthetenancy issooner determined, become the tenant of the dwelling-houseuponandsubjecttotheterms andconditionsofthe
tenancy in force at the time of the making of that Order, and the respondent shall cease to be the tenant.
(2)	Every Tenancy Order shall have effect and may be enforced as if it were an order of the Court for possession of the land granted in favour of the applicant.
(3)	Nothing in this Act or in any Tenancy Order shall-	” (nJ limitoraffecttheoperationof any enactments or
rule of law for the time being applicable to any
tenancy to which a Tenancy Order applies, or to	“ the dwelling-house held under the tenancy; or
(b)	authorisethc Court to vary, except by vesting the tenancy punuant to this section or revesting the tenancy pursuant to section 14, any express or implied term or condition of the tenancy.
14.	(I) The Court may, if it thinks fit on the application of-
(a)	the applicant or respondent; or
(b} the personal representative of either party,
make anorder(inthisseetionreferredtoasa“revesting oider’9revestingthetenancyaccordingly.
(2) Where a reverting order is made under subsection (1),thepersoninwhosefavouritismadeshall,unlessthetenancy
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
291
 

 
is sooner lawfully determined, becomethetenantofthedwelling- house upon and subject to the terms and conditions of the tenancy in force immediately before the date on whichihe revesting order was made.

 
PART V
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OCCUPATION ORDERS AND TENANCY ORDERS
15.	(1) Before making on Occupation Order (other than an interim Occupation Order) or a Tenancy Order (other then nn interimTenancyOrder),the Courtshalldireet that notice be given to any person having an interest in the property which would be affected by any such Order.
•		(2) The person referred to in subsection (1) shall, upon beingnoñfiedpuisuanttothatsubseetion,beentitled toappearand to be heard in the matter of the application for the Occupation
,	Order or Tenancy Order as a party to that application.
(3)	Where an application is made for an Occupation Order, the Court may treat that application as an application for a Tenancy Order or an Occupation Order or both and may make a Tenancy Order, whether or not it makes an Occupation Order, if it is satisfied that -
(ci} it hasjurisdiction to make theTenancy Order and that the making of such an order is appropriate; and
(h) subsection(I) has been complied with in respect of the making of « Tenancy Order.
(4)	Where an application is made for a Tenancy Order, the Court may treat that application as an application for an Occupation Order or a Tenancy Order or both and may make an Occupation Order, whether or not it makes a Tenancy Order, if it is satisfied that -
 





to Occupation Orders and Tenancy Orders.
 




 
293
 
JOOI	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 








Ancillary ordera
 
(nJ it has jurisdiction to make an Occupation Order rind thattliemaking of such on Order is appropri- ate; and
(bj subsection(1) has been complied with in respect of the making of an Occupation Order.
16.	(1) On or after making an Occupation Order or a Ten- ancy Order. the Coua may, subject to subsection (2), make an order granting iotheapplicantthe use.forsuchperiodandonsueh terms and subject tosuch conditions as the Courtthinks fit, of all or any of-
 
(a} the furniture;
(bJ household appliancei; and
(c)	household effects;
in the household residence or other premises to which the	•
Occcupationorderrelatesorinthedwelling-housetowhichthe
Tenancy Orderrelates.
(2) Anorder madeunder subsection(1) shall continue in force fora period of three months beginning on the date on which the order is made, unless the Court otherwise directs, but, in any event, shallexpire ifthe Occupation Order made inrelationtothe
household residence or other premises or the Tenancy Order made in relation to thcdwclling-housecxpiresor is discharged.
PART VI INTERIM ORDERS
17.	(l) Every Interim Order made under this Act on an er poMe application shall specify a date, which shall be as soon as reasonably pnicticnble, but no later than 21 days thereafier,for a hearing on whetheranordershould bemadeinsubstitutionfor the Interim Order.
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
293
 

 
(2)	A copy of any such lnterim Order shall be served on the respondent and sliall notify the respondent that unless the respondent attends on the specified date to show caiise why an ordershould not bemade insubstituüon Vor theInterim Order, the Court may discharge the Interim Order and make an Order in substitution therefor.
(3)	At the hearing refeired to in subiection (1) the Court

(a)	discharge the lnterim Order,
(b)	discharge the Interim Order and make an order in substitution therefor: or
(c} on good cause being ihown, adjourn the hearing to such date and place as the Court may specify; but such final date not toexceed 42 days from the date oftheapplication.
(4)	Where nhearing is adjoumedundersubsecüon(3)(c) the Court may, at the adjourned hearing,exerciseeitherthe power eonferred by paragrnph f«J or paragraph{6J of that subsection.
(5)	In this section and Part VII -
“Interim Order’ means an Interim Protection Order, an Interim
Occupation Order and an interim Tenancy Order.
“Order’ menns a Protection Order, an Occupation Order und a Tenancy Order, but docs not include an lnterim Order.

 
PART VII
PROCEEDINGS IN RESPECT OF AN APPLICATION FOR AN ORDER
18.	Where an application is made for any order, the Clerk of the Court or the Registrar shall fix a date for the hearing of the application which shall be no more than seven days after the date on which the application is filed.
 






Date of kearing of

 
 



 
294
 
2O0l	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 

 
ings.





























 
19.	tl) A copy of the application for an order, together with a notice of the date on which, and the time and place at which, the application is to be heard, shall be served on the respondent.
(2)	A notice ofprœeedings shall be issued in accordance with Form 13 of the Schedule.
(3)	Where an application is filed in respect of a chi!d or dependant, a copy of the application, together with notice of the date on which, and the time and plnce at which, the application is to be heard, shall as soon as practicable, be served on the parent or guardian or other person with whom the child or dependant normally resides or resides with on a regular basis.
(4)	A notice of proceedings which ii issued and served under this section is deemed to be a summons that is duly issued and served and compels the respondent to appear in Court to an.swer the application as if it were a complaint.
(5)	A noticeofproceedingsissuedunderthissectionmay be served by the applicant or his agent and the Court shall receive proof of such service by affidavit in accordance with Porm 14 of the Schedule.
(6)	Where the hearing of an application is adjoumed because the application and the notice of proceedings have not been served on the respondent. the üme and place fixed by the Court for the adjourned hearing, shall be the date, time and place stated in the new notice of proceedings.
20.	Where notice of proceedings has been served on the respondent in nccoAance with section 19 and iherespondentfails toappear in person atthetime fixed for the hearing theCourt may-
(o) proceed to hear and determine the matter in the respondent's absence; or
(b j whens the Court is satisfied, having regard to the materials before it, that it is appropriate to do so, adjourn the matter and issue a warmnt for the respondent to be apprehended and brought before the Court.
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
295
 

 

 
Z1. If,on the date of the hearing of an application foran order, the respondent appears in Court, but neither the applicant nor the person on whose behalf the application is made appears either in person or is represented by his attorney-at-law, the Coun may-
faj dismiss the application;
(6)	having received a reasonable excuse for the non- appearanceofthe applicantorotherperson, adjourn the hearing upon such terms as it considers just; or
(r) where it issatisfied, having regard to the submissions before it, that it is appropriate for evidence to be given by affidavit, sodirect, but theCourt may, on the application of any other party, order the attendance for cross-examination of the deponent of any such affidavit.

22. Where the Court proposes to make an order or an Interim Order, and the respondent is before the Court, the Court shall explain to the respondent -
(n) the purpose, terms and effect of the order;
(b)	theconsequencesoffailing tocomply with theorder; and
(c)	the means by which the order may be varied or
discharged.
23. Where an order or Interim Order is made or varied by the Court -
 
AbseTCg Of
nppl icont.



















Explanation of Orders.











Service of Orders,
 
(o) theClerk shall arrnnge for the orderorInterim Order to be drawn up on the prescribed forms, in the Schedule; and
(b}  the Court shall cause a copy of the order or Interim
Order to be served on-
() thezespondenp
 



 
296	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
(ii)	any other person to whom the order or Interim Order is to apply, whether or not the person is a pany to the proceedings; and
(iii)	the police officer in charge of the station located nearest to the area where the respondent or applicant resides; and
{c} ifitrelntes to real propeny, itshall be lodged with the Register of Titles by the applicant as a lis pendens.

r• ›«	+• ‹bin		24. (1) Where the Court has not beenabletoserveanInterim ‘°"' “"'c"	Order or an order, as the ease may be, upon the respondent personally, it may make an order for substituted service of the
Interim Order or order, as the ease may be.
(2)	For the purpose of subsection (1) “substituted serv-
ice" means-
tnJ registered post to the last known address of the respondent;
(bj leaving the document at the last known address of the respondent;
(c} service by advertisement in two weekly newspa- pers which service is deemed to have been effected at midnight on the date of the later advertisement, the cost to be borne by the appli- cant; or
(d} such other manner as the Court mny direct.
Respondent to haYe	25. A respondent shall not be bound by rim order or Interim
notice.Breach °’	Order -
(a)	where he was not present at the time of the making
of the order, or
(b)	where the order has not been served on him person- ally or in accordance with section 24.
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

PART VIII ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS
 
ACT 22
 
297
 
26. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a person against whom an order has been made and who-
(‹iJ has had notice of the order; and
(b} contravenes any provision of the order or fails to
comply with any direction of the Court, commits an offence and is liable-
(i) ona firstconvictiontoa fine notexceeding ninethousanddollarsorimprisonmentfora term of three months;
(il) on n second conviction to a fine not ex- ceeding fifteen thousand dollars or to im- prisonment foratermnotexceeding twenty- four months or to both the fine and impris-

(W) on a third or any subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a term not less than twenty-fourmonths but notexceeding five
 
(2) Where an order contains a direction of the Court pursuant to section 4(1)(b j(v’iii1 ihat the respondent seeks coun- selling ortherapyanditis broughttothe attention of the Court that therespondentrefusesor neglects iocomply with such adirection and the Court finds that such refusal ornegleci was unreasonable, the respondent commits an offence rind is liable to a fine of three thousand dollars.
 
Brcsch of Ord•rs.
 



 
298
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
AC7 22
 

 
PART IX
POLICE POWERS OF ENTRY AND ARREST

 

 
OffcCz'S.
































lxstie Of Warrants
 
37.	(1) A police officer shall respond to every complaint or report alleging domestic violence whetherornotthecomplainant is the victim.
(2)	It shall be the duty of a police officer responding to a domestic violence complaint to complete a Domestic Violence Report which shall form part of a National Domestic Violence Register to be maintained by the Commissioner of Police.
(3)	A Domestic Violence Report shall be in the form prescribed as Form t5 of the Schedule und shall include but
not be limited to
(d)	the ItMTle of the parties;
(b} the relationship and sex of the parties;
(c} information relating to the history of domestic violence between the parties;
(dJ the dntc and time the complaint was received;
(e} the type of abuse and the weapon used, if any.

28.	Where a Magistrate is satisfied. by information on oath,
that -
 
{aJ there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a person on premises has suffered or is in imminent danger of physical injury at the hands of another person in asituation amounting todomestic violence and needs assistance to deal with or prevent the injury;and
(b} apelice officer has been refused permission to enter the premises for the purpose of giving assistance to the first mentioned person in panigraph (a},
 

 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
299
 

 
the Magistmte may issue o warrant in writing authorising a po- lice officer to enter the premises specified in the warrant at any time within twenty-four hours after the issue of the warrant and subject to any conditions specified in the warrant, to take such action as is necessary to prevent the commission or repetition of the offence or a breach of the peace or to protect life or prop-


29.	(l} For the avoidance of doubt, a police officer may act	n› > m «  »
 
in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Law and Procedure Act where he has reasonable cause to believe that a person is engaging in or attempting to engnge in conduct which amounts to physical violence and failure to act immediately may result in serious physical injury or death.
(2) Nothing in this section authorises the entry onto premises by a police ofhcez, for the purpose of any search or the arrest of any person, otherwise than in connection with the conduct referred to in subsection (1).
(S) Where a police offictr exercises a power of entry under subsection(1) he shall immediately submit a written report to the Commissioner of Police, through the Head of the Division where the incident occurred, such report tocontain the following information -
(n) the reasons for entering the premises without a
WitfT8flt;
(b} the offence being committed or about to be committed; and
(c)	the manner in which the investigation was con- ducted and the measures taken to ensure the protection and Safety of the person at risL
(4)	The report referred to in subsection (3) shall be submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions by the Commis- sioner of Police within seven days of receiving the report.
 
without
Ck. t2:Of.
 




 
300
 
]0O1	PROTECTION AGAINST DOiYIESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
(5)	Where acomplaint ismade against a police officer by a person resident in premises alleging that theofficer's entry onto the premises under subsection (1) was unwarranted, a senior police officer shall be appointed to investigate the complaint and submit acopy of its report to the Commissioner of Police and the Director of Public Prosecution within fourteen days of the complaint having been made.
(6)	Where the investigation of the senior police officer finds that the entry under subsection (1) was unwarranted, the Commissioner of Police shall submit the report to the Police Service Commission and such report may form the basis of disciplinary action against the police officer.

 
Duiy of police
fficer to oisist










Poucrs of
 
30.	Where a police officer has entered premises in further-
ance of sections 28 or 29 (1) he shall-
(a)	give assistance to a person who hns suffered injury;	“
(b j ensure the welfare and safety of a child dependant or other vulnemble persons who may be on the
premises;and	'
{r) prevent any further breach of the law.

31.	(1) Where an order is in force and a police officer
 
  " "		believes on reasonable grounds that a person has committed a breuch of the order the police officer may detain and arrest that person without a warmnt for the protection of a prescribed person.
(2)	No person shall be arrested under this section unless the police officer believes that the arrest of the person is reasonably necessary for the protection of a prescribed person.
f3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the police officer
.shall take into account -
(nJ the seriousness of the act which constituted the alleged breach:
 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 
(b} the time that has clasped since the alleged breach was committed;
(c)	therestmining effectofother persons or circum-
stances on the respondent; and
(d} the need for a cooling-off period.
(4)	Where an arrest is made under this section -
(a)	the person arrested shall be entitled to make a telephone call to one person of his choice, other than the applicant or a prescribed person;
(b} itshall be the duty ofthe policeofficer whomakes the orrest to ensure that the person arrested is informed, as soon as pmcticable after the arrest, of the right conferred by paragraph (aJ.
32.	(1) Subject to subsection(2), where a person is arrested under section 28 or 29, the person shall be charged in accordance with the relevant provisions ofthecriminal law for committing or attempting tocommitanyoffenceundertliatlaw and shall bedealt with accordingly.
(2) Wliereanapplication fora Protection Order has been made or where a person has been arrested and charged under section 28 or 29 and after hearing all the evidence the Court is satisfied that-
{a} the incident was aa isolated one;
{6} there are circumstances which make it desirable
to preserve the family unit: and
(cj the conduct complained of is not sufficiently grave to waminttheimpositionofeithertheorder or the penalty, as the case may be,
it may, with the consent of the applicant or complainant, as the case may be, withhold the granting of a Protection Order or the imposition of any penalty as prescribed by law and require the
 






















Existing Criminal

 









!
 
302	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
respondent or defendant to enter into a bond of good behaviour for a period not exceeding six months.
(3)	Where a bond of good behaviour has been entered intounder subsection(2) the Court may prescribe such additional conditions as follows-
(aJ that the parties receive professional counselling, including family counselling;
(fiJ that the panics report to a probation officer at certain fixed intervals; or
(cj that the matter be reviewed by the Court within
three monlAs.
(4)	A bond of good behaviourentered into under subsec-
tion (2) shall be forfeited where the Court is satisfied that-
JaJ the respondent or defendant has continued to en- gage in conduct amounting to domestic violence against the complainant;
(b j based on arepon from a probation officer, social worker. police officer or such other person, do- mestic violence is likely to beperpetmted against the applicant or complainant; or
(rJ the applicant or complainant has become fearful of the respondent or defendant to the extent that heisnolonger willing tocontinuetherelationship.
33.	(1) Where direct oral evidence of a fact would be admissibleinanyproceedingsunderthisAct, adocumentcontain- ing a stntement made by the complainant which forms part of the record compiled by the police and tending to establish that fact, shall be admissible in circumstances where-
{aJ the complainant refuses to be sworn as a wit-
ness; or
(b)	having been sworn as a witness, the complainant gives ornl evidence which is inconsistent orcon- tmdictory to the statement forming part of the police record.
 
2001		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
acr x
 

303
 

 
(2) A statement admitted as evidence by virtue of sub- section (1), shall be treated by the Court as astatutory declaration made under ihe Statutory Declarations Act and the Court may draw any reasonable inference from the form or content of that stntement and determine the weight, if any, to be attached to the evidence of any fact stated therein.
34.	(1) Notwithstanding the Magistrate's Code of Proce- dure Act where the Court is required to determine whether to grant bail in respect of an offence under this Act, the Coun shall consider-
‹ij the need to protect the applicant from domestic violence;
(b} the welfare of a child where the defendant or victim of the alleged offence has custody of that

(c)	the welfare of any child being a member of the household;and
(d)	any hardshipthatmay becausedtothcdefendani or other members of the family if bail is not granted.
(2)	Notwithstanding the Magistrate's Code of Procedure   
Act the Court in granting bail, may order that therecognisance be subject to such ofthe following conditions as theCourtconsi&re appropriate -
{nJ that the defendant not harass or molest or cause another person to harass or molest the victim of the alleged offence;
(b that the defendant not be on the premises in which ihe victim resides or works¡
(cj thatthedefendant not be inalocality in which am situated the premises in which the victim resides or works; and
(dj where the defendant continues to reside with the victim, that the defendant not enter or remain iii
 
21101	PROTECTION  AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 













 





















Evidence.
 
the place or residence while under the influence
of alcohol or a drug.
(3)	Whensapoliceofficerbelievesonreasonablegrounds thataperson, whohasbeenadmittedtobailsubjecttooneormore conditions, hos failed to comply with a condition of the recogni- sauce, the police officer may, notwithstanding anything in any other law. arrest the person without a warnint.
PART X GENERAL
35.	(1) No person shell be present during the hearing of any proceedings under this Act (other than criminal proceedings)

(aj officers of the Court;
(hJ panics to the proceedings and their counsel;
{cJ witnesses;
(d} any other person permitted by the Judge or Magistrate to be present.
(2)	A witness shall leave the court-roomifasked to do so by the Judge or Magistrate.
(3)	Nothing in this section shall limit any other power of theCourt to hearproceedings in camera or to exclude nny person from the Court.

36.	In any proceedings under this Act (other than criminal proceedings) including proceedings by way of appeal, the Court may receive such evidence as it thinks fit whether it is, or is not otherwise admissible in a court of law or not.
 
*   -<		37. Every question of fact arising in any proceedings under this Act (other than criminal proceedings) shall be decided on a balance ofprobabilities.
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
305
 

 

 
38.	(1) Subject tosubsection(4), noperson shall publish any reportofproceedingsunderthisAct(otherthancriminalproceed- ings) except with the leave of the Court which heard the proceedings.
(2)	A person whocontravenessubsection(1)commitsan offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars.
(3)	Nothing in this section limits-
(a} the provisions of any other enactmentrelating to theprohibitionorregulationofthe publication of reportsorparticularsrelatingtojudicial proceed- ings; or
(b) the power of theCourt topunish any contempt of

(4)	This section shall not apply to the publication of any report in any publication that -
(a)	’is of n6onn/de professional or technical nature; or
{6} isintendedforcirculationamongmembersoffhe
)egalormedicaIprofessions,officersoythePub-
lie Service, psychologists, marriage counsellors or social welfare workers.
39.	In any proceedings under this Acta coun may make any order by the consent of all the parties to iuch proceedings.
40.	The Court may, on making an order under this Act, recommend either or both parties to participate in counselling of such nature as the Court may specify.
41.	(1) A penon aggrieved by-
(a) the making of an order by the Court; or
(h) the refusal of the Court to make an order,
may, within twenty-eight days after the decision of the Court, appeal to the Court of Appeal.
 
Rcslriclion of
 

























 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 








 
mortgeg•.














Ruks of Going.





Regulstioni.
 
(2) Except where the Court which makes an order under this Actotherwise directs, the operation of such order shall not be suspended by vinue of an appeal under this section, and every such injunction or other order may be enforced in the same manner end in all respects as if no appeal under this section were pending.
42.	(1) The rights conferred on any person in respect of any property by an order made under this Act shall be subject to the rights of any other person entitled to the benefit of any mortgage, security, charge or encumbrnnce affecting the property if such morigage, security, charge or encumbrance was registered be-, fore the order was registered or if the rights of that other person entitled to that benefit arise under an instrument executed before the date of the making of the order.
(2)	Notwithstanding anything in any enactment or in any
instrument, nomoney payable underany such mortgage, secu rity,	” charge or encumbrance shall be called up or become due by
reason of the making of an order under this Act.
43.	Rules of Court may be made for the purpose of regulating the practice and procedure of the Court iii proceedings under this Act, providing for such matters as are necessary for giving full effect to the provisions of this Act and for the due administmiion thereof.
44.	The Minister may make Regulations subject to affirma- tive resolution of Parliament for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and in particular for -
(a j designating persons who could provide counselling service;
(b} prescribing qualifications and experience for per- sons who may be counsellors; and
r)	amending, ridding or substituting any forms.
 

 
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
307
 

 

 
SCHEDULE
FORM I
Protection Against Domestic Violence Ach 2001
APPLICATtON FOR PROTECTION ORDEiUINTERIM PROTECTION ORDER
 
(Sections 4 (1), 5
())
 
No.  of 20.....


A. B.


C.D.	Respondent





hereby apply under section 4f5 öf the Proiection Against Dotnestic Violence Act 2001 for a Protection Order/lntcrim Proieciion Order to bc wade by


(Speciff reloiionshiR ionamedRespondentf
and    w£o   resides   at............................,......,...........,..................,...........................
{Ceci o‹Âïî'essofRespandenz)
in respect ofihe followiog conduck
(Speciff dofer, times, place onddetoils ofollegedcond ct).

 
308



(fkx%oss4(2),5
(i))
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM2
Protection Against Domestic Violence AcL 2001 PROTECTION ORDEIUTNTERIM PROTECTION ORDER
 
ACT 22
 
LO. Of2O:.

A. B.

C.D.	Respondent
Tbc Coutkaviitg beard Bn application made fry ..........................................,......
N-'3i›a•la•••J
in respect offlic conduct or thrcaccaed conduct oF...............................,....,.......


NOW THIS COURT ORDERS, that for the period from the ..........day	” of....,......................, io the ...........day of...„.....,........., YOU .............................

1.	Skall not engage in tbc followiag coaduct:

2.	Shall not engaga in any conduct that constiNtes aa offence under tbis AcL
3.	Shall comply with the following prohibitions and coaditions:
(Specify prohibitions end cont:h’tioni imposed end ony period or periods for
'hichthey may be imposed  Zf%erenf	theperiodofthe ProteciioMnferim

lfyou the said.	fail lo comply with any of the terms of this Order
m-¥
you shall be liable to imprisonment and/or a fine pursuant to section 26 of the



Registrar/Magisiraie
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST	ACZ 22
DOMESTICWOLENCE


Pmieciion Against Domestic interim Act, 2001 APPLICATION FOR DISCHARGE OF PROTECTION ORDER OR
II'4TERlM PROTECTIOi'4 ORDER
No.	of 20......

c. n.	Respaadeat

I .......................................,.	,..Aenby apply undw section 6
ofihe Prat«ciioa Agaiast Domestic Violence Act, 200lfor discharge oftbc Protectioa Order aiadc against ..,.,.......................................oa the	day
of........................„ by the	Court (a copy of which

unachcd io ilic said application) in respect of cenai conduct or ihreaicned

CO UGIDWBIdS



I risk fora discharge ofthe Order on the following grounds:

Osted this .................day of..................




 
Jt0
 
zttl	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
AC'I' 22
 

 

 
(5ectton6)
 
FOKM4
Protection Agañist Domestic Violence Act, 2001
ORDER DISCHARGE IG PROTECTION ORDER/INTERIM
PROTECT1ONORDER
 

No. of20::.
Bcv
A. B.

C.D.	Respondent
The Coun, having heard on application made under section 4/5 of the Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001 by ........„.....,........,...............
in respect of thC conduct or theatened COnduci of

...,..,............ .	... towards.	And the Court
us	y	••••/  ao•u y

ban:ny or ›a..........day of..,..,......,.	, made an Order, a copy of which is
attached, prohibiting the Respoadcnt From engaging in the conducc specified

NOW the Court eg the application of.	for a discharge of the
Order and b•iag satisfied that tbc Order should be discharged, does this day Order ihat tM Proceccion Order/ Izttcrtm Protection Order be discbazged.



RegistrarlMagistrafe
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM 5
Protection Agaiast Domestic Violence Acf. 200t
 
AC3’ 22
 
31I


(Sections 7 and 8)
 

APPLICATION F-OR OCCUPATION ORDER/tNTERIM OCCUPATION ORDEk

No.  of 20......
tween
A. B.


C. D.	Respondcat


hereby apply under section 7/8 of the Protection Against Domestic Violence
•	Act 2001 for an Occupation Order/lnterim Occupation Order to be made by Court against .............................................................................................


in respect ofihe following conduct: I$peciff •!•*• !!“	• R! * o ddetails of


Dated this....................day of....................



 
312	2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 
(Sections 7 and 8}
 
FOMM6
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001
 

OCCUPATION ORDEIUfNTERIM OCCUPAYION OROER

 
No.	of 20......
Between
A. B.

C. D.
 



Applicant

Respondent
 

The Court kaviog beard an application made under section 7/8 ofihc Protection Against Dotncstic Violence Act, 2001 by........................................
in respect ofthe conductor threatened conduct of.	,.



HOW iliis Court £lrden that, for the period from the	day of
,...to	the ...............day of.....................

1.	Shall not engage in the following conduct:

2.	Shull not enguge in conduct that constitutes a domestic violence
oKtnce•
3.	Shall comply with the followiiig prohibitions and conditions:
(specify prohibitions and conditions end any pe- riod	or periods %r which they may be imposed.)
lf you the said,..............,.	fail to comply with any of the terms of this
Otder you shall be liable to imprisonment and/or a fine pursuant to section 26 of the Act

Dared this............... day of.....................


ReyistrarlMagistrate
 
2001	PROTECTION  AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 










 


C. D.
 
FORM7
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001
APPLICATION FOR VARIATION OR D!SCHAAGE OF OCCUPATION ORDERfINTERIM OCCUPATIO1't ORDER





Respond-
 



hereby appty undersectioo IO ofthc ProtcctionAgainstDomestic ViolcaccAct 2001 for a variation/discharge odtboOrder made against


(a copy of which is attecfted to the ssid application) io respect of cmain







There ltai been no previous proceedings in any Court in Inspect of the said Order and 1 now ask for a discharge or variation of ihat order io be made.
(Speci/}'derails ofvariaiiaHgmunds%r dis-
**^W*!

 
3lt
 
2tiiil	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 

 
(Section IO)
 
yORM 8
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001 VARIATION OR DISCHARGE OF INTERIM OCCUPATION OROER
No.	of 20......

mB.


The Court, having hcard anapplicaüon made under section 10 ofthe Protec- rios Aguinsi Dointstic Violence Act 2001 by


in respect ofthc conduct orthreaientd conduct of.............................................



having on the.............,dny of...................... made an Otder, a copy of which is	,
attachcd, pzobibitiag tbc Rcspoadast boæ cagagîag ia the cooduct sp¢cifi¢d thcrcin:
Non the Court on the application of ......................................,.	this day or-

thai the Occupation Order or (Interim Occupation Order) br:
1.	Discharged..............................................,................
 

 




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM9
Proieclion Against Duninstic Violence Aeb 2001
 
ACT 22
 

 



(Section llf 12)
 
APPLICATION FOR TENANCY ORDERffNTERlM TENANCY ORDER

 
No.	of 20......
Between
A. B.

arid
c. n.
 



Appli-


Respondent
 


 


hereby apply under section 11/12 ofthe Proinciion Against Domestic Violence Act200l for a Tenancy Order/lnterim Tenancy Order to be made by the Coun



in respect oY the following conduct (speck doin, time, place and details of allegedcon ict.j

Daced this................day of............,...
 
3lG



(Section 11(2), 12)
 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM 10




l4o.	of 20.,...
tw
A. B.


c. o.
eni
 
ACT 22










Appli-



Respond-
 
The Coun hnving heard an application made under section 11(1)/12(1) of the Protection Against Domestic Violence Act 2001 by............,................„..........




Now This Cniirt ORDERS, that for the period from ihc ,.	day







2.	Skal} oot cagagc io any coaduct that coastitute an offence uadcr tlñs Act;
3.	Shail comply wiih the followñig prohibitioiu and conditions.
{Specif Prohibitions and Condition aadany period or periods for which th	br inn	eel.

Dakd this............... day of.„ ................




 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM 11
 
ACT 22
 




(Section 14)
 
1t7
 

ProtectionAgainst Domestic ViolenccAct, 2001

APPLICATIO1'4 TO DISCHARGE TEFIAIJCY ORDER AI4D


No.	of 20......
BcMecn A- B.

C.D.



hcteby apply under section 14 ofthe Protection Against Domestic ViolcnceAct 2001 for a discharge ofthe order made against

rymi
oa the ........,....day of.	by the Court(a copy of which is sttocbcd to




There has been no pmvious proceedings in any Court in respect of the said order and I now ask for a discharge of ihai order to be made.



Dated ihis.....................day of.....,................












 
SIS	200G	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORIvt 12
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001
ORDER DISCHARGING TENANCY ORDER A1'4D REVZSTING TENAXCY

 
No.	of 20......
tw
A. B.


c. o.
 



Appli-


 

TbsCourt, bsviogksardaa applicatioa made uadcrsectioa 14 ofthe Protectioa
,	Agataa Doa›sstfc Violence Act 2001 by


in respect oftlhn conduct or threatened conduct of.............................................


w	*odbeviogoo
the........... day of.	aide ao ordar, a copy ofwkich is attached,
prohibiting the rnspondtnt from engaging in ibe conduct specified therein:

Now tbsCourtoa lbs applicatioaof.	thisdey ordms




 
2001		PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 
3I9
 

 
tscction 19 (2))

Pnteciion Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001
NOTICE OF PROCEEDINGS

 
Ao.  of 20......
Between
A. B.

C.D.
ent
 




Respond-
 
TO THE RESPONDENT
An application under sermon ... of the Protection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001 for a Ptoieclion Order/Occupation OrderfTeoancy Order has been made by................,.............................................................................,..............
against you.
A copy of the application is attached. The application lies been set dnwn for hearing on the ...............day of....................................., at	..-A.MW.M. at
mr


IF YOU DO NOT APPEAR IN PERSON AT THE HEARING OF THE APPLICATION, THE COURT MAY -
(p2 deal with the application in your absence; or
(bj issue a warrant for your arrest and to be brought before the Court.




Dated this.....................day ofi.....................
 
20tll	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
 
ACT 22
 

 
FORM 14
Pixitection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2000
AFFIDAVIT £OR USE IN PROVING SERVICE OF PROCESS

 
No.	of 20......
Between
A. B.

C.D.
 



Applicant

Respondent
 

Retuni ofservice ofproctss in respect of Dommtic Violence Offencets) for the








Sworn io by me.........................,.	the above-named Drponent

Dated ihis ........................day of....................








 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

FORM 15
Prniection Against Domestic Violence Act, 2001 DONfESTlC VIOLENCE POLICE REPORT
 
ACT 22
 

 



(Section 27)
 
STATION..............,....,..,. DIVISION.,.................... Reference No. ................
Complaint made

Relationship to Victim or Alleged Offender....................................................... Telephone No. ..,.........„...........,.,.,........
Mode of Report ..................................................................................................


Date .............................. Time ..................... Diary Reference ...........................
Recorded by: fNuntber7RanMNumeJ.......................................................„........ Name ofViciim .....................................................................„,..........................
u	mi
.........................................................	... Religion .........................................
Address .............................................................................................................
Telephone Rio. .........., Marital Siotus ........... Relationship to Offender.............. Sex .................. Age .................... Occupation ...................„......„.........,.	,.
Address of Employment ....................................................................................
Nnme ofAlleged Offender ..................................................„,.......,..............,....



Sex ,..........., Age ............ Marital Status............... Telephone No,................
Occupation ................................... Address of Employment .....,.................,..


Address .................................,................,.......,......„.........................................
Relationship to ViciimfAlleged Offender........................................................
 
t #t	PROTECTION AGAINST
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

BRiEF FACTS AS REPOhTFsD
 
ACT 22
 

 







Medical Report Form Attached (ticld	Yes Q	Xo  @

'	Whereabouts  ofchildren  at  time ofincident  ...................,....,.............................

Strife whether previous complaints wtm made /iic19  Yes II	No
Dale ........................... Time ........................,... Diary Reference.....................
Investigator: jWum6er/J?o	oote,/..,................................. ............  ,..,  „..,



Other previous compiaink mode
Dare ........................Time ................................ Diary Refumncc .....................
Investigator. f?\fomber7RanHNaniv]........,....„,..................................................



1s Protection Order (P.O.) in existence? (tick)  Yes	No O
Date    of)ssue    ......,.............................................,.....,....,.....................................


 
2001	PROTECTION AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

ACTION TAKEN WITH RSSPECT TO PRESENT REPORT:
Anion taken, by whom





ARREST MADE:
Date of Arrest ,.	Mode of Arrest

Present staius of report

CHARGES PREFERRED:
 
ACT 22
 



(4)	.,......,............................................„..................................,..,........................ y	STATFs REASON(S) If NO CHARGES PREFERRED:




AGEl'tCY TO WHICH REPORT REFERRED/FOLLOW UP ACTION:




........	...........................................
Supervising Officer
(inspector ord at›ove)


Date	Date
Passed in the House of Assembly this l7th day of December, 2001.
RUTH SIMON (MRS.)
Clerk of the House of Assembly (Ag.)

 
 
Printed by the Government Printer st the Government Printery, Roseau
 

(Price $10d0)
