





































PART I - PRELIMINARY
.Sùori titTe
 
DOMESTIC VIOLEXCE ACT, 2013 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section
PART I - PRELIMINARY
1.	Short title
2.	Interpretation
PART II - ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
3.	Establishment of Victims of Violence Advisory Committee
4.	Composition of the Advisory Committee
5.	Functions of the Advisory Committee
6.	Meetings of the Advisory Committee
7.	Allowances
8.	Secretariat of the Advisory Committee
PART III - VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SUPPORT FUND
9.	Establishment of domestic violence support fund 10.ObjecNvesofthe Fund
11.	Sources of moneys of the Fund
12.	Management of the Fund 13.Accounts and audit
14.	Annual report of the Fund
PART IV- OFFENCE OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
15.	Meaning of domestic violence
16.	Meaning of domestic relationship
17.	Prohibition of-domestic violence
18.	Domestic violence not justified by consent
19.	Number of acts which would amount to domestic violence
PART V- COMPLAINTS
20.	Filing of complaints to Police
21.	Police to respond promptly
22.	Police assistance after receipt of complaint
23.	Arrest by Police
 
24.	Arrest by persons other than Police without warrant PART VI — PROTECTION ORDERS
25.	Application for protection order
26.	Conduct of proceedings
27.	lnterim protection order
28.	Effect of protection order
29.	Duration of final protection order
30.	Conditions of protection order
31.	Referenœ to Children's Court
32.	Extension of protection order to other pensons
33.	Occupation order
34.	Power to discharge protection order
35.	Contravention of protection order
PART VII — PROCEEDINGS
36.	Settlement out of court
37.	Modifiœtion or cancellation of protection order
38.	Publication of proceedings
39.	Criminal charges and protection
40.	Civil claim for damages
41.	Pubiic education
PART VII)- MISCELLANEOUS
42.	Regulations
 



   


2.	Interpretation

In this Act. unless the contex' ot. .eavise requires -

abuse" means conduit that I  •n s or is !.xe!/ IO CaLiSe harm to
the safety, health OF «e1l betrg of the ccmplainant;

"aggravated" in relation to domestic violence, refers to any act of domestic violence where-

{a)	it has caused the victim to suffer wounding or grievous bodily harm, or

(b)	the court considers the incident or inciden1s to be so serious as to be aggravated, taking into consideration-
(i)	whether a weapon was used,

(ii)	any failure tc respond to previous warnings by the Police, the court or any official body,
(ii)	evidence of premeditation,

(iv)	whether the victim is particularly vulneiabie,
and

(v)	any other consideration the court Considers appropriate;
"alleged offender" means a person against whom a complaint of
domestic violence is filed;
"applicant" means a person who applies for a protection order undeF this Act;




 
 





“'*?ompIainan!” means a person echo makes a col plaint or on
›//hcse behat* a complaint is maple to the Police. under section


“court”	includ s	the High Court	hlag.strate‘s	Ccurt	and Children’s Court;
“economic abr›se” inclr›des-

 		the unreasonable deprivation of any economic or financial resources tG which the Complainant or a family member or dependant of the Complainant is entitled unde' any law, requires out o1 necessity c• has a reasonable expeciation of user, inciuding household necessaries and bend repayments or rent payments in respect of a shared household,
(b)	unreasonably disposing of moveable or immovable property in which the Complainant or family member or dependent of the Complainant has an interest cr a reasonable expectation of use,
(c)	destroying or damaging property in which the Complainant has an interest or a reasonable expectation of use:
“emergency monetary relief™ means compensation for monetary losses suffered by a Complainant ai the time of the issue of a protection order as a result of dGmestic violence, inGfuding, as appropriate —
 
 


‹al	!oss of earnings,
(b”›	medical and dentai expenses

(ò)	househcld necessaries

"nousehold chattels" include {ieweII=ry, clothes. furniture and furnishing, refrigeratof, television, radiogram, otner electrical and electronic appliances kitchen and laundry equipment, hunting equipment, books, motor vehicles, other than vehicles used wholly for commercial purposes, and household livestock;
"intimidation" means intentionaily inducing fear in anot.*.er person on’ -
‹ai	threatening !o abuse thet person or a third party,

(b)	threatening to damage. destroy or dispose of property in which that person or a third party has a material interest, or
(c )	exhibiting a weapon before that person; "marriage" includes marriage under any custom or religion;
 
 	 

protection. order" means an order madar by the court I nder sections 13 “ 4 and 15 and en the final determination of an apDlicatio*;
"respcn4e ,I" means a pe°rson against y.hom a Protection orúer
.iS brought: and "sexual abuse" means
 	the forceful engagement of another person in a sexual
contact, which includes sexual conduct that abuses, humiliates or degrades the other person or otherwise violate another person’s sexual integrity; or

 		a sexual contact by a person aware cf being infesting with human immc nodeficiency virus (HIV) or any oth° sexually	transmitted	infection	with	another	pers‹›n without that ctl er peison be'ng given prior information of the infection:

“sexual harassment n°, ans °xcIuding married ccup!es sexual contact without the consent of the person with whom he contact is made, repeatedly making unvvant d se.xuai advances, repeatedly fo!lc 'ng, pursuing or accosting a perscn or making pers:•stent, uny/e!ccme communica'ion with a persc'ri and includes

(a)	watchinç, loitering outside or near a building whr.re the harassed person resides. works, carries on business, studies or happens to õe:

(b)	repeatedly making telephone calls or inducing a third person to make telephone calls to the harassed person, whether or not conversation ensues;
 
"‹c›


td)
 

repeatedly sendtng, delivering or  causing the delivery of letters, tel°s‹°ms, packages , facsimiles, electronic mail or other objects or mess-ages to the harassed person's residence, school or workplace; and

engaging on any other menacing cr threatening behavior.
 




 



4. Composition of the Advisory Committee (“ } T'ne .Advisory Committee consists cfs
 	!he Perman=nt Secreteny of tne fJinistry responsio!e ‘cr Shomen's Affairs, as the Chairperson;


 	a representative of the i\Ministry iesponsibl•- for Health
not below the rank of D=puty Director;

(e) a represeniaflve of the lGnistry responsb|e for Bask
Education not below the rank of a Peputy Director:

 		a representative from the Police Force not beiov/ the rank cf Superini=ndent:

 
tg)
(>)

i

(k›
 
the Executive Director of \Vomen“s Bureau;
" a representative of the Ministry responsible for Youths not be/o‘r/ the rani‹ of Director.
a representative Of the Supreme Islamic Counci!:

a representative of ’.he Cirristian Council; and

Fwo	representatives	of	Civil	SGcie	organisations,
3pprovec bythe Ulnisten
 

{2) Tie D'rector of Social \S’=ifare shall ’oe the secre:any tc the Board
 
   



 
‹,h)
(:l

id›
 
advise the Minister or, po!icy matters under this Act:

propose and promc*.e strategics to prevent and combat gender based v'oience;
liaise with government agercies.. organisations arid individuals to promote the rehabilitation and ”eintegraiion of victims of violence;
 

(e)	advice on guidelines for dishursev›eilt from the fund;

(f)	manage the fund;

(g)	advocate ance support research on international and regional developments and standards for dealing .with matters of gender based vio!enr.e;
 		supervise and monitor the implementation and administration of this Act and an‘y other legislation relating to gender bas*d violence’

 

 
;j;
 
support resource mcbiIisa‹ion activities: and
deal v•/itñ any other mati=rs concerned with gender based violence.
 

4. Meetings of the Advisory Committee

\ ! The Adviso.'y' Comm2e	shall motet al least once every three months

(2! the	quorum for the Ad•v scrv Committee meeting is six
members.
(3) Tne Chairperson shall presila at n =et›ngs cf the Añviso \› Committee= and .n the aosence of 'ne Chairperson, the members present snalI elec: a person from among their nr!n^.ber
 



	Dorelc''oençeAc,20’°	



t5 The .Advisory Committee may co-opt a person tc attenci its meeting but the co-Gpted person shal! not vote en ary matter put to a vote.
ï6) The Aôvisory Conlmittee may determine the pfoc dure lo!“ its meetings
7.	Allawances
IVlembers Gf the Advisory Committee sL!a!l be oaic* allo ‘‹ances approved by the Minister in consultat:'on with the iv\inis:er responsible for Finance.
8.	Secretariat of the Advisory Committee
(1)	The Ad•zisory Committee shail have a secretariat which sfia!i be locatecî at the k1inistry.
(2Ï The Ministry shall praviöe the facilities and personnel for ›.he functioning cf the Secretar'at.
PART III - VICTIIYIS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SUPPORT FUND
9.	Establishment of Victims of Domestic Violence Support
Fund
There is established by this Ach Vic!ims of Domestic Violence Support Fund.
10.	Objectives of the Fund
Moneys in the Fund shall be aopI!•d-
{al	towards	the bas.’c	mat rial	supocrt	of	victims	of domestic violence:




9
 
 	 









4 l . üources ot rncneys for the Fund
The Funa shall consist of-



12.	Management of the Fund
11)	The Fund shall be mamaged by the 4.d•/isory Committee.
ÏÊ) The ?d •‹scry Com'vittee shall pay all moneys of the Fund into a bank account opened for the purpose.
13.	Accounts and audit
‹1) The Advisog Com.m ittee shall jeep boohs of accounts for the Furo and proper recorc!s in relatïnn te› them.

(2)	The Aò ’isory Coamitiee shal( submit the accounts sf the Fund to tïne h1inister to be audited as part of the IViinistry”s o’ era!i a di:. ’Withi one r‹zont.h al.er the end of the finan,cial 'yeaï.
14.	Annual report of the Fund
'“! ) T/°›	Advisory Ccmmittee shal! within. ene month after the



 
	Domestic Violence Ac‹. 2013	



PART IV - OFFENCE OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

15.	Meaning of domestic violence
‘Domestic violence”’ means engaging in the following within the context of a previous or existing domestic relationship-
S	(a)		an act under the Criminal Code which constitutes a threat or harm to a person under that Code;

(Cap 13.01}
(b)	specific acts, threats to commit, or acts which result in-
(i)	physical assault or use of physical force against another person including the forcible confinement or detention of another person and the deprivat:men of another person of access to adeqLlate food, water, clothing, shelter, rest , or subjecting another person to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
(ii)	sexual abuse,

(iii)	economic abuse, or

(iv)	emotional, verbal or psycho(ogicaI abuse namely any conduct that makes another person feel constantly unhappy, miserable, humi(iated, ridiculed, afraid, jittery or depressed or to feel inadequate or worthless;
{c)	sexual harassment and intimidation by inducing f=ar in a"nother perscn; and

(d)	behavior or conduct that in anyway-

(i)	harms or may harm another person,
(ii)	endang=rs the safety, health or well-being of another person,

(iii)	undermines another person's privacy, integrity or security, or

(iv)	detracts or is likely to detract from another person's dignity and worth as a human being







 





 


1F Meaning of domestic relationship
(1)	“Domestic relationship means family relalionship. a relationship akin to a family re1atio,nsrip or a relationship in a domestic situation that exists if .was existed between a complainant and an alleged oñender ance includes a relationship where the complainant —

(a)	is or has been married to the alleged offender;

 
{b)
 
lives with the alleged öffender in a relationship in the nature of a marriage notwithstanding that they are not, were not married to each other or could not or cannot be married to each other;
 
(c)	is engaged to the alleged offender, courting the alleged offender or in an actual or perceived romantic, intimate, or cordial relationship not nesessarily including a sexual relationship with the alleged offender;
(d)	and the alleged offenders are parents of a child, are= expecting a child together or are foster parents to a child;

(e)	and the alleged offenders are family members related by consanguinity, affinity or adoption, or would be so related if they are married either customarily or under any enactment or were able to be married or if they were living together as spouses although they are not married;

 

 


(9)
 
and the alleged offender, share or shared the same residence or are co-tenants;

is a parent, an elderly blood relation or is an elderly person who is by law a relation of the alleged offender:
 
(h)	is a house help in the household of the alleged offender;

(i)	lives in or attends a public or private care institution and is under the care and control of the alleged offender; and


12
 
	Dom=stic Violence Act. 2u13	


¿)		Is	n reIaticnsr'ip determined by th= court tc be domestic relationship.
2 A court shall, in a determination under paragraph /j) of s sc-section (1) have regard to -

(a)	the length of time the persons spent together,
h
,	(b)	the place where the time is ordinarily spent;
o)	the manner in which that time is spent: and (J'	the duration of the relationship.
(3)	Without prejudice to sub-section (1). a person is in a domestic relationship where the person —
(a)	is providing refuge to a complainant whom an offender seeks to attack: or
(b)	is acting as an agent of the offender or encouraging him or her.
17.	Prohibition of domestic violence

(1)	A person in a domestic relationship shall not engage in domestic violence.
(2)	A person in a domestic relationship who engages in domestic violence commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dalasis or imprisonment not exceeding two years or to both.
(3)	The Court may in addition to imposing a fine or a prison term, order the offender in a case of domestic violence to pay compensation to the victim as the Court may determine.

{4) When a cause for complaint has arisen between persons in a domestic relationship and the persons do not cohabit, none of those persons shall enter into the residence of the other person without that other person's permission.

18.	Domestic violence not justified by consent

The us= cf violence in the domestic setting is not justified on !he basis of consent.

13






 
	Domestic V.olenoe Act, 2013	



19.	Number of acts which would amount to domestic violence

lls A single oct may amount to Jomestic violence.

(2)	A number of acts that form a pattern of behavior ma'y amount to domestic violence even though some or all of the acts viewed in isolation may appear minor or trivial.

PART V- COMPLAINTS

20.	Filing of complaint to the Police

(1)	A victim of domestic violence or any other person w'rth information about domestic violence may file a complaint with the Police about the domestic violence.

(2)	A child may be assi»ted by a next friend to file a complaint of domestic violence.

(3)	Notwithstancling sub-section (1), a complaint of domestic violence may be filed by a social welfare officer or health care provider where the intervention is in the interest of the victim.

{4) Where a victim is for any reason unable to file a complaint personally, a member of the victim's family may file a complaint on behalf of the victim.
(5) Where a person who could have been a Complainant under this Act has died, the complaint may be made by the deceased person's personal representative or by a member of the deceased's family or any oth•r person competent to represent the deceased.
(ô) A complaint of domestic violence may be filed with the Police at the place where the -

 
(a)
(b)
t !
(d)
 
offender resides; victim resides;
domestic violence occurred or is occurring; or
victim is residing temporarily where the victim has left her or his usual place of abode.
 




 
 
 

21.	Police to respond promptly

A Police officer shail respond promptly tc a request by any person for assistance from Jomestic vioienc anJ shall cffer such protection as the circumstances of the sase or the person who made the repori required. e›/en when the oerson repos.ing is not the victim of !he domestic violence

’‹	22. Police assistance after receipt of complaint

(1)	When a Police Officer receives a complaint under section 20(1), the office,r shall -

(a) interview the parties and witnesses to the domestic violence, including children in accordance with the provisions of the Children's Act;

 
{b)
 
recorci the complaint in detail and provide the victim with an extract of the complaint upon requesi in a language the victim understands;
 
(C)  assist the victim to obtain medical treatment  where
necessary;
(d)	assist the victim to a place of safety as the circumstances of the case or as the victim requires where the victim express concern about safety;

(e)	protect the victim to enable the victim retrieve personal belongings, where applicable;
 	assist and advise the victim to preserve evidence; and
(g) assist and advise the victim of his or her rights and any services which may be available.

(2)	Police assistance to a victim under sub-section (1) (c) consists of issuing a medical form to the victim and, where necessary, sending the victim to a medical facility.
(3)	A victim of domestic violence who is assisted by the Police to obta‹n medical treatment under sub-seciion (1) (c), shall be entitled to free medical treatment and a free medical report within fourteen days of the issuance of the medical fcrm, in all pubiic medical facilities.



15






 
 




	Dcmestiñ V oience Act. 20“i 3	


f4) Family mediation or inteaention shall net ?•= a bar to ti°,e investigation or prosecution of a complaint of doc.estic violence=
23.	Arrest by Poiice
(“i ) 4. Police Officer may arrest a person for domestic vioi=nce with a warrant ‹ssued in pursuance of this Act or without a warrant.
!2) A Police Officer may arrest a person for domestic violence 'wi hcut a warrant where -
ta)		an act of domestic	violence is committed	in the presence of the Police officer;
(b)	the Police officer is obstructed by the person in the execution of Police duties; or
(c)	the person is held in lawful custody under this Act and has escaped or attempts to esCape from such cUstody.
(3)	A Police Officer may arrest a perscn without warrant upon reasonable grounds of suspicion that —

(a)	he or she has committed an offence of domestic violence; or
(b)	he or she is about to commit an offence of domestic violence; and
(C)	there is no other way to prevent the commission of the cffence.
(4)	A Polices Officer may arrest a perscn without a warrant if the officer has reasonable cause tc believe that the p rson has contravened or is contravening a protection order issued under section 25, 26, or 27.

24.	Arrest by p=rsons other than Police without warrant
(1)	A person may arrest another person without a warrant if that other person commits as act of domestic violence in his or her presence.
(2)	A Derson may erres* another person without a wurrer't where the person has reasonable suspicion that the oth
 
	Domestic Vio!ence Act z013	


person has committed an offs-nce af domestic vio ence
t3) A person who effects an arrest under sub-section (1 or (2) s call within a reasonable time, being not more than twelve hours afer the arrest, hand over the person arrested to the Foiice.
PART VI - PROTECTION ORDERS
25.	Application for protection order
(1)	A person may apply to a court for a protection order to prevent -

(a)	a respondent
(b)	an associated respondent; or

tc)	both a respondent and an associated respondent,

from carrying out a threat of domestic violence against a complainant or any other person or to prevent the respondent, an associated respondent, or both from further committing acts which constitute domestic violence against a complainant or any other person.

(2)	“The application may be filed in a court s'ituated where-
(a)	the	applicant	or	complainant	resides,	carries	on business or is employed;
(b)	the respondent resides, carries on business or is employed; or
(c)	the act of domestic violence occurred or is occurring or is likely to occur.
(3)	The application may be made ex-parts, unless the court otherwise orders it to be on notice.
(4)	A court before which criminal proceedings in relation to domestic violence is pending may, on its own motion or on an application by the victim, issue a protection order in respect cf the victim.



17
 
 




	domestic Violence Act, 20a 3	


26.	Conduct of proceedings

(1.) roceedings for a protection order shall be held in chambers in the presence of *.he parties, their legal practitioners and any other perscn permi'‹ted by the court to be present.

(2)	Notwithstanding sub-se4ion (1), where the court is of the opinion that the presence of the respondent is likely to have adverse effect on the victim or a witness, the court may take such steps as it considers necessary to separate the respondent from the victims or the witness, without sacrificing the integrity of the proceedings.

(3)	Subject to sub-section (3) cf section 25, an application for prot=ction order shall be heard by the court ’within fourteen days of the filing of the application.
(4)	The court may request a social enquiry report on any of the parties to the proceedings and the report shall be prepared and submitted to the court by a social worker, probation officer or other person appointed by the court, as appropriate.
(5)	The report shall contain details of the circumstances of the domestic violence, an assessment of the effect of the violence and any other information considered expedient by the social worker, probation officer or other person appointed by the court.

27.	Interim protection order
(I)	Where an application is made ex-parte for a protection order, the court shall issue an interim protection order if it considers the order to be in the best interest of the applicant.
" {2) In determining whether it is in the best interest of the applicant to issue an interim protection order, the court shall take into account -

(a)	the risk of harm to the applicant or a relation or friend of the applicant if the order is not made immediately;
(b)	the likelihood that the applicant will be deterred or prevented from pursuing the application if an order is not made immediately; or

(c)	whether there is reason to believe that the respondent is deliberately evading service of notice of the proceedings
 
	Domesi.c ‘io!erce Act, 2013	


and the applicant, cr any person in a domestic relation with the r=sDondent. wil:› be prejudiced by the delay involved in effecting service.

(*) An interim protection order shall be for a perisd cf three months and the cour' may. w'here it thinks fit extenJ it for a period not exceeding three months.

(4)	Where the respondent is not already before the court, the court shall, in making an interim protection order, summon the respondent to appear within the period of three months referred to in sub-section (3) to show cause why the interim order should not be made final.

(5)	If the respondent fails io appear before the court in accordance with sub-section (4), the order shall become final.
(6)	Where an application is made on notice to the court for protection order and the court is of the opinion that -

(a)	the respondent is committing, has committed or is likely to commit an act of domestic violence; and

(b)	the applicant will suffer significant harm if a protection order is not issued,

the court may issue an interim protection order pending the consideration of the order applied for.
(7)	Where the court grants an interim protection order, it shall apply the provisions contained in sections 28(1) and 30(1) and may apply any of the provisions contained in sections 28(2) and 30(2).
28.	Effect of protection
(1)	The court may issue a protection order to prohiôit a respondent from committing or threatening to commit an act of domestic violence personally or otherwise against an applicant or a relation or a friend of the applicant.

(2)	Subject to ”personal lavv where appropriate, the prcteúticn order may prohiòit tne respondent from —

(a)	physically assaulting or using physical force agains' the applicant or any relation or friend of the applicant;

19






 
 




	Domest:'7 !enceic! 2013	



(b)	forcibly confining cr detaining the appl cant or any relation or friend of tne applicant;


 
(d,




 
forming the applicant to engage in any sexual contact;
engaging in any sexual conduct that abuses, humiliates, or degrades the applicant or otherwise violates the applicant's sexual integrity;
depriving or threateni^s to deprive the applicant of —
/i) econGmic or financial resources to which the applicant is entitled by law, including house mortgage repayments or rent payments in respect of shared accommodation; and

(ii)	household chattels required by the applicant as a matter of necessity;
 

(g)	contacting the applicant at work or other places frequented by the applicant;
 	cGntacting the applicant by telephone or any other form of communication;
(i)	disposing of or threatening to dispose of movable or immovable property in which the applicant has a material interest;
 		oestroying or damaging, or threatening to destroy or damage property in which the applicant has a material interest;
 	.riding or hindering the use of property in which the aoolicant has a material interest;

threatening to abuse the applicant;


 
in)
 
ent=ring	the	applicant’s	residence	withooi	consent where the parties do not share the same residence:
 
	Domestic Violence Act, 2013	 	



(o)	emotionaily,	verbally	or psychologically abus:Eng	the applicant;
tp)	coming within fifty metres of the applicant and vice versa; or
(q)		doing any act which the court considers is not in the best interest of the applicant.
29.	Duration of final protection order
A final protection order issued by the court shall not excee6 twelve months in the first instance but may for good cause shown, be extended, modified or rescinded by the court on a motion by a party to the original proceeding.
30.	Conditions of protection order
{1) A protection order shall include a provision restraining the respondent from subjecting the applicant to domestic violence.
(2)	A protection order may, at the request of the applicai t or on the court's own motion, include any or all of the following-
(a)	a provision which -
(i)	binds the respondent to be of good behavior,
(ii)	directs the respondent to seek counseling or other rehabilitative service,
(jii) directs the respondent to relocate and continue to pay any rent, mortgage payment and maintenance to the applicant, or
(iv) forbids the respondent to be, except under conditions specified in the order, at or near places frequented by the applicant or by any child or other person in the care of the applicant;
(b)	a provision directing the respondent to surrender any firearms or other specified weapon in the possession of the respondent, which may also include, if appropriate -


21
 
 






a provisicn. suspending any	rearm licence .n the


 
(c:
 
a provision festraining the applicant, respondent or o th from takingconverting damaging, or otherwise dealing in property in which the other party may have an interest or a reasonable expectation of use;
 
(d)  a prcvision temporarily direciing the respondent to
».ase eriodic payments in respect cf the maintenanue c“ the applicant, and of any child of the applicant, .' t‹°e esçondent is legally liable to support the a plican. r time child, as an emergency measure where no such
.main*.enance orcier is already in force, togelheF Wltn such other emergency monetari reliefs as is appropiate;

(e	a prcvisicn granting temporary sole cus’.oóy -

(i)	of a child of the applicant to any apprcpriate custodian other than the respondent; or
tii) of any solid of the applicant or any chiia in the cede of the applicant to the applicant or to another appropriatesr.ustodian if the court is satisfied that that is reasonabiv necessary for the safety of the child in question
(t	 
(i)		forbidding contact between the respondent and 3ny child of the applicant;

(.*ij	SQëC.’fy +3 that contact between the respondent
*nd a child cf the applicant shall take place onty
.n the presence and under the supervision of a soc al workef or a family member designat ‹1 by the court for the purpose. or
(iii) aliowing	such	contact	only	under	specifieò
 
	Domestic Vioience a‘c 2013	 	


conditions designed to ensure the safety of the applicant, any’ chiid . who may be affected. and any other family member, if the court is satisfied that that is reasonably necessary for the safety of the child in question;

g)   a provision ordering the relocation of the applicant to a safe house to be provided by the Minister and compelling the respondent to pay rent for the period the applicant resides in such a safe house if the court is satisfied that that is feasonably necessary for the safety of the applicant or any child or person in the care of the applicant;
(h)	any other provisions that the court thinks reasonably necessary to ensure the safety of the applicant or any other person who is affected.
31.	Reference to Children's Court

(1)	Where there is a need for special protection for a child, the court may refer matters concerned with the temporary custody of a child in a situation of domestic violence to a Children's Court.
(2)	Any matter connected with domestic violenœ in which a
child is the perpetrator shall be referred to a Children's Court.
32.	Extension of protection order to other persons
A court may extend a protection order to any person specified in the order other than the applicant if the court is satisfied that -
(a)	thé respondent is engaging in or has engaged in conduct, which, if the person specified in the order, (referred to hereafter as the “specified person"), were or had been in a domestic relationship with the respondent, the conduct would amount to domestic violence against the specified person;

(b)	the respondent's conduct towards the specified person is due, in whole or in part to the applicant's relationship with the specified person; or

 	the extension of the protection order is necessary for the protection of the specified person.

23






 
 






33.	Occupation order

’. VVhere the court in issuing a protection order considers it expedient to issue an occupation order, the court may issue an y<¿{or r qg]§'gs .’n= respondent tc vaoate the matrimonial home
or ° ther specified hcme.

(2)	The court shall ‹ssue the orderafter theconsideration of a social enquiry report prepared by a social worker, probation officer or other person appointed by the court, as appropriate.

(3)	The court shall consider the effect of the order or omission of the crder on the health, education and development of the family where the complainant and the respondent are in a marital relationship.

{4) A landlord shall not evict an applicant solely on the basis that the applicant is not a party to a lease, where a residence is rented by a respondent but exclusive occupation is given to the applicant by the ccurt.
(5) In furtherance of sub-section (4), the landlord shall provide the details of the lease to the applicant on request.

34.	Power to discharge protection order

(1)	A court may discharge a protection order on an application on notice by an applicant or a respondent.
(2)	The discharge of the order may occur even though the order-
a) applies for the benefit of a specified person in the order, other than the applicant; and
(b) applies against an associated respondent.

(3)	Upon the discharge of an order under sub-sectton (2), it shall cease to have effect for the benefit of any specified person or associated respondent as if either of them had applied for or been granted a discharge of the order.
(4)	Where a discharge order applies for the benefit of a specified person or against an associated respondent, either of them may apply for the order to be discharged in so far as it applies to them.
 




	Domestic Violence Act, 2013	



(5)	An application may be made under this section for the discharge of an interim order in which case the court shall fix a hearing date as soon as practicable and no later than thirty days after the filing of the applicaticn unless there are special circumstances.

35.	Contravention of protection order
(1) A person who contravenes a protection order commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand dalasis or to imprisonment not exceeding three years or to both the fine and imprisonment.

{2) A person convicted of a subsequent offence of contFavening a protection order is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand dalasis or to imprisonment not exceeding five years or to both the fine and imprisonment.

(3)	A person making a complaint under section 20, who-
(a)	with intent to induce a Police Officer to perform any act or exercise any power provided in this Act in relation to a contravention of a protection order; and

{b)  intentionally gives false information to a Police Officer or fails to provide information to the Police Officer in order to induce him or her to do any act or exercise any power under this Act,
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dalasis or to imprisonment not exceeding one year or to both the fine and imprisonment.
PART VII - PROCEEDINGS

36.	Settlement out of Court

(1)	Where in a criminal trial in respect of domestic violence which is not aggravated -
(a)	the Complainant expresses the desire to have the matter settled out of court, the court shall refer the case for settlement by any alternative dispute resolution method; and


2S
 
 




	Domestic Violence Act, 2013	

(b)	the court is of the opinion that the case can be amicably settled, it may, with the consent of the Complainant refer the case for settlement by any alternative dispute resolution method.
t2) Where any case is referred to settlement under sub-section
(1).	the court shall, in addition -
(a)	refer the Complainant and the offender for counseling; tb)	 where necessary,	require	the offender	to receive
psycho-social care; and
(c) after consultation with the Department of Social Welfare appoint a Socisl Worker to observe and report on the subsequent conduct of the offender to the court.
(3)	Where a Social Worker reports that the offender has engaged in any act of domestic violence after the settlement, the offender shall be brought before the court and prosecuted uoder section 21.
(4)	In any criminal trial in respect of domestic violence which is aggravated, the court shall not consider or approve any settlement of the matter out of court, whether in accordance with sub-sections (1) (2) and (3) or not.
37.	Modification or cancellation of protection order
An applicant or a respondent may apply to the court which granted a protection order for the modification or cancellation of the protection order
38.	Publication of proceedings
(1)	Except with the leave of the court, a person shall not publish a report of the proceedings under this Act other than in criminal proceedings.
(2)	In the reporting of criminal proceedings under sub-section (1), the reporter shall protect the identity of the victim.
(3)	A person who contravenes sub-section (1) or (2) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not exceeding fifty thousand dalasis o to imprisonment not exceeding twelve months or to both the fine and imprisonment.

26
 




	Domestic Violence Act, 2013	



39.	Criminal charges and protection
The institution of criminal charges arising from acts of domestic violence shall be in addition to and shall not affect the rights of an applicant to seek a protection order under this Act.
40.	Civil claim for damages
Proceedings under this Act shall be in addition to, and shall not derogate from the right of a person to institute a civil action for damages.
41.	Public education
The Minister shall for the purpose of this Act, provide for public education on domestic violence and the contents of this Act.
PART Vlli - MISCELLANEOUS
42.	Regulations
{1) The Minister may make regulations providing for —
(a)	the training of the Police, security personnel and court officials on gender based violence;
(b)	the education,counseIing and reintegration of victims and perpetrators of domestic violence;
(c)	shelter for victims of domestic violence;
(d)	enhancement of social welfare services for victims of domestic violence;
(e)	the modalities	fof	the provision	of	free medical treatment for victims of domestic violence:
(f}	guidelines to protect persons from sexual harassment and to provide sanctions for perpetrators; and
(g) the effective implementation of this Act.
(2)	The Chief Justice may in consultation with the Minist.er, prescribe forms for the purposes of this Act.


27






 
 





	 	UOmestcViolence€ct, 204a 		






i'ASSED in the National Asserrlbly this I 7tii day of December, into

THIS l°RIh'â’ED IMPRESSION has been carefully compared by me with the Bill which› has passed in the National Assembly, and found by me to be a true and c ect copy of*he said Bill.	X.	i

D. C. W Kebbe
€."lerk of the h'ation	Assembly.

































28
