REGIONAL REGULATION OF BONTANG CITY

NUMBER 9 OF 2012

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE MAYOR OF BONTANG,

Considering:
a. that women and children biologically and philosophically constitute groups vulnerable to acts of violence, both violence occurring within the household and that committed outside the household;
b. that protection of women and children victims of violence is one aspect of the duties and responsibilities of the government in providing protection and services to the community;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In view of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 47 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Nunukan Regency, Malinau Regency, West Kutai Regency, East Kutai Regency and Bontang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3839) as amended by Law Number 7 of 2000 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 74 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3962);
3. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as last amended by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BONTANG CITY and

THE MAYOR OF BONTANG

HAS DECIDED:

To establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:

1. Region is Bontang City.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Regional Head is the Mayor of Bontang.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus of the Bontang City Government.
5. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
7. General Hospital is a service facility that provides basic and specialist medical services, medical support services, installation services and care services on an outpatient and inpatient basis.
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
10. Service is an action that must be immediately taken to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or having occurred violence against the victim.
11. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy in order to provide strengthening and recovery of victims of violence as determined in a decision of an authorized official.
12. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance for the self-strengthening of domestic violence victims to resolve the problems faced.
13. Victim Recovery is all actions for strengthening domestic violence victims to be more empowered, both physically and psychologically.
14. Implementation of Recovery is all actions that include services and assistance to domestic violence victims.
15. Cooperation is a systematic and integrated method among recovery implementers in providing services to recover domestic violence victims.
16. Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and or community organizations.
18. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children or father and his children and mother and her children or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
19. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (servants, drivers and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.
20. Household Scope is people who have family relations with persons as referred to in number 19 due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, fostering, guardianship who reside in the household as well as people who work to help the household and reside in that household.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence is carried out based on:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. non-discrimination;
e. respect and recognition of human rights;
f. the best interests of women and children; and
g. victim protection.

Article 3

The objective of protection of women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services for the best interests of victims occurring in the household and or public.

CHAPTER III

FORMS AND SCOPE OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

Forms of Acts of Violence

Article 4

Forms of acts of violence against women and children are:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence; or
d. household neglect.

Article 5

Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes acts that result in:
a. pain according to medical experts;
b. injury;
c. wounds or disability to a person's body;
d. miscarriage;
e. unconsciousness; and/or
f. causing death.

Article 6

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b includes acts that among others result in:
a. fear;
b. loss of self-confidence;
c. loss of ability to act; and/or
d. feeling of helplessness.

Article 7

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes acts in the form of:
a. sexual harassment; and/or
b. forced sexual intercourse, in an unnatural manner or disliked by one party, for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8

1. Household neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d constitutes an act of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household;
2. Neglect as referred to in paragraph (1) also applies to any person who causes economic dependence so that the victim is under the control of that person, by means of:
a. restricting and/or prohibiting from working properly inside or outside the home;
b. not providing livelihood; or
c. eliminating access and control as well as participation concerning economic resources.

Part Two

Scope of Acts of Violence

Article 9

1. The scope of acts of violence against women and children includes:
a. acts of violence that occur within the household; and
b. acts of violence that occur outside the household.
2. Acts of violence that occur within the household as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a occur within the household committed by:
a. husband or wife within a marriage;
b. having a blood family relationship, marriage, customary law, adoption; or
c. working for another person or living and residing with another person.
3. Acts of violence that occur outside the household as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b occur outside the household including:
a. harassment;
b. discrimination and violence in the workplace;
c. violence in conflict areas;
d. violence in mass media; and
e. human trafficking.

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 10

Women and children victims of violence receive the following rights:
a. respect for their dignity as human beings;
b. health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced;
c. determining their own decisions;
d. guarantee of their rights related to their status as wife, mother or child and household member as well as community member;
e. compensation;
f. complaint handling;
g. obtaining protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government;
h. obtaining access and services at Government and private health service facilities;
i. obtaining facilitation in the judicial process; and
j. psychological and legal assistance.

Article 11

Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 10, also receive the following special rights:
a. respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. basic services especially compulsory education for 12 years;
c. equal protection;
d. freedom from various stigma; and
e. obtaining freedom.

CHAPTER V

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 12

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children who are victims of acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community; and
c. Family and/or parents.

Article 13

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 12 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the Government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing integrated services for women and children victims of acts of violence;
e. guaranteeing the implementation of protection for women and children victims of acts of violence by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally responsible for the victim;
f. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
g. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence according to regional financial capacity;
h. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence;
i. opening the widest possible access to information for women and children victims of acts of violence.
2. The implementation of obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) is set forth in the Regional Action Plan containing programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of acts of violence;
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) becomes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan to be subsequently used as a basis for SKPD in implementing protection of women and children victims of acts of violence;
4. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Article 14

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b are implemented in the form of community participation through:
a. prevention of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to the competent authorities;
c. assistance and aid in handling women and children victims of acts of violence;
d. protection efforts and moral and/or material support to women and children victims of acts of violence.
2. Provisions regarding the procedures for implementing community participation are regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Article 15

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of acts of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI

PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 16

1. To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling;
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government conducts the following efforts:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, and improvement of social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern for the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 17

In implementing efforts to prevent acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government must take into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally responsible for the victim.

Article 18

1. Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 16, is implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public order and security.
2. Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

CHAPTER VII

SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

Forms of Services

Article 19

1. Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence include: a. health/medical services in the form of care and recovery of the victim's physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in the context of recovery from the victim's traumatic condition, by providing a safe house to protect victims from various threats and intimidation;
d. provision of moral/mental support to restore self-confidence, mental strength and independence in facing and resolving the problems befalling them;
e. provision of legal services and assistance to help victims undergo legal processes related to the violence cases they face; and
f. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Government;
3. Provisions regarding procedures for services to women and children victims of violence shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Article 20

1. The Regional Government is obligated to provide complaint services by victims of violence;
2. The Regional Government must establish a recovery house or safe house;
3. Provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Part Two

Service Institutions

Article 21

1. Services to victims of violence shall be implemented by service institutions established by the Regional Government as well as non-governmental institutions;
2. Provision of services by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by regional apparatus having the main duties and functions of providing services in the fields of health and social welfare;
3. Provision of services other than by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (2) may also be carried out by police agencies;
4. Provision of services by non-governmental institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by community organizations engaged in advocacy and services for women and children victims of violence.

Article 22

1. The Regional Government provides protection services to women and children victims of violence through P2TP2A;
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from violence.

Article 23

1. Provision of services implemented by the Regional Government as well as non-governmental institutions includes receiving complaints and providing assistance;
2. In carrying out its duties, non-governmental service institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall coordinate and cooperate with P2TP2A established by the Regional Government.

Article 24

1. The Regional Government facilitates temporary protection, legal protection and support directly or channels to third parties, whether police, foundations, non-governmental organizations, or individuals for women and children victims of violence;
2. Protection and support as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out from the time a report is received, whether from the victim or other parties or from the time violence against women and children is known to have occurred.

Article 25

The Regional Government must facilitate the provision of legal assistance both inside and outside the court, to take legal action at the victim's request.

Article 26

1. Medical services provided to victims include provision of visum et repertum, DNA examination, health examination, inpatient and outpatient care, as well as psychosocial and spiritual services;
2. Services organized by P2TP2A must be carried out quickly in accordance with the victim's needs;
3. Provision of medical services, counseling and reporting by P2TP2A shall be carried out free of charge.

Article 27

1. The Regional Government and or integrated service institutions for women and children victims of violence and community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations are obligated to handle cases confidentially;
2. Confidential handling of cases of women and children victims of violence shall be carried out at the request of the applicant, companion and/or counselor;
3. Handling of cases of women and children victims of violence may be reported by the Regional Government and/or service institutions for women and children victims of violence, and community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations if the victim and/or companion has given written permission.

Article 28

1. The Regional Government provides a confidential safe house with all its facilities, the financing of which is charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD);
2. Services at the safe house shall be provided to victims by fulfilling the following requirements: a. filling out a form for personal identity and fulfillment of the victim's needs;
b. signing an agreement on the confidentiality of the safe house's location; and
c. complying with the provisions in the safe house.
3. Services provided at the safe house include counseling, empowerment activities and victim independence;
4. Service facilities at the safe house are also provided for child victims according to their needs;
5. Further provisions regarding services at the safe house shall be stipulated in the Safe House Standard Operating Procedures.

Article 29

1. The Regional Government facilitates alternative confidential housing needed by victims who are not accommodated in the safe house or victims who feel psychologically uncomfortable living in the safe house with all its facilities;
2. The victim's alternative residence must be clear and can be monitored by the Regional Government and companions.

Part Three

Service Mechanism

Article 30

1. Integrated services for women and children victims of violence shall be carried out based on: a. the initiative of the Regional Government itself or technically by related SKPD either directly or indirectly; or
b. at the request and complaint of the victim, applicant, companion, family, other persons, community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations who know.
2. Integrated services carried out by P2TP2A shall be carried out based on referrals from service institutions or based on complaints from victims or their families;
3. Provisions regarding procedures and procedures for obtaining P2TP2A services shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

REHABILITATION AND REINTEGRATION

Article 31

1. Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to obtain rehabilitation both physically and psychologically;
2. Rehabilitation facilitation services include counseling services, psychological and medical services, legal assistance and skills training or alternative education;
3. Every woman and child victim of violence who has recovered both physically and psychologically has the right to be integrated or returned to their family, community and educational institution for those still in school status;
4. Fulfillment of integration rights for women and children victims of violence shall be carried out through cooperation and coordination among all related SKPD, vertical agencies in the region, community organizations, non-governmental organizations and family parties;
5. Further provisions regarding the implementation of rehabilitation and reintegration shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX

IMPLEMENTATION OF ASSISTANCE

Article 32

1. Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy, and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence;
2. Assistance carried out by persons or institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) must coordinate with P2TP2A.

CHAPTER X

HANDLING OF CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH THE LAW

Article 33

Handling of children in conflict with the law includes:
a. children as perpetrators;
b. children as victims; and
c. children as witnesses to criminal acts.

Article 34

Treatment of children as perpetrators of criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter a, is as follows:

a. investigators undertake efforts to handle cases of children in conflict with the law with a restorative justice approach for the best interests of the child and must involve the Correctional Center, parents and/or families of victims and perpetrators of criminal acts as well as local community leaders;
b. the correctional center is obliged to prepare a correctional research report;
c. in the event that a child is detained, their placement is separated from adult detainees or entrusted/placed in a special detention house for children;
d. the investigation process and submission of case files to the Public Prosecutor is carried out immediately by including the Community Supervisor of the Correctional Center;
e. in the event that the Public Prosecutor is of the opinion that, based on the results of the investigation and the results of community research, prosecution can be carried out by means of a restorative justice approach, then the Public Prosecutor immediately transfers/refers the case file to the District Court;
f. after receiving the transfer from the Public Prosecutor, the Judge immediately conducts a child trial with a restorative justice approach procedure;
g. if the court decision is in the form of an action, then the Correctional Center is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision;
h. guidance, coaching and care at the Correctional Center, Detention House and Correctional Institution is carried out in an integrated manner involving relevant agencies; and
i. in the event that the court decision hands over the child in conflict with the law to the Social Service, then the Social Service is obliged to receive and prepare facilities and infrastructure in the context of recovery and social rehabilitation of the child.

Article 35

Treatment of children as victims of criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter b, is as follows:

a. immediately after receiving a report from the victim of a criminal act, the investigator conducts an initial interview;
b. in conducting the interview, the investigator pays attention to the situation and condition of the victim;
c. if the victim requires further treatment, after the initial interview the victim may be treated or placed in a special (temporary) room for other required services such as medical care, psychological care or examination in the context of the investigation and inquiry process; and
d. after the victim has recovered and all services including the legal process are completed, the victim may be returned home or placed in a children's social protection house, safe house, trauma center, for social and mental rehabilitation.

Article 36

Treatment of children as witnesses to criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter c, is as follows:

a. in the event that a child reports as a witness, then the police immediately contact the child's parents or guardian, unless the child's parents or guardian is involved or suspected as the perpetrator;
b. make a record of the identity of the referring party, data regarding the child, chronology of events;
c. request the parent or guardian trusted by the child, to accompany the child when the child gives testimony;
d. in the event that a child gives testimony in the investigation process, it is conducted in a special and closed room accompanied by parents/guardian taking into account the age, intellectual level, and importance of the child's testimony;
e. the child has the right to receive protection from witness and victim protection institutions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. if medical treatment is required, the child is referred to the nearest hospital;
g. at every stage of examination up to examination in court, the child as a witness must be provided with an assistant.

CHAPTER XI

COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One

Cooperation

Article 37

1. In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. other Regency/City Governments; and/or
d. Non-governmental institutions.
2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is followed up in accordance with applicable law, including:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. provision of evidence and witnesses;
c. rehabilitation of victims of violence; and
d. repatriation and social reintegration.
3. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement.

Part Two

Partnership

Article 38

1. The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business world in the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
2. Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for children victims of violence; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of violence.
3. Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER XII

FUNDING

Article 39

1. Funds for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence managed by P2TP2A must be allocated in the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
2. In addition to the budget sources as referred to in paragraph (1), funds for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence may also be sourced from other lawful and non-binding budgets.

CHAPTER XIII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 40

1. The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence;
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. service guidelines and standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
3. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of protection of women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/P2TP2A and the community.

Article 41

1. The Regional Government is obliged to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence;
2. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out with professional, transparent and accountable principles.

Article 42

The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence organized by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER XIV

CLOSING

Article 43

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette.

Enacted in Bontang on 28 June 2012

MAYOR OF BONTANG,

ADI DARMA

Promulgated in Bontang on 28 June 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BONTANG CITY

ASMUDIN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BONTANG CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 9
