REGENT OF NORTH LAMPUNG

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH LAMPUNG REGENCY

NUMBER 1 OF 2017

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF NORTH LAMPUNG,

Considering: a. that women and children have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, therefore they need to receive optimal legal protection;
b. that based on Article 9 paragraph (3) and paragraph (4), as well as Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, it is stated that women's empowerment and child protection are mandatory government affairs not related to basic government services and are the responsibility of the North Lampung Regency Government;
c. that based on the considerations in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection of Children from Acts of Violence
In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 55) and Emergency Law Number 6 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 57) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions including Municipal Cities within the Level I Region of South Sumatra as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number i / Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332); Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number Und^» u1^“” 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Sran Daerah (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia ?r 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679); p™»i™ Government Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery aaUm Rumah (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604b Korban Negara Cara Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms of Integrated Services for Witnesses N°rban Kdana PeTdaganX MRepublik Indonesia of 2008 Number 22,1 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number Minister of State for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection; Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection; Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence- Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and 7^ N°mor 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines da” Development of Integrated Service Centers; PeXm a,‘ egara Women's Empowerment from Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;'

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
18. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products.

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF NORTH LAMPUNG REGENCY

REGENT OF NORTH LAMPUNG

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is North Lampung Regency.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of North Lampung.
4. Regional People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the DPRD of North Lampung Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus Organization is an auxiliary element of the regional head in the administration of Governmental Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Woman is a person who has the predicate as an adult girl, and/or as a wife/mother, who is legally and naturally recognized as a woman.
7. Child is a person who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years of age, including children still in the womb.
8. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upwards or downwards or sideways up to the third degree.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
11. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
12. Victims of acts of violence are women and children who experience misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
14. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
16. Cooperation is an activity or effort carried out by several people to achieve common goals.
17. Forum for the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, hereinafter abbreviated as FP2ATK, is a forum established based on this Regional Regulation whose membership comes from relevant agencies and communities concerned with the empowerment of women and protection of children from acts of violence.
18. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
19. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
20. Victim recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of domestic violence to be more empowered, both physically and psychologically.
21. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TPA, is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, Safe House, Child Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, or integrated service provider institutions for victims established by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is implemented based on the principles of:

a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of Victims of Acts of Violence;
b. justice and gender equality;

c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of Victims of acts of violence;
e. The principle of the right to life, survival and development,

Article 3

The objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence are to:

a. prevent violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;

b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services and Empowerment to women and children victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
e. facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; and
f. Facilitate the restoration of the rights, dignity and personal values of victims.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 4

1. The Scope of this Regional Regulation consists of a. protection of women; and b. protection of children.
2. Protection of women as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes: a. prevention of acts of violence;
b. integrated services for victims of acts of violence; and c. empowerment of victims of Acts of violence.
3. Protection of children as referred to in Article 4 letter b includes: a. protection of children who are victims of acts of violence; and b. special protection of children.

CHAPTER IV

IMPLEMENTATION

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One

General

Article 5

The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect women from acts of violence that occur in public or private life in the form of a. physical violence; b. sexual violence;

c. economic violence;

d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and h. threats of certain actions.

Article 6

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 5 is obliged to make efforts to:

a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts; b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence; c. provide emergency assistance; and/or d. provide assistance in the process of protection.

Part Two

Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 7

1. The Regional Government carries out prevention as referred to in article 6 letter a by: a. socializing laws and regulations; b. providing counseling/guidance; c. providing education on the dangers of domestic violence; d. conducting seminars/workshops or the like; e. forming networks in efforts to prevent violence; f. coordinating, integrating, synchronizing violence prevention based on partnership patterns; g. establishing a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; and h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms and customs (2) In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:

a. Religious institutions;

b. family and/or closest relatives;
c. customary leaders;

d. customary institutions;
e. community;

f. educational institutions;
g. health institutions;

h. social community institutions; and i. business world and other institutions.

Article 8

1. The Regional Government is obliged to prepare programs or activities for Prevention as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan;
2. Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) to support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Article 9

1. Regional Apparatus Organizations that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment shall implement prevention as referred to in Article 8;
2. Regional Apparatus Organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) in conducting prevention may cooperate with vertical Agencies.

Part Three

Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 10

1. The Regional Government shall implement integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b through activities: a. complaint services;
b. health services;

c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social rehabilitation services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and/or g. repatriation and reintegration.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of: a. special service rooms;
b. expert and professional personnel;

c. service centers and safe houses; and/or d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.

3. The implementation of services for victims of acts of violence shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A with other social institutions;
4. P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner;
5. Integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be implemented in accordance with standard operating procedures;
6. Provisions regarding Standard Operating Procedures as referred to in paragraph (5) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four

Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 11

1. Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in article 5 letter c conducted by the Regional Government in the form of: a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and ’ c. capital assistance.
2. Empowerment as referred to in paragraph 1 Perangka‘ SeSU?i de"gan tu8as

CHAPTER V

CHILD PROTECTION

Part One

Protection of Child Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 12

1. Protection of children who become victims of acts of violence as referred to in article 5 letter a shall be the responsibility of the Regional Government.
2. Protection of child victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by: a. formulating policies for prevention, vulnerable risk reduction, victim handling and child data and information systems; b. organizing maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children, both within institutions and outside institutions;
c. providing shelters, maintenance and care for neglected children; and d. organizing special protection for children.

Article 13

1. Provisions regarding prevention and services for acts of violence in women’s protection as referred to in Articles 7 through Article 12 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the protection of children from acts of violence;
2. In addition to conducting prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) also by increasing family capacity in child protection and child care skills.

Part Two

Special Protection for Children

Article 14

Special protection for children shall be provided to;

1.  a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually- e. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse; f. Children who are victims of pornography; g. Children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Child victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;' L. Child victims of physical and/or psychological violence j. Child victims of sexual crimes; k. Child victims of terrorism networks; 1. Children with Disabilities;

,m’. Child victims of abuse and neglect n. Children with deviant social behavior; and ° Children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to the condition of their Parents
2. The regional government in implementing the handling of cases as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER VI

COOPERATION AND COORDINATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One General

Article 15

1. The regional government shall conduct cooperation and coordination for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. Cooperation and coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus Organizations that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two

Institutional Framework for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 16

1. The Regional Government in conducting cooperation and coordination for the Protection of Women and children from acts of violence, shall establish a Forum for the Care of Women and Children from Acts of Violence (FP2ATK);
2. FP2ATK membership shall consist of elements of: a. regional government;
b. vertical agencies;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social institutions;
f. labor institutions; dan g. community organizations that care about the protection of women and children from acts of violence. ‘
3. The Organizational Structure of FP2ATK as referred to in paragraph (2) shall consist of:

a. policy formulation working group;

b. socialization working group;

b. service working group; and
c. data, information, monitoring and evaluation working group.
4. The establishment and term of office of FP2ATK members as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 17

FP2ATK shall have the duties of:
a. providing input in policy formulation; b. conducting coordination with Regional Apparatus Organizations and other social institutions;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. collecting and developing data and information related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. conducting review, monitoring, evaluation and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence; and f. providing reports, suggestions, input and considerations to the Regent.

Article 18

FP2ATK as referred to in article 16 paragraph (2) shall be assisted by a Secretariat at the Regional Apparatus Organization that handles affairs of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 19

Further provisions regarding the mechanism and working procedures of FP2ATK shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20

1. The Regional Government in the context of services for victims of acts of violence, shall establish P2TP2A.
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the duties of;
a. providing services, including: 1. receiving complaints/reports of violence against women and/or children, consultation, and counseling; 2. receiving and sending case referrals from Regency/City Regional Governments or institutions established by Regency/City Regional Governments; 3. providing legal assistance and support;

4. health;

5. social rehabilitation;
6. legal services; and
7. repatriation and social reintegration.  b. providing protection to victims of acts of violence, reporters and witnesses.
3. The appointment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.
4. Regional Apparatus shall provide guidance to P2TP2A in carrying out duties as referred to in paragraph (2).

Part Three

Cooperation

Article 21

1. In certain circumstances, the Regional Government may cooperate in the protection of women and children from acts of violence with:
a. other regional governments;
b. the police;
b. advocates;
C. health workers;
d. social workers;
e. companion volunteers;
f. spiritual counselors;
g. other law enforcement officers, to assist victims in the court trial process;
h. the National Commission on Violence Against Women;
i. the Indonesian Child Protection Commission or a Child Protection Institution; and/or
j. certain parties desired for the benefit of the victim.

2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
ia. outreach/socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. assistance/companionship for victims;
e. counseling;
, £ social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

Part Four

Coordination

Article 22

1. The Regent coordinates the protection of women and children from acts of violence with:
a. the government;
b. other regency/regional governments;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; dan e. community institutions.

2. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
b. education affairs;
c. social affairs;
d. legal affairs;
e. labor affairs; and £ other affairs.

CHAPTER VII

COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION

Article 23

(I) Every person may participate in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence; (2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by:

a. reporting acts of violence against women and/or children;

b. providing first aid to victims of Acts of Violence;

C. independently disseminating/socializing the rights of women and children; and/or

d. establishing independent community social institutions.

Article 24

In the event that community social institutions implement protection for women and children from acts of violence, they must coordinate with FP2ATK.

i *

Article 25

1. The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:a. outreach/socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children; andb. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VIII

INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM

Article 26

1. The Regional Government prepares and compiles an information and reporting system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence; (2) The information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 27

1. The Regional Government carries out guidance and supervision of FP2ATK and other social institutions. (2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the Regional Apparatus Organization that implements women’s and children’s empowerment affairs. (3) The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) must be reported to the regional government.

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 28

Financing for activities for the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence may be sourced from; a. the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or ketentua^^ ^ngan

CHAPTER XI

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 29

This Regional Regulation.P J 8 dak bertentangan dengan

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

«ini harus ditetapkan

diundangkan.‘ ’n tórh,tung Peraturan Daerah ini A^rtUr“ ?“rah“““tanggal diundangkan.

Article 31

Promulgation PeraturL memenntahkan dalam Lembaran DaerahKabupaten^pu^^^ , Enacted in Kotabumi on date 27 - 7.2017

REGENT OF NORTH LAMPUNG,

AGUN MU MANGKUNEGARA

Promulgated in Kotabumi on date 27 - 7 - 2017 regional secretary REGENCY

SAMSIR

REGIONAL GAZETTE 2017 NUMBER..1.. REGISTER NUMBER NORTH LAMPUNG 01/482/LU/2017 NORTH LAMPUNG REGENCY YEAR PEJ^TURAN DAE^AH KABUPATEN LAMPUNG PROVINCE 1NUMBER:

ELUCIDATION OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH LAMPUNG REGENCY NUMBER 1 OF 2017

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

L GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in North Lampung Regency so as to avoid violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation to regulate protective measures so that institutional and regulatory support is needed that can guarantee its implementation, especially in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in Lampung Regency

H. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Ppsal 1 Sufficiently clear

Article 2

Sufficiently clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

Sufficiently clear

Article 5

Sufficiently clear Letter a.

What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death. Letter b.

What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Letter c.

What is meant by "economic violence" is an act that restricts a person from working inside or outside the home to earn money and goods, including allowing a working person to be exploited, while someone does not fulfill the economic needs of the family.

Letter d.

What is meant by "social violence" is an act of a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life to a person or may cause physical damage or damage to another person's property Letter e.

What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Letter f.

What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:

1. acts that result in the failure to fulfill a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
2. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate;
3. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household, whereas according to the law applicable to him or her or due to an agreement or contract he or she is obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
4. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Letter g.

What is meant by "neglect of workers" is is the act of any person or legal entity that results in unfair treatment of female workers whereas according to the law applicable to him or her or due to an agreement or contract he or she is obliged to provide adequate protection from lawful acts against workers such as haphazard recruitment, unclear shelters and workplaces, arbitrary business owners.

Letter h.

What is meant by "coercion or deprivation" of freedom is:

1. Coercion is any act «or action of taking, bringing, inviting a child or woman with persuasion and or coercion to be made a wife or to be employed illegally.
2. Deprivation of freedom is any act or action of taking, bringing, inviting, kidnapping a child or woman to be made a wife or employed by confining, detaining or imprisoning illegally in a room or certain place.

Letter i.

What is meant by "threat of certain acts" is any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbol or body movements, whether with or without using means

Article 6

that creates fear or restricts a person's fundamental freedom.

Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Sufficiently clear

Article 10

Sufficiently clear Paragraph (1) Letter a.

What is meant by "complaint services" is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community Letter b. What is meant by "health services" is efforts that include promotive, prefentif, curative and rehabilitative aspects. Letter c.

What is meant by "counseling" is a process of providing objective and complete information, conducted systematically with interpersonal communication guidance, guidance techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge aimed at helping a person recognize their current condition, the problems being faced, and determine solutions or efforts to overcome those problems Letter d. What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and coaching to humans so that it can provide tranquility, peace and coolness of heart to humans by always providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, tawakal and continue to carry out their obligations.

Letter e.

What is meant by "social rehabilitation services" is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly. Letter f.

What is meant by "legal aid and assistance services" is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to conduct the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.

Letter g. t What is meant by "return and reintegration" vTya m^n§embalikan women and children Av«t O'ban violence and daerah penerima to the area of origin. ryyai [Zj Letter a What is meant by "special service rooms" di sakit and tempabtempat Rv^d"^ ReSOrt u^a, Hospitals k^tor/^ Hospitals that are designated and in offices/agencies or other places determined by the Regional Governmenty K Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c.

What is meant by "Service Center and Safe House" is what is known as a trauma Hu f^edangkan a^an is known as a shelter. Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Sufficiently clear

Article 13

Sufficiently clear Rumah center,

Article 14

Paragraph (1) Letter o.

What is meant by "stigmatization" is the giving of a mark or stigma to a person, or group of people with a certain meaningful understanding in a certain situation and context openly or covertly to influence the thinking power or evaluative power of a person or group of

Article 15

people towards something, Sufficiently clear

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear

Article 18

Sufficiently clear

Article 19

Sufficiently clear

Article 20

Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Paragraph(1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Letter o fulfillment of needs for victims.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear

Article 23

Sufficiently clear

Article 24

Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Sufficiently clear

Article 26

Sufficiently clear

Article 27

Sufficiently clear

Article 28

Sufficiently clear

Article 29

Sufficiently clear

Article 30

Sufficiently clear

Article 31

Sufficiently clear EXo™DAERAH lampung
