CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY

WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY NUMBER 22 OF 2024

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD THE REGENT OF CENTRAL LOMBOK,

Considering that women and children are God's creatures and assets of the nation who must be protected, respected, and have their human rights fulfilled by the State, law and government to obtain true welfare as stated in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia: that women and children require protection from various forms of violence, exploitation, child marriage, and neglect, there is a need for strategic efforts from the Regional Government and other parties who are obligated to provide protection to women and children, that Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency Number 3 of 2009 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence is no longer in accordance with the development of law and policies on protection of women and children established by the government and provincial government so it needs to be replaced, that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and children.

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia:

2. Law Number 69 of 1958 concerning Formation of Level II Regions within Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1665), Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019) as amended by Law Number 16 of 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 186, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6401), Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946): Law Number 12 of 2022 concerning Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792): Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 903): Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 8 of 2015 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women and Children (Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province of 2015 Number 8, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 119), Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 5 of 2021 concerning Prevention of Child Marriage (Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province of 2021 Number 5, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 174), With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY and

REGENT OF CENTRAL LOMBOK

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Central Lombok Regency.

2. Regent is the Regent of Central Lombok.

3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous Region.

10. Regional apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the region.

Penyelenggaraan Pelindungan is all actions and service efforts to guarantee and protect the rights of children and women organized by the Regional Government and the Community.

Kekerasan is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.

Kekerasan terhadap perempuan hereinafter abbreviated as KTP is that which results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions. Coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.

Kekerasan terhadap anak is any action that results in misery or suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom.

Korban is a woman and child who experiences and/or suffers either directly or indirectly as a result of violence,

Pelindungan terhadap perempuan is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, Courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.

11. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive Protection from violence and discrimination.

Article 2

Protection of women and children is based on the principles of: respect for human dignity; non-discrimination; best interests of Victims; justice; benefit; and legal certainty.

Article 3

The objectives of Protection of women and children consist of:

a. preventing all forms of violence against women and children,

b. providing Protection and services to women and children victims of violence:

c. providing a sense of security to women and children from crime and violence:

d. avoiding children from child marriage,

e. guaranteeing Protection and fulfillment of children's rights, and

f. giving reproductive health guarantees to women and children.

Article 4

The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:

a. Women's Empowerment,

b. Women's Protection,

c. Fulfillment of Children's rights, and

d. Special Protection of Children.

CHAPTER II

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Article 5

Implementation of Women's Empowerment, includes:

a. efforts to raise awareness and form women's behavior in the need for self-capacity improvement,

upaya pengembangan akses perempuan untuk berpartisipasi di bidang ekonomi, politik, sosial, dan budaya, and

efforts to improve women's competence.

Article 6

Efforts to raise awareness and form women's behavior in the need for self-capacity improvement as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include:

a. understanding and awareness of women's basic rights,

b. providing motivation for women to have ability or empowerment, and

c. fostering awareness in women about equality and their position.

(2) Efforts to raise awareness and form women's behavior as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented through guidance of community groups, women's forums, women's organizations, and women's institutions.

(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out in the form of education, socialization, and advocacy.

Article 7

Efforts to develop women's access to participate in the economic, political, social and cultural fields as referred to in Article 5 letter b, include:

a. the cultivation and development of women's entrepreneurship;

b. improvement of Women's Empowerment in various professions;

c. improvement of the role and function of women in political organizations;

d. involvement of women to participate actively in development programs;

e. provision of access for women to participate in the Provincial Regional Government environment;

f. provision of leadership opportunities for women;

g. cultivation and development of women's organizations or institutions in order to improve Women's Empowerment; and

h. improvement of Women's Empowerment in arts and culture.

Article 8

Efforts to improve women's competence as referred to in Article 5 letter c, are carried out among others through:

a. skills training; and

b. education and literacy for women.

CHAPTER III

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Article 9

The implementation of Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:

a. efforts to improve family quality;

b. efforts to fulfill the special needs of women;

c. efforts to prevent and Protect Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination in a rapid, integrated, and integrated manner; and

d. efforts to Protect Women in disaster situations.

Article 10

Efforts to improve family quality as referred to in Article 9 letter a, are implemented through:

a. improvement of child quality through provision of access to information, education, counseling, and services regarding child care, nurturing, Protection, and development;

b. improvement of adolescent quality through provision of access to information, education, counseling, and services regarding family life;

c. improvement of family functioning, roles, and duties;

d. empowerment of vulnerable families through Protection and assistance and/or facilitation to develop themselves to be equal with other families;

e. improvement of family environment quality;

f. improvement of access and opportunities to receive information and family economic resources; and

g. development of innovative ways through assistance and/or more effective facilitation for pre-prosperous families, and development of programs and activities in efforts to reduce poverty rates for pre-prosperous families and women who serve as heads of families.

Article 11

Efforts to fulfill the special needs of women as referred to in Article 9 letter b, are implemented through:

a. health services especially family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth and post-childbirth;

b. fulfillment of the right to obtain paid leave including maternity leave; and

c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure for women.

Article 12

Efforts to prevent and Protect Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination as referred to in Article 9 letter c, include:

a. prevention of women from becoming victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination;

b. handling of women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination; and

c. Empowerment of Women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination.

Article 13

Efforts to Protect Women in disaster situations as referred to in Article 9 letter d, are implemented through:

a. health services; and

b. provision of women-friendly facilities at disaster evacuation sites.

CHAPTER IV

FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Article 14

Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 4 letter c, includes:

a. fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms;

b. guidance of family environment and alternative care;

c. fulfillment of basic health rights and welfare; and

d. fulfillment of education rights, leisure time, culture, and recreation.

Article 15

Fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms as referred to in Article 14 letter a, is implemented through:

a. facilitation of population administration and civil registration of children;

b. provision of Child-appropriate information; and

c. improvement of children's participation in development.

Article 16

Facilitation of population administration and civil registration of Children as referred to in Article 15 letter a, among others:

a. facilitation of ownership of birth certificate extracts;

b. facilitation of ownership of family cards; and
c. facilitation of child identity cards.

Article 17

Provision of Child-appropriate information as referred to (1) in Article 15 letter b, includes efforts to:

a. provide broad access to information for Children;

b. provide appropriate information for Children;

c. encourage production and dissemination of Children's books; and

d. develop Protection of Children from inappropriate information.

In order to provide broad access to information for (2) Children as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, analog information facilities and digital information facilities are built and developed.

Article 18

Improvement of Children's participation in development as referred to in Article 15 letter c, is carried out through institutionalization of Children's participation.

Institutionalization of Children's participation as referred to in paragraph (1), takes the form of a Regional Children's Forum to accommodate Children's participation in development.

The Regional Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (2), has the following functions:

a. monitor the fulfillment of rights and implementation of Children's obligations;

b. socialize children's rights and obligations in the peer environment;

c. voice Children's aspirations;

d. involve themselves in regional development planning deliberation forums;

e. involve themselves in decision-making processes; and

f. encourage children to actively ' develop their potential.

Article 19

Guidance of family environment and alternative care (1) as referred to in Article 14 letter b, is implemented through:

a. guidance for families or substitute families; and

b. holistic and integrative early childhood development; and

c. guidance for prevention of Child marriage.

Guidance for families or substitute families as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, includes:

a. guidance on fulfillment of Children's Rights required during their care; and

b. guidance to always include love and affection in child care.

3. Forms of guidance for families or substitute families as referred to in paragraph (2), among others: provision of family consultation institutions for a. Child care, guidance on standardization of alternative care institutions b. ; and strengthening the capacity of consultation institutions providing Child care services.

Article 20

1. Fulfillment of basic health and welfare as referred to in Article 14 letter c, includes:
a. provision of Child health facilities and infrastructure,
b. provision of human resources in the health sector,
c. guidance on Protection and maintenance of Child health.

Child, covering:

1. guidance on child growth health in efforts to reduce infant mortality rates and malnutrition rates for children,
2. guidance on providing early breastfeeding initiation, exclusive breast milk and continuous breast milk directly,
3. guidance on providing complete immunization for children, and
4. guidance on providing healthy, balanced, and safe food for Children.

Provision of Child welfare facilities and infrastructure, covering:

1. guidance on child-friendly households,
2. provision of child-friendly public spaces,
3. guidance on availability of child-friendly infrastructure in public spaces,
4. guidance on organizing Children's playgrounds,
5. guidance on Child care facilities,
6. guidance on availability of breastfeeding (lactation) rooms,
7. guidance on availability of child-friendly places of worship,
8. provision and guidance on availability of green open spaces,
9. guidance on organizing smoke-free areas, and
10. guidance on organizing child-friendly public transportation.

e. provision of accessibility facilities and infrastructure for Children with disabilities,
f. maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children,
g. guidance on improving the welfare of poor families.

2. Guidance on child-friendly households as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d number 1, is carried out in efforts to fulfill access to clean water and proper sanitation.

Article 21

Fulfillment of the right to education, leisure time, culture, and recreation as referred to in Article 14 letter d, is implemented through:

a. provision of educational facilities and infrastructure,

b. provision of educational human resources,

Cc. organizing child-friendly schools,

d. implementation of support for the 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program,

e. guidance on early childhood education,

f. facilitation of access to education for children who are already married,

g. facilitation of access to education for children in conflict with the law,

h. provision of children's playground facilities and infrastructure,

i. provision of creative and recreational facilities and infrastructure, and

j. provision of sports facilities and infrastructure for Children with disabilities.

CHAPTER V

SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN

Part One

General

Article 22

1. Special Protection as referred to in Article 4 letter d, covers:
a. 020p apa) Children in emergency situations,
b. Child victims of child marriage,
c. Children in conflict with the law,
d. Children from minority and isolated groups,
e. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually,
f. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse,
g. Children who are victims of pornography,
h. Children with Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,
i. ii Children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking,
j. Children victims of physical and/or psychological Violence.

1  AN

Children victims of sexual crimes, Children victims of terrorism networks, . Children with Disabilities, Children victims of abuse and neglect, Na Children with deviant social behavior, and Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

2. Children in emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, consist of:
a. Children who become refugees:
b. Children victims of riots,
c. Children victims of natural disasters and non-natural disasters, and
d. Children in armed conflict situations.
3. Child victims of child marriage as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, constitutes a marriage conducted between a man and a woman where one and/or both are still of child age.

Article 23

Implementation of Special Protection of Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1), includes:

a. Prevention, and

b. Handling.

Part Two

Prevention

Article 24

Prevention as referred to in Article 23 letter a, includes:

a. optimization of child resource capacity,

b. creation of an environment that supports child Protection,

c. DO strengthening coordination of stakeholders,

d. increasing accessibility and expanding services,

e. strengthening regulations and institutions, and

Article 25

1. Optimization of child resource capacity as referred to in Article 4 letter a is carried out through:
a. increasing children's awareness and attitudes regarding the right to receive Protection,
b. increasing child participation in child Protection efforts: and
Cc. increasing spaces and communities that support children to grow and develop optimally, both in formal and informal environments in line with the development of information, technology, and children's situations.
2. (3) (1)  (2) (3) Increasing children's awareness and attitudes regarding the right to receive Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through local government policy intervention toward optimization of child Protection implementation in school education.

Increasing child participation in child Protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is carried out through regional policy intervention:

a. providing and strengthening peer counselors and Youth Posyandu starting from the village/kelurahan level to the district level integrated with the formal referral system,

b. providing formal participation mechanisms for children and adolescents to be directly involved in child Protection efforts at various levels, one of which is through the Children's Forum, and

Cc. strengthening the Children's Forum as pioneers and reporters.

Article 26

Creation of an environment that supports child Protection as referred to in Article 24 letter b, is carried out through:

a. changing values, norms, and perspectives on child Protection,

b. strengthening the role of parents, schools, families, and communities in child Protection, and

c. revitalization of culture that risks encouraging violence and child marriage.

Changing values, norms, and perspectives on child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through local government policy intervention strategies toward:

a. strengthening understanding and the role of parents, families, social/community organizations, schools, Islamic boarding schools and other stakeholders in child Protection efforts,

b. transformation of counseling and assistance services for parents and children professionally,

Cc. improving quality parenting skills especially for adolescents, and

d. encouraging cultural practices that support the realization of child Protection and prevent child marriage.

Strengthening the role of parents, schools, families, communities and other stakeholders in child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is carried out through local government policy intervention strategies toward: (1)  (2) (3)  (4)

a. socialization and education about the importance of child Protection,

b. family economic empowerment through family entrepreneurship, family hope programs and/or other programs that ensure children from poor and vulnerable families receive social assistance:

Cc. strengthening child-friendly school systems and environments by adding reproductive health rights and mental health, and

d. strengthening community institutions at various levels down to the village/kelurahan level with various training and child assistance skills.

Article 27

Increasing accessibility and expanding services as referred to in Article 24 letter c shall be carried out through:
a. provision of child and adolescent friendly, gender responsive and inclusive access and services before violence against children occurs, and
b. provision of child and adolescent friendly, gender responsive and inclusive access and services after violence against children occurs.

Increasing accessibility and expanding services through the provision of child and adolescent friendly, gender responsive and inclusive access and services before violence against children occurs as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, shall be carried out through regional government policy intervention towards:
a. provision of child-friendly information services,
b. developing Adolescent Posyandu services starting at the hamlet/neighborhood level, and
Cc. optimization of services to reduce vulnerability in children.

Increasing accessibility and expanding services through the provision of child and adolescent friendly, gender responsive and inclusive access and services after violence against children occurs as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, shall be carried out through regional government policy intervention towards:
a. Development of a comprehensive service referral system for vulnerable children, and
b. Assistance for children requiring special Protection to obtain their rights as children.

Increasing accessibility and expanding services may be carried out by strengthening existing service institutions, namely: | community health centers, posyandu, Adolescent Posyandu and Family Posyandu, UPTD PPA, Family Learning Center (PUSPAGA):, Family Welfare Consultation Institution (LK3): Child Protection Organizing Institution, ba Child Social Welfare Institution (LKSA). Prosperous Family Service Center (PPKS), and

Article 28

Strengthening regulations and institutions as referred (1) to in Article 24 letter d shall be carried out through:
a. strengthening institutional capacity for child Protection and empowerment and education units,
b. encouraging the formation of village regulations and village head regulations on child Protection,
c. conducting evaluations of village regulations, school regulations and/or customary rules that encourage violence and vulnerability of children, and Strengthening institutional capacity for child Protection and empowerment and education units as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a shall be carried out through regional government policy intervention towards increasing the knowledge and skills of law enforcement officers, village apparatus, KUA officers, customary stakeholders, extension workers and teachers.

Article 29

Strengthening stakeholder coordination as referred to in Article 24 letter e shall be carried out through strategies focused on:
a. increasing cross-sectoral, cross-field, and cross-regional cooperation,
b. strengthening data and information systems, and
C. supervision, monitoring, and evaluation.

Strengthening stakeholder coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through regional government policy intervention towards:  a. strengthening coordination forums for planning and implementing child Protection policies,
b. utilization of data for policy improvement, and
Cc. building data and information systems as a basis for implementing referral services for children requiring special Protection.

Part Three

Handling

Article 30

1. Handling as referred to in Article 23 letter b, includes:a. rehabilitation services, covering physical, medical, psychological, educational, and social rehabilitation;b. facilitation of legal aid services,c. facilitation of fulfillment of basic needs, covering food, clothing, housing, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment,d. facilitation of fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and psychosocial disorders,  e. facilitation of health services:f. repatriation and social reintegration, andg. protection of child witnesses.
2. Protection of child witnesses as referred to in paragraph  (1) letter g, shall be implemented through:a. facilitation of medical, psychological rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, within institutions and outside institutions;b. facilitation of safety guarantees: andc. facilitation of ease in obtaining information regarding case developments.

Article 31

In order to carry out handling in the effort of Special Protection for Children, the Regional Government needs to provide a child social protection house/comprehensive integrated child safe house.

CHAPTER VI

COORDINATION TEAM FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 32

1. The Regent shall establish a Coordination Team for the Protection of Women and Children.
2. The Coordination Team for the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1), serves as a coordination forum in implementing empowerment, Protection of women, fulfillment of Children's Rights and Special Protection for Children in the region, which has functions including:a. facilitation in the empowerment and Protection of women, andb. facilitation in efforts to fulfill Children's Rights and Special Protection for Children.
3. The membership of the Coordination Team for the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall at least consist of: elements of Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs a. in the field of women's empowerment and child Protection, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of education, . Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of health, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of social affairs, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of transportation, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of community and village empowerment: Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of population and civil registration, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of communication and informatics, Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of labor and transmigration: Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of public works and spatial planning, sIrera elements of the Police, elements of the Prosecutor's Office, . elements of the Court: elements of the Children's Forum, educational institutions, community organizations concerned with the Protection of women and children, media, dang. the community.  r. (4) The Coordination Team for the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), shall be established by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VII

INSTITUTIONS

Article 33

1. The regional government shall establish UPTD PPA which carries out Handling, Protection, and Recovery of Victims, Victims' Families, and/or Witnesses.
2. UPTD PPA shall be positioned in the work unit implementing governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
3. The establishment of UPTD PPA shall be stipulated by Regent's Regulation after meeting the requirements in accordance with statutory provisions.
4. UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the duty to: receive reports or outreach to Victims,  a.  b. provide information about Victims' rights, facilitate the provision of health services,  &.

. facilitate the provision of psychological strengthening services,  d » facilitate the provision of psychosocial services,  social rehabilitation, social empowerment, and social reintegration  social, provide legal services, identify economic empowerment needs:  identify temporary shelter needs for Victims and Victims' Families that need to be fulfilled immediately, facilitate the needs of Victims with Disabilities, coordinate and work stuna on the fulfillment of Victims' rights with other institutions, and monitor the fulfillment of Victims' rights by law enforcement apparatus during the judicial process.

Article 34

(1) UPTD PPA in carrying out its duties as referred to in Article 33 performs the following functions: app e.

provision of facilities, places, and/or service spaces, arrangement of service patterns, assurance of service quality, provision of mechanisms, management, and resolution of public complaints, and monitoring and evaluation.

(2) The Working Procedures and Mechanism for Implementation of Duties and Functions of UPTD PPA shall be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION

Part One

Community Participation

Article 35

Community participation in the empowerment and Protection of Women may be carried out through:
a. provision of skills training,
b. prevention of women from becoming victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination, and
c. assistance to women victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination.

Article 36

Community participation in the implementation of Child Protection is carried out through activities:
a. provision of suggestions and considerations in the implementation of Child Protection,
b. dissemination of information in the context of Child Protection,
c. provision of funds, services, as well as facilities and infrastructure in the context of Child Protection,
d. provision of education in efforts to improve the morals of Children,
e. prevention of child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children,
f. reporting, emergency assistance and Protection for Children who experience child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect,
g. advocacy for handling child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children,
h. facilitation of the repatriation and/or social reintegration process, and
i. other activities that support efforts for the Protection, care, and welfare of Children.

Part Two

Business Participation

Article 37

Business participation in the empowerment and Protection of Women may be carried out through:
a. provision of facilities and infrastructure for the empowerment and Protection of Women,
b. facilitation of education and training, and
c. provision of awards.

Article 38

Business participation in child protection may be carried out through: provision of suggestions and considerations in the implementation of Child Protection, provision of funds, services, as well as facilities and infrastructure in the context of Child Protection, provision of education in efforts for Child Protection, prevention of child marriage, Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect of Children, other activities that support efforts for the Protection, care, and welfare of Children.

CHAPTER IX

AWARDS

Article 39

The Regent may grant awards to Regional Apparatus, Village/Sub-district Governments, the business sector, and the community who have played an active role in:
a. support and active participation in women's empowerment efforts, and
b. provision of facilitation for the protection of women and children.
The granting of awards as referred to in paragraph (2) (1) shall be in the form of:
a. Incentives, grants or financial assistance,
b. certificates,
c. trophies, and/or
d. facilitation of the development of facilities and infrastructure for the protection of women and children.

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 40

Financing for the implementation of Child Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, and
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 41

UPTD PPA that has been established before this regional regulation is promulgated shall continue to carry out its duties and functions related to the Protection of women and children and must adjust to this regional regulation no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional regulation.

2. In the event that UPTD PPA has not been established, the establishment of UPTD PPA shall be carried out no later than 2 (two) years from the promulgation of this regional regulation.
3. In the event that UPTD PPA has not been established as referred to in paragraph (2), the implementation of Integrated Services in the region shall be carried out by the regional work unit that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 42

Upon the entry into force of this Regional Regulation, Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency Number 3 of 2009 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence, is revoked and declared invalid.

Article 43

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Central Lombok Regency.

Derenan in Praya ag xgal, 23 9— 2024 REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY YEAR .... NUMBER ....  REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY, WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE NUMBER ... YEAR 2024

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY

NUMBER YEAR 2024

REGARDING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

GENERAL
l. Regional Regulation of Central Lombok Regency number 3 year 2009 regarding Protection of children and women victims of violence has been in effect for approximately 14 years. During the period of its validity there have been many changes in policies and legislation in the field of Protection of children and women both taken by the central government, provincial government and Central Lombok regency government. Therefore at the level of regency regional regulation adjustments need to be made so that the Central Lombok regency government has a legal basis in implementing policies and programs in the field of Protection of women and children.

The field of regional government has undergone changes with the revocation of Law Number 32 Year 2004 regarding Regional Government by Law Number 23 Year 2014 regarding Regional Government. Based on article 12 of Law Number 23 year 2014 regarding Regional Government that the affairs of women empowerment and protection of children constitute Mandatory Government Affairs that are not related to Basic Services. In the appendix of Law Number 23 year 2014 regarding Regional Government is regulated in more detail the division of regency government affairs in the field of women empowerment and protection of children. The field of women includes authority: a). Prevention of violence against women involving parties within the scope of regency/city Region. b). Provision of services for women victims of violence requiring coordination at the regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening and development of institutions providing Protection services for women at the regency/city Region level. Field. Quality of Life of Women includes, Institutionalization of PUG in government institutions at the regency/city Region level. b. Empowerment of women in the political, legal, social and economic fields in community organizations at the regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening and development of institutions providing women empowerment services at the regency/city Region level. Field of Fulfillment of Children's Rights (PHA), includes: Institutionalization of PHA in government, non-government institutions, and business world at the regency/city Region level, Strengthening and development of institutions providing services for improving the quality of life of children at the regency/city Region level. Field of Protection of special children includes, a. Prevention of violence against children involving parties within the scope of regency/city Region. b. Provision of services for children requiring special Protection requiring coordination at the regency/city Region level. c. Strengthening development of institutions providing services for children requiring special Protection at the regency/city Region level.

Changes also occurred in law number 23 year 2002 regarding Protection of children through two amendments namely 1). law number 35 year 2014 regarding amendment to law number 23 year 2002 regarding Protection of children, and 2. Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 Regarding Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 Regarding Protection of Children into Law. There are a number of obligations of regional governments contained in this law that must be further regulated by regional regulations. Amendments to law number 23 year 2002 regarding Protection of children certainly have legal implications for child Protection legal policy in Central Lombok regency.

In the aspect of Protection of women there has been a significant change when law number 12 year 2022 regarding criminal acts of sexual violence was enacted. There are several provisions related to the obligations of regional governments that must be regulated in regional regulations: 1). Provisions of Article 76 paragraph (2) Provincial and regency/city Regional Governments are obliged to establish UPTD PPA that organizes Handling, Protection, and Recovery of Victims, Families of Victims, and/or Witnesses, 2). Article 79 paragraph (1) obligation of the Central Government and Regional Governments are obliged to organize Prevention of Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence quickly, in an integrated and coordinated manner, and integrated. 3). Article 80 paragraph (1) Regional Governments are obliged to organize education and training for law enforcement officers, government service personnel, and service personnel at Community-Based Service Provider Institutions, 4). Article 82 Central Government and Regional Governments are obliged to conduct coordination regularly and continuously for Victims.

At the provincial government level has enacted Regional Regulation of West Nusa Tenggara Province Number 8 Year 2015 regarding Implementation of Protection of Women and Children. There are several obligations contained in the Regional Regulation related to regency obligations. 1). formation of regional regulations and regional head regulations in regencies/cities regarding Protection of Women and Children, 2). Formation of Coordination Team for Protection of Women and Children at regency/city level.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear

Article 2

Letter a What is meant by "principle of respect for human dignity" is recognition of the dignity of Victims that must be protected, respected, and upheld.

Letter b What is meant by "principle of non-discrimination" is respecting equality of degree not differentiating, both parties, on the basis of religion, race, ethnicity, nationality, skin color, social status, affiliation, and ideology.

Letter c What is meant by "principle of best interests of Victims" is that all actions concerning Victims carried out by executive institutions, legislative institutions, judicial institutions, and Society must be the main consideration.

Letter d What is meant by "principle of justice" is that material content related to Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence must reflect fair and proportional treatment for every citizen.

Letter e What is meant by "principle of benefit" is that material content related to Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence is able to provide broad benefits for the interests of Society, nation, and state.

Letter f What is meant by "principle of legal certainty" is that the implementation of regulation of Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence must be carried out within the framework of a rule of law that prioritizes the foundation of legislation, propriety, and justice.

Article 3

Sufficiently Clear

Article 4

Sufficiently Clear

Article 5

Sufficiently Clear

Article 6

Sufficiently Clear

Article 7

Sufficiently Clear

Article 8

Sufficiently Clear

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear

Article 10

Sufficiently Clear

Article 11

Sufficiently Clear

Article 12

Sufficiently Clear

Article 13

Sufficiently Clear

Article 14

Sufficiently Clear

Article 15

Sufficiently Clear

Article 16

Sufficiently Clear

Article 17

Sufficiently Clear

Article 18

Sufficiently Clear

Article 19

Sufficiently Clear

Article 20

Sufficiently Clear

Article 21

Sufficiently Clear

Article 22

Sufficiently Clear

Article 23

Sufficiently Clear

Article 24

Sufficiently Clear

Article 25

Sufficiently Clear

Article 26

Sufficiently Clear

Article 27

Sufficiently Clear

Article 28

Sufficiently Clear

Article 29

Sufficiently Clear

Article 30

Sufficiently Clear

Article 31

Sufficiently Clear

Article 32

Sufficiently Clear

Article 33

Sufficiently Clear

Article 34

Sufficiently Clear

Article 35

Sufficiently Clear

Article 36

Sufficiently Clear

Article 37

Sufficiently Clear

Article 38

Sufficiently Clear

Article 39

Sufficiently Clear

Article 40

Sufficiently Clear

Article 41

Sufficiently Clear

Article 42

Sufficiently Clear

Article 43

Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CENTRAL LOMBOK REGENCY NUMBER ....
