REGENT OF KONAWE

PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI

REGIONAL REGULATION OF KONAWE REGENCY

NUMBER: 12 OF 2018

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE  IN KONAWE REGENCY

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE REGENT OF KONAWE,

Considering:
a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that children and women are vulnerable groups experiencing violence where all forms of violence against children and women constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity thus requiring legal protection to protect their self-respect and dignity and to guarantee their right to life in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
c. that violence against children and women in Konawe Regency shows a fairly high number and continues to increase, thus requiring protection efforts;
d. that all forms of violence against children and women constitute violations of human rights thus it is necessary to protect their self-respect and dignity and to guarantee their right to life in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
e. that the implementation of Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence in Konawe Regency needs to be supported by institutions and regulations so as to ensure its implementation;
f. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, c, d and e above, it is deemed necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence in Konawe Regency;

In view of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 29 of 1959 concerning Formation of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
3143. ;
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women [Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
3886. ;
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
4235. ;
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
11. Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
12. Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) and Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 56);
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KONAWE REGENCY  and

THE REGENT OF KONAWE

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION OF KONAWE REGENCY  CONCERNING PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN  VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN KONAWE REGENCY

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Konawe Regency.

2. Regional Government is the Government of Konawe Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Konawe.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Konawe Regency.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child in the womb.
7. Woman is a person who has female genitalia, can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and includes a person who is legally recognized as a Woman.
8. Violence is any act against a person that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
9. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
11. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, serious injury or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
12. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of distrust and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
13. Sexual violence is any act in the form of forced sexual intercourse, sexual abuse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural and/or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
14. Exploitation is an act with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits.
15. Victim is a child and woman who experiences physical suffering, psychological suffering, sexual suffering, either directly or indirectly resulting from acts of violence.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
18. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for strengthening victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.

21. Repatriation is an effort to return children and women victims of violence to their families, substitute families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.

22. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions in order to carry out their roles properly both in the family and in society.
23. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with their families, or substitute families, communities, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
24. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
25. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, Safe House, Child Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
26. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of violence.
27. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER I I

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. victim protection;

Article 3

1. The objectives of implementing protection for children and women victims of violence are to:
a. prevent violence against children and women;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against children and women;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for children and women;
d. provide services to children and women victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity.
2. The objectives of implementing protection for children and women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER II I

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

Forms of violence against children and women are:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 5

Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a is caused by acts that cause pain, injury, serious injury or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death.

Article 6

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b is caused by acts that cause fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8

Neglect as referred to in Article 4 bumf d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after children as they should be, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the household sphere, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 9

Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

CHAPTER IV

VICTIMS' RIGHTS

Article 10

Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance;
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

Article 11

Child victims of violence, in addition to obtaining rights as referred to in Article 10, also obtain the following special rights:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 12

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for child and women victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family and parents.

Article 13

1. The Regional Government implements efforts to protect child and women victims of violence through:
a. implementing policies for the protection of child and women victims of violence applied by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of child and women victims of violence;
c. establishment of PPT;
d. ensuring the implementation of service facilities for victims;
e. seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of children and women in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection for women and child victims of violence.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
4. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 11 letter b, are organized in the form of community participation.
2. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. forming family partners at the kelurahan level;
b. forming child and women protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of children's rights and women's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.
4. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 15

The obligations of family and parents as referred to in Article 11 letter c, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect children and women as family members.

CHAPTER VI

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Institutional

Article 16

1. In order to provide services and protection to children and women from violence, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for child and women victims of violence.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements of the Health Office, Youth Education and Sports Office, Social Office, Cooperatives Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women Empowerment and Family Planning Agency, Community Empowerment Agency, Civil Service Police Unit, Regional General Hospital, Police Resort, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Higher Education Institutions.
3. PPT as referred to in paragraph (2), is established by Regent's decree.
4. The implementation of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
5. PPT as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.
6. PPT provides services and temporary protection in the form of safe houses.
7. In the event that PPT does not yet have a safe house, then victims of violence are referred to PPT that has a safe house.
8. PPT consists of several counseling fields.
9. Counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (8) consist of at least:
a. legal field;
b. health field;
c. spiritual field; and
d. psychology field.
10. Further provisions regarding the organizational structure of PPT are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention and Services

Article 17

Forms of prevention of violence against children and women carried out by PPT, can be implemented through:
a. Socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community related to the protection of children's and women's rights; and
b. Training of PPT members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing violence against children and women.

Article 18

1. PPT in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with Sub-district PPT, and competent parties in making efforts to prevent violence against children and women.
2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 19

Forms of services for victims organized by PPT include:
a. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims, carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. Psychosocial services constitute services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving their problems;
d. Legal services to assist victims in undergoing legal processes, and;
e. Economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

Article 20

1. In carrying out service duties for child and women victims of violence, PPT coordinates with Sub-district PPT.
2. The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Assistance

Article 21

1. Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions cooperating with PPT.
2. The mechanism for assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four

Principles of Services and Assistance

Article 22

The provision of services and assistance to victims shall be carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Part Five

Services

Article 23

1. Forms of services provided to child and women victims of violence are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. return home;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
3. In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other regency/city governments, the community, families and parents.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures for services and handling of child and women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 24

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the provision of protection for child and women victims of violence.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
3. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 25

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) shall be conducted in order to realize the objectives of providing protection for child and women victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 26

1. PPT reports the implementation of the provision of protection for child and women victims of violence to the Regent.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, including:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER VIII

FUNDING

Article 27

Funds for the provision of protection for child and women victims of violence are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 28

1. The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that carry out protection for child and women victims of violence.
2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER IX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 29

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.  In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Konawe Regency.

Enacted in: Unaaha On Date: 16 April 2018 Pit. REGENT OF KONAWE PARINRINGI, SE.,M.Si DrgjQjdgjigkan in: Unaaha: 16 April 2018

;RAH REGENCY N KONAW E

. L, S.Sos.,M.Si ^l^MBARAN REGIONAL GAZETTE N KONAW E YEAR N 2018 NUMBER  ••••••• REGISTRATION NUMBER PROVINCE OF SOUTHEAST SULAWESI  KONAWE REGENCY NUMBER 12/62/2018 Validated-in accordance with the original HEAD^sAGiAI^ LAW SETDA KONAWE REGENCY  / I.M.Si ,19670712"! ^9803 1 013
