COPY REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO

EAST JAVA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY

NUMBER: 2 OF 2019

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO,

Considering:
a. that women and children are creatures of God Almighty who have human rights guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, therefore women and children must be protected from all forms of violence and discrimination;
b. that violence against women and children in the Region tends to increase, therefore the Regional Government and/or community need to play an active role optimally to provide protection, so that women and children are prevented and free from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor;
c. that protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as a basis for implementing comprehensive and integrated protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Children.

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of 1950 Number 41) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette 5234);
11. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153 Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5512) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 24, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5657);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 42);
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 903);
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 903);
20. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2013 Number 3 Series D, Supplement to Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 23);
21. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 2 of 2014 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2014 Number 2 Series D, Supplement to Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 38);
22. Regional Regulation of Probolinggo Regency Number 6 of 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus.

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY and

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is Probolinggo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Probolinggo Regency. 3. Regent is the Regent of Probolinggo.
4. Agency is the Regional Apparatus that has the duties and functions of protection of women and children.
5. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, which is established by the Regional Government or community-based.
6. Protection of Women and Children is all activities to protect the rights of women and children and provide a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights without violence and discrimination in accordance with human dignity.
7. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years or a child who is suspected, charged, sentenced to a crime and a child who becomes a victim of a criminal act.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
10. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, ethnicity, religion, taste, and skin color that has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights.
11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
13. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems faced.
14. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
15. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
16. Safe House, hereinafter referred to as Shelter, is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with the determined operational standards.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The implementation of protection of women and children is based on the principles of: a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of children and women; b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of women and children victims of violence; and e. legal certainty.

Article 3

The implementation of protection of women and children aims to: a. ensure the fulfillment of the rights of women and children so that they can participate optimally in society in accordance with human dignity;  b. provide protection and provide a sense of security to women and children from all forms of violence and discrimination;
c. prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children including trafficking in persons;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; ande. empower women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER III

OBLIGATIONS OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 4

The Regional Government is obliged to implement the protection of women and children.

Article 5

In implementing the protection of women and children, the Regional Government shall:
a. establish basic policies for the implementation of protection of women and children in the Regional Action Plan;
b. implement policies for the protection of women and children established by the government and provincial government;
c. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children among regional apparatus organizations;
d. cooperate with other regions for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children;
e. strengthen institutional Gender mainstreaming and mainstreaming of children's rights for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and childrenf. establish PPT in the Region;
g. ensure the implementation of excellent service in the protection of women and children, including for women and children victims of violence; andh. prepare a data system for the protection of women and children, including data on violence against women and children;
i. establish and develop a Child-Friendly Regency;

CHAPTER IV

PLANNING

Article 6

The Regent establishes basic policies for the implementation of protection of women and children in the Region.

Article 7

1. The basic policy as referred to in Article 6 is elaborated in the Regional Action Plan.
2. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) is integrated with the Regional Long-Term Development Plan, Regional Medium-Term Development Plan and Regional Government Work Plan documents.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall at least contain:a. programs and activities for the protection of women and children, including women and children victims of violence;
b. regional action programs and activities to prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women and children;
c. programs and activities for improving and enhancing services for the protection of women and children victims of violence; andd. programs and activities for empowering women and children victims of violence.
4. Provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8

The Regional Action Plan must be used as a guideline for the Regional Government in formulating policies related to the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER V

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

General

Article 9

1. The Regent is obliged to implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children in an integrated manner in order to fulfill the rights of women and children in the Region.
2. In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (1), the Agency coordinates with regional apparatus organizations, law enforcement officials and the community.

Part Two

Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Paragraph 1

Forms of Violence

Article 10

Violence against women and children may take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; ande. exploitation.

Article 11

Physical violence as referred to in Article 10 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 12

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 13

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or  d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 14

Neglect as referred to in Article 10 letter d is caused by:  a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of the child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after the child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care; c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 15

Exploitation as referred to in Article 10 letter e is caused by:  a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/orc. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Paragraph 2

Rights of Victims

Article 16

Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to receive:  a. protection;
b. information;
c. excellent service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; andg. guarantees of rights related to their status as a family member and community member.

Article 17

In addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 16, child victims of violence also receive special rights in the form of:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; ande. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 18

1. In the event that women and child victims of violence require continuous handling, then women and child victims of violence have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
2. Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is handling at the rehabilitation stage, whether carried out by PPT, individuals, non-governmental organizations, or by the community.

Article 19

1. The safe house as referred to in Article 18 paragraph (1) provides a place and/or temporary safe shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
2. The operation and/or management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the relevant Agency.
3. Provisions regarding the operation of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3

Rights of Witnesses and Perpetrators

Article 20

1. Every woman and child who becomes a witness or perpetrator of violence has the right to receive information, protection, rehabilitation, confidential handling, psychological and legal assistance, as well as fulfillment of their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a community member.
2. Fulfillment of rights as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4

Scope

Article 21

Protection of women and child victims of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. services; andc. empowerment.

Article 22

1. The Regional Government carries out prevention as referred to in Article 21 letter a by:a. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of women and children;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education about the dangers of domestic violence; d. forming cooperation networks in efforts to prevent violence;
e. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
f. collecting data and information and establishing a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; g. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of women and children;
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with social norms.
2. In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention efforts are also carried out by families and/or communities.
3. Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized in an integrated manner by PPT

Article 23

1. Services as referred to in Article 21 letter b are organized through activities:a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and/org. repatriation and reintegration.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized with: a. fast and precise;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. a sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; andg. guaranteed confidentiality.
3. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized in an integrated manner by PPT.

Article 24

1. Empowerment as referred to in Article 21 letter c is organized through:a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and c. capital assistance.
2. Job training as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes: a. skills training;
b. field work practice; andc. apprenticeship.
3. Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:a. entrepreneurial skills training; andb. business actor assistance.
4. Capital assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c includes: a. facilities and infrastructure assistance; andb. working/business capital assistance facilities.
5. Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by PPT.

Part Three

Special Protection of Children

Article 25

1. Regional Government is obligated and responsible to provide special protection for children.
2. Special protection for children as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to:a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are economically and/or sexually exploited;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking; i. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorist networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; ando. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
3. Provisions regarding procedures for special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four

Assistance

Article 26

1. Assistance is carried out by individuals or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence, perpetrators and witnesses.
2. Provisions regarding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five

Recovery of Victims, Witnesses, and Perpetrators

Article 27

For the purpose of recovery, women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence may obtain services from:
a. Social institutions (groups or institutions whose scope is on women and children) and or;
b. Social workers (Individuals who have competence to carry out recovery or rehabilitation) namely:
1. Nurses
2. Health workers

Article 28

1. Women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to obtain health examination services by Health Facilities in accordance with professional standards.
2. In the event that women and children victims, witnesses, and perpetrators of violence require treatment, health workers are obligated to provide health recovery and rehabilitation services.
3. Provision of health recovery and rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29

1. Women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to obtain counseling services from social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors.
2. Social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors as referred to in paragraph (1) are obligated to provide services to women and children victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence in the form of providing counseling to strengthen, provide a sense of security and rehabilitation.

CHAPTER VI

ESTABLISHMENT OF PPT

Article 30

1. In the context of providing protection for women and children, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for women and children.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of regional apparatus that administer affairs of:a. health;
b. education;
c. youth;d. social;
e. cooperatives;
f. industry;
g. manpower;
h. trade;
i. population and civil registration;
j. women's empowerment and child protection;
k. public peace and order;
l. regional general hospital;
m. police;
n. non-governmental organizations; ando. universities.
3. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by Regent Decree. (4) Provisions regarding organizational structure, duties and functions of PPT shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

COOPERATION

Article 31

1. In providing protection for women and children, the Regional Government may cooperate with:a. other regional governments;
b. commissions/agencies/government institutions in the field of protection of women and children;
c. police;
d. advocates;
e. health workers;
f. social workers;
g. volunteer assistants;
h. spiritual counselors;
i. non-governmental organizations engaged in the protection of women and children; andj. the community.
2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance;
h. repatriation and social reintegration;
i. Family Welfare Consultation Institution (LK3).
3. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 32

1. The community may participate in the provision of protection for women and children.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. establishing family partners at the sub-district/village level;
b. establishing non-governmental organizations whose field of work is in the protection of women and children;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's rights;
d. taking preventive measures if finding indications of violence against women and children in the community;
e. providing first aid to women and children victims of violence; andf. reporting to the competent authority if violence against women and children occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business sector.

Article 33

In providing protection for women and children, individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business sector shall coordinate with PPT.

Article 34

1. The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children.
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of: a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the rights of women and children;
b. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children;
c. providing assistance in the provision of protection for women and children as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 35

1. The Regent shall conduct guidance and supervision of the provision of protection for women and children, both carried out by PPT and non-governmental organizations.
2. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted in order to realize the objectives of providing protection for women and children in accordance with the mechanisms and service procedures established in laws and regulations.
3. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the relevant Agency.

Article 36

1. Supervision as referred to in Article 35 shall be conducted on: a. implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children; andb. fulfillment of guidelines and minimum service standards in the implementation of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
2. Supervision shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year and the results shall be used as input for the formulation of policies, programs, activities for the protection of women and children for the following year.

Article 37

Provisions regarding guidance and supervision of the provision of protection for women and children shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X

REPORTING

Article 38

1. PPT is obligated to report the implementation of the provision of protection for women and children to the Regent through the Agency.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; andd. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XI

FUNDING

Article 39

Funds for the implementation of the protection of women and children are sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40

1. The Regional Government may provide funding assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women and children.
2. Funding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII

PROHIBITIONS

Article 41

Every person is prohibited from:
a. treating women and children in a discriminatory manner that results in women and children suffering losses, both material and moral, thereby hindering their social function;
b. treating women and children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of maltreatment and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing violence against women and children;
e. committing violence or threat of violence to force women and children to have sexual intercourse with him or her or with another person;
f. committing violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing fraud, committing a series of lies, or persuading women and children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of women and children; h. obstructing women and children from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of women and children;
j. intentionally placing, allowing, involving women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropic substances and/ork. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

Article 42

PPT organizers or safe houses are prohibited from collecting fees in providing services to women and children who are victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER XIII

ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 43

1. Health Workers who refuse or are unwilling to provide health examination services as referred to in Article 28 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:a. written warning;
b. suspension of practice license/work permit;
c. limitation of practice for Health Workers in independent practice; (2) Social workers, volunteer companions, and/or spiritual counselors who refuse or are unwilling to provide counseling services as referred to in Article 29 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of: a. reprimand; orb. written warning.
3. Provisions regarding the mechanism for imposing sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XIV

INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS

Article 44

1. Civil Servant Investigators within the Regional Government are given special authority to conduct investigations of criminal acts as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.
2. The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:  a. receiving, seeking, collecting and examining information or reports concerning criminal acts;
b. examining, seeking and collecting information or reports concerning criminal acts;
c. requesting information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. examining books, records and other documents concerning criminal acts;
e. conducting searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents and conducting seizures of such evidence;
f. requesting the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. ordering to stop, prohibiting someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and examining the identity of the person and or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. photographing persons related to criminal acts;
i. summoning persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. terminating investigations;
k. taking other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts according to applicable law and which can be accounted for. (3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Investigator of the State Police of the Republic of Indonesia in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XV

CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 45

1. Any person who violates the prohibitions as referred to in Article 41 and Article 42 shall be threatened with a maximum imprisonment of 3 (three) months or a maximum fine of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
2. The criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are violations.

CHAPTER XVI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 46

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this regional regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Probolinggo Regency.

Enacted in Probolinggo On the date of March 1, 2019

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO

signed.

Hj. P. TANTRIANA SARI, SE Promulgated in Probolinggo On the date of March 1, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY

H. SOEPARWIYONO, SH, MH

Principal Supervisor Young

NIP. 19621225 198508 1 002

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY YEAR 2019  NUMBER 2 SERIES E REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY  NUMBER 24-2/2019 Copy in accordance with the original:

on behalf of REGIONAL SECRETARY Assistant for Government Administration and Public Welfare

for and on behalf of

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

P A R J O N O, SH. M.Si Supervisor Level I

NIP. 19610607 198102 1 002

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY

NUMBER: 2 OF 2019

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION

That protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, so that regulation is needed as a basis for the implementation of comprehensive and integrated protection of women and children in a Regional Regulation.

II. ELUCIDATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1: Sufficiently clear.

Article 2: Sufficiently clear.

Article 3: Sufficiently clear.

Article 4: Sufficiently clear.

Article 5: Sufficiently clear.

Article 6: Sufficiently clear.

Article 7: Sufficiently clear.

Article 8: Sufficiently clear.

Article 9: Sufficiently clear.

Article 10: Sufficiently clear.

Article 11: Sufficiently clear.

Article 12: Sufficiently clear.

Article 13: Sufficiently clear.

Article 14: Sufficiently clear.

Article 15: Sufficiently clear.

Article 16: Sufficiently clear.

Article 17: Sufficiently clear.

Article 18: Sufficiently clear.

Article 19: Sufficiently clear.

Article 20: Sufficiently clear.

Article 21: Sufficiently clear.

Article 22: Sufficiently clear.

Article 23: Sufficiently clear.

Article 24: Sufficiently clear.

Article 25: Sufficiently clear.

Article 26: Sufficiently clear.

Article 27: Sufficiently clear.

Article 28: Sufficiently clear.

Article 29: Sufficiently clear.

Article 30: Sufficiently clear.

Article 31: Sufficiently clear.

Article 32: Sufficiently clear.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
