Considering

REGENT OF MELAWI

PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MELAWI REGENCY

NUMBER 15 OF 2017

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF MELAWI,
a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of acts of violence against women constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected, and their right to life is guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
c. that violence against women continues to increase, therefore protection efforts are required;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women from Acts of Violence;

Considering 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law...
4. Law Number 34 of 2003 concerning the Establishment of Melawi Regency and Sekadau Regency in the Province of West Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4344);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic Number 4976);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
10. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
11. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning the Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 44);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 56);
13. Regulation...
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);

With Mutual Agreement REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MELAWI REGENCY And

REGENT OF MELAWI

DECIDES:

To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BAB I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is Melawi Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as the Element of Regional Government Administration who leads the Implementation of Government Affairs which are the Authority of the Autonomous Region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Melawi.
4. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Melawi Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs which are the authority of the Region.
6. Women are human beings of female gender starting from infants, adolescents, adults up to the elderly.
7. Women with Disabilities are women who have self-limitations, which may be physical, cognitive, mental, sensory, emotional, developmental or some combination thereof.
8. Elderly Women are women who are 60 years of age and above.
9. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social and psychological to the victim.
10. Violence against women is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain acts, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
11. Korban...

11. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
12. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the regional government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
13. Service/handling is an act carried out as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that violence against victims is occurring or has occurred.
14. Companion is a person or representative of an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling/therapy and/or advocacy.
15. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution or functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
16. Safe House is a residence for victims during the assistance process for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers.
17. Minimum Service Standards, hereinafter abbreviated as SPM, is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing 5 (five) types of services for women and child victims of violence, namely (1) Complaint Handling (2) Health Services (3) Social Rehabilitation (4) Law Enforcement and Legal Aid, and (5) Repatriation and Social Reintegration.
18. Complaint Handling is a series of actions taken by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women submitted by victims, families and the community.
19. Health Services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
20. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.
21. Law Enforcement is the action of officials authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
22. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal companions and advocacy to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return women victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
24. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment for victims.
25. Integrated Service Unit or abbreviated as UPT is a unified unit that organizes integrated service functions for women victims of violence.
26. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward.
27. Rumah...

27. Household is husband, wife and children, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care and guardianship and/or domestic workers who reside in that household.

BAB II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The Implementation of Protection of Women victims of violence is based on:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment

Article 3

The Implementation of Protection of Women victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent violence against women;
b. provide services/handling to victims; and
c. empower women victims of violence and vulnerable groups;
d. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women.

BAB III

SCOPE OF PROTECTION

Article 4

The Scope of Implementation of Protection of Women victims of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. service/handling;
c. empowerment;

Part One

Prevention

Article 5

1. Efforts to prevent violence against women are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the SKPD in charge of Women's Empowerment;
2. Prevention Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. forming work networks;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a violence prevention system;
d. disseminating laws and regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence;
e. providing education for women victims of violence;
f. through Communication, Information and Education (KIE) media.

Article 6

In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 5, prevention efforts are also carried out by families and/or closest relatives, communities, educational institutions and customary institutions.

Part Two

Service/Handling

Article 7

1. The Implementation of Service/Handling of victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from and/or to other service units in a networked manner.
3. Further provisions regarding the development, mechanisms, and working relationships of integrated PPT networks as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 1 Forms of Service

Article 8

Forms of service/handling of victims include:
a. complaint handling;
b. health/medical rehabilitation services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. law enforcement and legal aid services; and repatriation and social reintegration services;

Paragraph 2

Service Principles

Article 9

The Implementation of Service/handling of victims is carried out with:
a. fast and appropriate;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality;

Part Three

Empowerment

Article 10

Forms of empowerment for women victims of violence include:
a. membentuk..,
a. forming communities of women victims of violence;
b. job training;
c. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
d. capital assistance.

Article 11

Job training as referred to in Article 10 letter b includes:  a. skills training;
b. field work practice; andc. apprenticeship.

Article 12

Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as  referred to in Article 10 letter c include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; andb. business implementation assistance.

Article 13

Capital assistance as referred to in Article 10 letter d  includes:
a. facilities and infrastructure assistance; andb. working/business capital assistance facilities

CHAPTER IV

VIOLENCE

Article 14

Violence against women consists of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;exploitation; and/ore. other violence;

Article 15

Physical violence as referred to in Article 14 letter a includes  acts that result in pain, wounds, injury or disability to  the body, miscarriage, fainting, and/or death.

Article 16

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 14 letter b includes  acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence,  loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or  severe psychological suffering.

Article 17...

Article 17

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 14 letter c includes:
a. acts constituting sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations with and/or others for commercial purposes
c. coercion of sexual relations with persons and/or for certain purposes.

Article 18

Neglect as referred to in Article 14 letter d includes:
a. acts that neglect women within the scope of their household, and/or
b. acts that result in economic dependence.

Article 19

Exploitation as referred to in Article 14 letter e includes:
a. actions that exploit women economically or sexually with  the intention of benefiting oneself or others.
b. actions with or without the consent of the victim which include but  are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery  or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual,  reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or  transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting  the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain  material or immaterial benefits.
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs  of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not  limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

Article 20

Other violence as referred to in Article 14 letter f includes:
a. any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing,  images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without  using means that cause fear or restrict  a person's fundamental freedom.
b. a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something  in such a way that the person does something contrary  to their own will.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 21

Every woman victim of violence has the right:
a. to have her dignity respected as a human being;
b. to obtain physical, psychological health recovery  as well as social recovery according to the suffering experienced by the victim of violence;
c. to obtain...

to obtain protection from family, society, Local Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on
c. Court Determination for Protection and Care;

handling specifically with confidentiality of the victim;
d. special handling with accompaniment by social workers and legal assistance at every
e. level of examination process in accordance with the provisions of legislation;
f. spiritual guidance services;g. to determine their own decisions;

CHAPTER VI

GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY AND INSTITUTIONS

Part One

Regional Government

Article 22

1. The Regional Government is obligated  to implement and provide and is responsible for  protection efforts for women victims of violence in the form of:a. establishing PPT;
b. policy formulation;
c. planning and implementing programs and activities;
d. providing facilities and infrastructure support; ande. supervising the provision of services to victims with  minimum service standards.
2. In implementing the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional  Government as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government  prepares a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women.
3. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as  referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 23

The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to  in Article 22 paragraph (1) are coordinated by the SKPD responsible for  women's empowerment issues.

Part Two

Society and Family

Article 24

Society and family have obligations and responsibilities:
a. to prevent acts of violence against women;
b. to provide information and/or report acts of violence against  women to the competent authorities;
c. to provide protection to victims;
d. to provide emergency assistance;
e. to participate in handling victims of violence;

Part Three

Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 25

1. Efforts to provide and organize services/handling for  victims are carried out in a networked manner.
2. The network as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:  a. coordinate and synchronize PPT service handling;
b. develop networks and referral systems; andc. collect, compile and present reports on violence.
(3) The network as referred to in paragraph (2) carries out its duties and  functions in accordance with the form of service as referred to in  Article 8.

CHAPTER VII

INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER

Article 26

1. PPT may be established by vertical agencies in the regional Regional Government,  district/city government, and/or community institutions.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of the Regional Police,  SKPD responsible for Health, Education, Social Affairs,  Community Empowerment, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection  as well as Community Social Institutions, which function to provide  protection to women from acts of violence carried out  in a networked manner.
3. services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house (shelter)  for victims.
4. In the event that PPT does not have a safe house as referred to in  paragraph (3), then the victim is referred to a PPT that has a safe house.
(5) Further provisions regarding the PPT Organizational Structure are regulated by  Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM

Article 27

1. The SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment implements an information system  and submits reports on the implementation of women's protection  to the Regent.
2. Further provisions regarding the information and reporting system  as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX

FUNDING

Article 28

Funding for women's protection activities carried out by  the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure  Budget and/or other lawful sources in accordance with legislation.
CHAPTER X...

CHAPTER X

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 29

(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection by:
a. forming family partners at the community level within organizations;
b. forming community-based women's protection units;
c. independently conducting socialization of women's rights;
d. undertaking preventive measures if indications of violence against women are found in the community;
e. providing first aid to victims; and
f. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against women occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and/or mass media.

CHAPTER XI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 30

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of women's protection.
2. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
3. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a encompasses planning and implementation.
4. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b encompasses planning, implementation, procedures, financing, quality, control, and supervision.
5. Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted based on the provisions of laws and regulations periodically every 6 (six) months.

CHAPTER XII ...

.,.   ' . (

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 31

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Melawi Regency.

@deKd/- Enacted in Nanga Pinoh on the date of z,,pember 2014 }

REGENT OF MELAWI,

ly' PA.n Promulgated in Nanga Pinoh on the date of ?) percm»er 2o 13 \ REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MELAWI REGENCY Ivo TIt's MULYONO

MELAWI REGENCY YEAR 224J7 NUMBER I5

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION

WEST KALIMANTAN:(19) /(2o17) MELAWI REGENCY, PROVINCE OF

I. GENERAL

ELUCIDATION OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF MELAWI REGENCY

NUMBER 15 YEAR 2017

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE Acts of violence against women constitute violations of human rights; therefore, their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women in Melawi Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades their degree and human dignity, it is necessary to establish a regional regulation on the protection of women.

Protection of women constitutes all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by giving consistent and systematic attention.

Existing laws and regulations or those related to the protection of women victims of violence have not yet regulated efforts to protect women at the regional level, so institutional support and regulations at the regional level are needed that can guarantee their implementation.

This Regional Regulation regulates efforts to protect women, particularly in the form of prevention, services/handling, and empowerment of women in Melawi Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article I

Number I Sufficiently clear Number 2 Number 3 Number 4 Number 5 Number 6 Number 7 Number 8 Number 9 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 10 ...

Number 10 Sufficiently clear Number 1l Sufficiently clear Number 12 Number 13 Number 14 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 15 Sufficiently clear Number 16 Sufficiently clear Number 17 Number 18 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 19 .
What is meant by efforts from the Promotive aspect is an effort to promote/socialize acts of violence to the community, with the aim of increasing community vigilance and sensitivity to the danger of violence threatening women.

What is meant by efforts from the Preventive aspect is an effort that prioritizes the prevention aspect with targets of communities vulnerable to becoming victims of violence and receiving its impact. Preventive efforts can be carried out through community empowerment in the form of training activities and others.

What is meant by efforts from the Curative aspect is efforts made in the form of handling victims of violence who need handling according to their needs, namely health rehabilitation handling if the victim suffers the impact of violence physically or psychologically, provision of assistance and law enforcement for victims who need assistance and law enforcement and so on.

What is meant by the Rehabilitative aspect is efforts made as an effort to recover victims of violence both physically, psychologically and psychosocially.

Number 20 Sufficiently clear Number 21 Sufficiently clear Number 22 Sufficiently clear Number 23 Number 24 Number 25 Number 26 Number 27 Number 28 Number 29

Article 2

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Letter a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims is the guarantee of the fulfillment of the basic rights of victims.

Letter b What is meant by "justice is a state where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to obtain access and welfare.

What is meant by "gender equality is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of the victim" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, regional government, community, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, must prioritize the best interests of the victim.

Letter e What is meant by empowerment is strengthening victims of violence to be able to try and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3 ...

Article 3

Letter a Letter b Letter c Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear What is meant by women as a vulnerable group

Article 4

Article 5

Article 6

Article 7

Article 8

Article 9

Article 10

Article 11

Article 12

Article 13

Article 14

Article 15

Article 16

Article 17

Article 18

Article 19

Article 20

is the elderly, persons with disabilities, the homeless, home workers, domestic workers, female heads of households, Indonesian migrant workers, former residents of correctional institutions, and victims of disasters/conflicts.

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Letter a Threat of violence is any act unlawfully directly or indirectly including through social media networks and communication tools.
Letter b...

Article 21

Point b Sufficiently clear Point a What is meant by "the right to be respected for one's dignity as a human being" is upholding human rights.

Point b Sufficiently clear Point c Sufficiently clear Point d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, questions, ideas, and signs containing value, meaning and messages whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard and read presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.

Point e Sufficiently clear Point f What is meant by "the right to obtain compensation" includes:

repatriation, skills guarantee.

Point g economic empowerment, health and education costs or What is meant by "the right to obtain social rehabilitation" includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.

Point h What is meant by "the right to obtain complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.

Point i Point j Sufficiently clear What is meant by "the right to obtain assistance" is among others: psychologists, psychiatrists and health experts

Article 22

Article 23

Article 24

religious leaders, advocates and family members.

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Article 26

Article 27

Article 28

Article 29

Article 30

Article 31

Article 32

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MELAWI REGENCY NUMBER 183
