REGENT OF EAST BARITO

PROVINCE OF CENTRAL KALIMANTAN

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST BARITO REGENCY NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF EAST BARITO,

Considering:
a. that women and children with their dignity have the right to be protected from various acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination that marginalize and degrade their dignity as human beings;
b. that negative behavior and actions that may result in women and children being in a position of pressure or powerlessness in the scope of social community, or in the scope of legal processes should be given special treatment that maintains the stability of their soul and spirit to remain able to carry out their lives in social interaction;
c. that the Regional Government is obliged to provide protection for women and children;
d. Bearing in Mind 1. 2.
3. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children;

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

Law Number 5 Year 2002 concerning Establishment of Katingan Regency, Seruyan Regency, Sukamara Regency, Lamandau Regency, Gunung Mas Regency, Pulang Pisau Regency, Murung Raya Regency and East Barito Regency in Central Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 18, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4180);

4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning

5. Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning

6. Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning

7. Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

Law Number 44 Year 2008 concerning

8. Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);

Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning

9. Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
10. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
11. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

12. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
13.
14. 15.

16.

17. 18.

Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

Government Regulation Number 65 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Preparation and Implementation of Minimum Service Standards (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 150, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4585);

Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

Government Regulation Number 12 Year 2019 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 42, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6322);

Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 Year 2011 concerning Second Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);

19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036), as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);

20. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);

With Mutual Approval REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF EAST BARITO REGENCY and

REGENT OF EAST BARITO

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is the Region of East Barito Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government Administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Barito.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives Institution which is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus of East Barito Regency is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives of East Barito Regency in the administration of government affairs which are the authority of East Barito Regency.
6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.

14.

Agency is a Regional Apparatus that manages government affairs in the field of women and children.
Technical Service Unit is a Regional Technical Service Unit that manages the affairs of protection of women and children.
Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child who is still in the womb.

Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a Woman.

Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.

Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.

Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and distress whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.

Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.

Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

15. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

16. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or distress either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
17. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
18. Service is an immediate activity and action carried out by professionals in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.

19. Assistance is an activity and action carried out by an assistant during the service process.

20. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution that has the expertise to provide assistance.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
22. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
23. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
24. Institution is an agency/office/body within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
25. Regional Action Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RAD is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.

26. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
27. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
28. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
29. 30.
31. 32.

Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.

Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and stipulated by Regional Regulation.

Gender Equality is the view that all people should receive equal treatment and not be discriminated against based on their gender identity.

Medicolegal Service is a form of health service carried out by medical personnel using medical science and technology based on the authority possessed for legal purposes and to implement applicable regulations.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2
(1) The implementation of protection of women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children;
d. the best interests of women and children; and
e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience acts of violence or neglect.
(2) The objectives of implementing protection of women and children include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing a sense of security for women and children;

d. providing services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses;

e. facilitating and mediating domestic disputes to realize harmonious and prosperous household integrity; and
f. seeking compensation/compensatory for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 3
Protection of women and children in the region includes prevention, service, and empowerment of victims of physical violence, psychological violence, sexual violence, exploitation, trafficking in persons, and domestic neglect including child deviant behavior.

(2) The implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence is a joint obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government, community, family, and parents.

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

(1)
(2)

Article 4

Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical, psychological violence, exploitation or trafficking has the right to receive protection and services.

Protection, assistance, and services to victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. to be respected for their dignity as human beings;
b. complaints or requests for protection from the person concerned and/or other parties; c. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose whereabouts are kept secret to avoid intimidation and threats;

medical services/health treatment in the form of
d. care and recovery from injuries or physical condition of victims by medical personnel and paramedics; medicolegal services for evidence
e. in the legal field;

protection by law enforcement officers;
f. provision of information regarding the rights and legal obligations to
ob.

victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;

continuous handling up to the stage of
h. Rehabilitation;

for the recovery of physical, psychological health

1. as well as sexual according to the suffering experienced by victims of violence;

psychological assistance to
J.

restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore the self-confidence of victims;
k. assistance support for legal processes and obtaining the right to compensation or compensation; 1. for spiritual guidance services;
m. to determine their own decisions;
n. for assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
i. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a community member (social reintegration); and

L  -D-F {,

!
j. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent. (3) In the event that the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), they also receive special rights including: a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;

the right to basic services;
b. the right to equal protection;

C. the right to be free from various stigma;
d. the right to obtain freedom; and
e. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator. f.

CHAPTER V

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 5

Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. b.

C. d. e.

regional government;

community;

institutions;

family; and parents.

Article 6

The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include: a. implementing the obligations of protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;

establishing policies, programs and activities for
b. protection of women and children from acts of violence;

conducting cooperation in the implementation of
c. protection of women and children from acts of violence;

!
d. e. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;

providing Safe Houses for women and children victims of violence;
f. allocating budgets for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence according to regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
h. establishing regional technical implementing units for the protection of women and children based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 7

1. the obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.
2. The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children
b. providing protection to victims; c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties, and/or related Agencies through UPTD PPA; and
e. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
3. The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), is implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 8

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children r'i

CHAPTER VI

INSTITUTIONS

Article 9 (1) The Regional Government is obliged to establish a Technical Service unit for the protection of women and children.

2. The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) is established based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
3. The Technical Service Unit as referred to in paragraph (1) is established after this Regional Regulation comes into force and is regulated by Regent's regulation.

CHAPTER VII

PREVENTION, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT

Part One

General Article 10 The Regional Government through the Agency or technical service unit and PD, implements prevention and service efforts for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of Children and Women up to the empowerment of victims to be able to return to living their lives in accordance with the dignity they possess.

Part Two

Prevention of Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect of Women and Children

Article 1 1

1. The form of prevention as referred to in Article 10 is carried out through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children and Women to the wider community in the region;

g?.4, f-.3.&a - activities to disseminate information on the protection of
b. women and children to be known by all people in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or notice boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the worst condition;

training for members who are able to
C. disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;

opening of public complaint channels by
d. the Regional Government or Agency through the Technical Service Unit in each area through community networks;

strengthening coordination channels with the Government at
e. the District, Sub-district/Village level;
f. immediate handling of community complaints throughout the region and securing subjects of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking, neglect; and/or people or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of raising awareness of the wider community to the smallest community groups (families), especially parents to protect women and children. (2) The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD conducts data collection on areas of violence based on the incidence rate and conducts research and assessment of the vulnerability level of areas to find solutions for reducing to stopping acts of violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.

Part Three

Services for Women and Children Experiencing Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 12

1. The form of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect is implemented in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 4 paragraphs (2) and (3).
2. To support the operations of UPTD, the Regent orders the Agency related to services as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the minimum service standards established by the government.

Article 13

The Regional Government through the Agency/UPTD is obliged to prepare standard operating procedures for Assistance to victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect at every stage of fulfilling the rights of victims.

Article 14

The provision of services and assistance to victims shall be conducted with the principles of: non-discrimination;
a. swift, safe, and empathetic;
b. coordination between government agencies; C.

guarantee of confidentiality;
d. easily accessible; and e. free of charge.

f.

Article 15

Forms of services for the rights of women and children from acts of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services; b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal aid; and f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Part Four

Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 16

1. The Regional Government through the Office/UPTD is obliged to carry out economic empowerment for victims of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect.

(2) Forms of empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. providing the necessary needs for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large enterprises, as well as financial institutions to develop the businesses of victims of acts of violence;
e. seeking the provision of capital for victims of acts of violence; and f. expanding access to information and promoting the products of victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VIII

COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP

Part One

Cooperation

Article 17

Cooperation is carried out to strengthen the role (1) of the Office/UPTD in achieving the objectives of the protection of women and children in the regional area.

Cooperation is carried out with: {2J
a. the government;
b. the provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions; and e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.
3. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph {2), includes: exchange of data and information; a.

victim rehabilitation

b.
c. repatriation d 7 id..j'

i.x
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

(a) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph l2\, shall be set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two

Partnership

Article 18

(1i The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business community for support in the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area.

2. Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through: a. notification of information on employment opportunities for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence. (3) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2], shall be set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement.

CHAPTER IX

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 19

1. In providing protection for women and children, the community may: a. form family partners at the village/sub-district level by the community;
b. form women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct independent socialization of the rights of women and children;

p.;ce.sq,&ffi:1 .:iljrr@,;'F "Ii-,i a-. 4.a\aI J _ 'ro: ia:E*!-:i:!1!:_r''rgt;rir'::r (-  ' u'''L
i. .,,,i,,* '.;l\" i-* , , . ', i i,ti;t -

d. provide first aid to victims;

and;
e. report to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph {1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER X

REGIONAL ACTION PLAN

Article 20

In order to carry out obligations and (1) responsibilities, the regional government establishes programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as the basis for implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

The RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), {2) constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).

Further provisions regarding the RAD as (3) referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 2 1

The Regent conducts guidance and supervision (1) of the implementation of the protection of women and children from acts of violence. The Regent may appoint the Head of the Office to (21 conduct guidance and supervision.

Article 22 The community may conduct supervision over the implementation of the protection of women and children in the regional area with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or DPRD.

[3'j:"\.[t-,e\ffi .*":;: 'r:''::!:-stiffiJ-.:3:-'!@:f -::]M4I@S;ffi: I v ti *P--W ;'-i;j....,. . E $ffiF{mr, .t ,liI

CHAPTER XII

INVESTIGATION

Article 23 (1) In addition to general investigating officers, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation may also be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with laws and regulations. with Regulation (21 Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. receive reports or complaints from a person regarding the existence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take first action at that time at the scene and conduct an examination; c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identity;
d. seize objects and/or letters; e. take fingerprints and photograph a person; f. summon persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in experts needed in connection with the examination of the case;
h. cease investigation after receiving instructions from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident does not constitute a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this matter to the public prosecutor, the suspect or their family; and/or i. take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.
3. Investigators as referred to in paragraph (2), shall notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Investigating Officer of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code. v;
.

CHAPTER XIII

SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 24 (1) Any person who intentionally fails to provide protection for women and children resulting in the occurrence of acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the Laws and Regulations.

{2) If an official appointed to provide protection fails to carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

3. Officials who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence, who violate service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal organizational mechanism.

CHAPTER XIV

OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 25

The handling of legal cases in the investigation process (1) by law enforcement officers must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.

Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (2) (1) are:
a. in cases of investigation for women or female children victims of violence must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in letter a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardian along with the advocacy and psychology team from P3A who have the same gender;

c. in cases of investigation for male children victims of violence may be conducted by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and carried out as referred to in letter b; and
d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 26

In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be presented at the trial, except in circumstances that are very compelling while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in trial processes at different times.

Article 27 In the case that the perpetrator of a criminal act is a child, the following matters apply:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by considering that the child still has hope for his/her future;
b. The investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases;
c. The investigation is conducted in a closed room and attended only by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardian;
d. in the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but is entrusted to his/her family with supervision and custody;
e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court room; and f. the child's sentencing process is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that may be accompanied by his/her parents.

Article 28

The news media is not permitted to expose news coverage for cases concerning child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and life prospects for the future unless the victim as a result of such violence loses his/her life.

$r&ffi,eF tE)SEitryt se'sqma !

CHAPTER XV

FUNDING

Article 29

The budget allocation for protection of women and children victims of violence carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, and/or other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XVI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

The establishment of UPT as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (3) must be implemented no later than 1 (one) year after this Regional Regulation is stipulated.

Article 31

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation with its placement in the Regional Gazette of East Barito Regency. Stipulated in Tamiang Layang on date el4ppt 2019

REGENT

Promulgated in Tamiang Layang on date F).A3uli$ zots

REGIONAL SECRETARY

EAST BARITO REGENCY,

ESKOP

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST BARITO REGENCY YEAR 2079 NUMBER . 60 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST BARITO REGENCY CENTRAL KALIMANTAN: (O4,SOI2O19) , -"' ",:,:' ;,,. i,";,.),-,1;j,r. . $SmlqCJ. v  k .i i:"--iT*' 'r -

I. GENERAL

ELUCIDATION

ON

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST BARITO REGENCY NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

The role of women is very important because they are the mothers of the nation who are the pillars of the family to build the future of quality human resources in various fields including family economic empowerment, likewise with children who are the nation's generation who will play a role in filling development in the future.

Children and Women must receive protection from violent treatment, exploitation, human trafficking and neglect by responsible parties. Protection is intended so that a peaceful and prosperous atmosphere is created for all levels of society in fostering life and togetherness within the regional area. Violence cannot be avoided just like that, but must be prevented as early as possible from spreading to a level that is detrimental to all parties. Protection efforts are prioritized on prevention efforts and minimizing incidents.

Acts of violence against Children and Women are violations of human rights so their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life is guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Children and Women victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so that institutional and regulatory support is needed that can guarantee their implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims, especially in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of Children and Women victims of violence in Kotabaru Regency. As one of the efforts to protect Children and Women, it is carried out through guidance, training and assistance to victims and families of violence victims. Economic empowerment is also carried out for the prevention of women as victims, which can be done by growing and developing micro and small businesses in accordance with local potential. To grow micro and small businesses, it is necessary to increase the capacity and capability of women through assistance and guidance so that women can grow and develop their businesses.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1 Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Paragraph (1) Letter a Respect for the rights of Children and Women is respect for the fulfillment of basic rights for women and children.

Letter b What is meant by "gender justice and equality" is a condition where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare; Gender equality is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment towards victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of the victim" is all the best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, so the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Letter e What is meant by restoration of socio-economic rights is increasing understanding, awareness, responsibility, commitment, participation, ability and independence in order to improve the economy and quality of women or target groups so that they are protected from problems.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

f L w:,j'...'i l

Article 3

Paragraph (1) "physical violence" means any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death. "psychological violence" means an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person. "sexual violence" means any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes. "exploitation" includes: acts that exploit a child economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;

b. acts with or without the victim's consent that include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

"trafficking in persons" means the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.

"household neglect" means:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after children as appropriate;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of the household, whereas according to the law applicable to him or her or because of an agreement or contract he or she is obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person. Deviant behavior of children such as the use of glue that can cause children to feel addicted or intoxicated because they are invited by their friends, and deviations towards promiscuous behavior or the use of illicit goods.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Special stigma for cases of child rape, victims have the right not to receive exposure through media coverage including mention of family background, location/place of residence and matters related to the child's future interests.

Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f Compensation or restitution is currently not yet institutionalized in formal juridical terms but in customary (adat) rules it is already institutionalized, legal remedies are possible in the case of claims for damages as currently developed in developed countries.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear Article 6 Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear Article 10 Sufficiently clear.

Article 11 Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24 Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST BARRITO REGENCY NUMBER
