REGENT OF NORTH LOMBOK

PROVINCE OF WEST NUSA TENGGARA

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY

NUMBER 1 OF 2017

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF NORTH LOMBOK,

Considering:
a. that to realize the constitutional rights of every citizen in accordance with the principle of equality before the law, the Regional Government needs to strive to guarantee the Protection of human rights for Women and Children;
b. that Women and Children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence, thus need to receive optimal Protection;
c. that Protection as referred to in letter b, is included in mandatory affairs which are the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the Regional Government and its prevention must involve all parties;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation and Protection of Women and Children.

In View of:

1.

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 26 of 2008 concerning the Establishment of North Lombok Regency in the Province of West Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4872);
6. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
7. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5121);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY

REGENT OF NORTH LOMBOK

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish	: 	REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Part One

Definitions

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: Region is North Lombok Regency;

Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration;

Regent is the Regent of North Lombok;

Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit within the Government of North Lombok Regency;

Implementation of Protection is all actions and service efforts to guarantee and protect the rights of Women and Children organized by the Regional Government and the Community;

Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child still in the womb;

Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery;

Assistance is activities and actions carried out by Assistants during the service process;

Assistant is a person or representative from an Institution who has the expertise to provide Assistance/social worker who has professional competence in their field;

Institution is a non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides Assistance;

Supervision is a systematic monitoring process of the overall Implementation of Protection and legal aid for Children and Women;

Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations;

Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of the Region established by Regional Regulation;

Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an empowerment and Protection service for Women and Children established by the Government which is community-based;

Violence is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty;

Women victims of Violence are Women who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, sexually, economically or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life;

Child victims of Violence are Children who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically or neglect that threatens life, body and degrades human dignity;

Children in emergency situations means Children who become refugees, Children victims of riots and unrest, Children victims of disasters and Children in conflict situations;

Children in disaster situations are natural disasters, fire disasters and riots;

Complaint handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of Violence against Women and Children submitted by victims, families or the Community;

Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly;

Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or Community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for victims;

Integrated service unit or abbreviated as UPT is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for Women and Children victims of Violence;

Safe house is a temporary shelter that aims to provide Protection and a sense of security to victims of Violence;

Child Protection Institution or abbreviated as LPA is an Independent Institution in the field of Child Protection and fulfillment of Children's rights that is community-based;

Integrated Service Center of North Lombok Regency or abbreviated as PPT KLU is a form of integrated service delivery based on community health centers to handle victims of Violence against Women and Children which includes medical, medicolegal, and psychosocial services.

Part Two

Principles and Objectives

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children shall be carried out with due regard to religion, customs, social culture of the Community while prioritizing the basic principles of Women's rights and Children's rights.

The basic principles of Protection of Women's and Children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) include: non-discrimination;

the best interests of Women and Children;

the right to life, survival, and development;

respect for the opinion of the Child;

legal certainty (Protection of victims' rights);

local wisdom;

justice and gender equality;

transparency;

accountability; and sustainability.

Article 3

The Implementation of Protection of Women and Children aims to: provide guidance to the Regency Government in planning policies and strategies for the Protection of Women and Children;

prevent all forms of Violence against Women and Children and violations of the rights of Women and Children;

protect and provide services to Women and Children Victims of Violence;

strengthen the protective environment for Women and Children from all forms of Violence, exploitation, maltreatment and neglect;

increase empowerment of Women and Children; and increase the role of government institutions, business entities, media and/or NGOs in the Region.

CHAPTER II

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One

General

Article 5

The Regional Government, Community, family, and parents have obligations and responsibilities for the efforts to Implement Protection of Women and Children.

Part Two

Obligations and Responsibilities of the Regional Government

Article 6

The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to: respect and guarantee the human rights of every Woman and Child without distinction of ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture, and language, legal status of the Child, birth order of the Child, and physical and/or mental condition;

provide support for facilities and infrastructure in the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children, including providing breastfeeding facilities for Children, playgrounds, recreational facilities, shelters, and establishing integrated service centers for the Protection of Women and Children;

supervise the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;

ensure the availability of a safe and comfortable environment for the optimal growth and development of Children;

allocate budget to Institutions that have programs in the field of Protection of Women and Children;

coordinate programs, budgets and services that ensure ease of service to victims;

formulate guidelines for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children;

provide services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

monitoring, supervision and evaluation of the Implementation of Protection and Assistance for Women and Children;

prevent, reduce risks, and carry out handling of all forms of Violence, exploitation, maltreatment, Children in conflict with the law and Children in emergency situations;

strengthen family-based and Community-based Child care;

increase the participation of Children in making policies that affect them, including in family life, education and the Community; and increase community participation in the Protection of Women and Children including prevention, risk reduction and handling.

The provision of facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, for the fulfillment of service standards;

The provision of facilities and infrastructure by the Regional Government shall be carried out in stages adjusted to the financial capacity of the Region.

Part Three

Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 7

The Community has obligations and responsibilities for the Protection of Women and Children through community participation activities in the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children in the form of: providing information and/or reporting every occurrence of vulnerability risks and Violence that is known;

facilitating deliberation to achieve consensus for restorative justice for Children in conflict with the law through informal channels and carried out at the village/sub-district government level and institutional authorities;

identifying/early detection and initial handling of Children at risk;

mediation and guidance for families experiencing domestic Violence, domestic conflict, and divorce;

preparation of families and the Community in accepting Children who are victims of maltreatment and/or Children at risk; and the process of repatriation, social Rehabilitation, and social Reintegration.

Part Four

Obligations and Responsibilities of Family and Parents

Article 8

family and parents have obligations and responsibilities towards Children in the form of: caring for, maintaining, educating, and protecting Children;

preventing early marriage;

ensuring the continuity of the Child's education according to the Child's ability, talent and interest; and reporting every birth of a Child to the authorized agency to register births.

In the event that parents do not exist or their whereabouts are unknown or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family, which shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One

General

Article 9

Every Woman and Child has basic rights as a human being that must be protected, promoted, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 10

Every Woman has the right to:
a. live, survive and improve her standard of living;
b. live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and mentally;
c. enjoy a good and healthy living environment;
d. live in a family within a legal marriage bond based on the provisions of laws and regulations;
e. obtain work according to ability, conditions and fair and just wages;
f. specifically for Women with disabilities, the right to obtain facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. play an active role in the political and governmental fields in accordance with the potential and capabilities she possesses;
h. obtain legal information and services;
i. obtain services to increase her income; andj. obtain other rights in accordance with her human dignity and based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 11

Every Child has the right to:
a. obtain education and teaching in accordance with age level, physical and mental condition, intelligence and interests and talents;
b. live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive Protection from acts of Violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect;
c. have his/her needs fulfilled by the family;
d. receive religious guidance;
e. obtain his/her identity; andf. obtain other rights in accordance with his/her human dignity and based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12

The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to facilitate efforts to Protect, promote, uphold and fulfill the rights of Women and Children according to its authority based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two

Implementation of Protection of Women and Children

Article 13

The Implementation of Protection of Women and Children includes:
a. prevention and Protection;
b. Handling, recovery of victims of Violence;
c. Rehabilitation, Reintegration and empowerment;
d. law enforcement services and legal assistance;
e. facilitation of juvenile justice; andf. cultivating a gender-just social system.

Paragraph 1

Prevention and Protection

Article 14

1. Related SKPD responsible for the Protection of Women and Children shall organize prevention and Protection in the form of:a. dissemination of information;
b. developing data centers;
c. organizing education on the prevention of Violence against Women and Children;
d. developing child-friendly school models;
e. encouraging increased participation of Children in preventing Violence against Children as well as socialization and promotion of Children's rights through the establishment of Children's Forums/Children's Councils.  f. preparing a code of ethics for educators and orphanage staff as well as parties involved in handling Children;
g. providing guidelines or SOPs on handling Violence against Children;
h. preparing guidelines for the implementation of recovery and social Reintegration for Child victims of Violence;
i. preparing guidelines for the role of the Community in providing recovery and Reintegration services;
j. involving the participation of the Community in recovery and Reintegration services for Child victims of Violence;
k. raising awareness about safe sex, the dangers of cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, narcotics and psychotropic abuse, Child marriage, pornography, pornographic acts and HIV/AIDS to families, the Community and Children;
l. increasing the capacity of families and Child care Institutions regarding Child Protection and child-rearing skills.  m. increasing the capacity of all Child Protection services;
n. guaranteeing the continuity of character-based education in accordance with the 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program;
o. fulfillment of the right to legal identity for Children and Women including birth certificates and marriage certificates;
p. guarantee of receiving standard health services;
q. guarantee of Children's right to receive exclusive breastfeeding with the obligation for public spaces to provide breastfeeding corners;
r. guarantee of Protection and fulfillment of Children's rights from the womb and Women's rights;
s. fulfillment of Children's needs according to the age of the Child;
t. Assistance and reproductive and psychological health services for adolescent Children and Women;
u. development of Marriage Age Maturation Programs;
v. strengthening the function of Institutions or non-governmental organizations engaged in Child empowerment; andw. encouraging and facilitating the development of Child-Friendly Districts.
2. Implementation of prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with Educational Institutions, Religious Institutions, Media, Business Entities and/or NGOs.

Article 15

1. Every person must protect Women and Children from the threat of danger of Violence against Women and Children.
2. Every person or Institution is prohibited from falsifying data/documents that result in Violence against Women and Children and/or non-fulfillment of Children's rights.

Paragraph 2

Handling, Recovery of Violence Victims

Article 16

1. Related SKPD responsible for social affairs, health, and Protection of Women and Children, shall organize Handling and Recovery in the form of:a. providing Assistance in legal processes;
b. conducting mediation and/or dispute resolution;
c. accompanying referrals, psychological and medical recovery;
d. accompanying the legal identity process for Women and Children; ande. conducting counseling.
2. Implementation of Handling and Recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with the Police, Hospitals, Integrated Service Centers, Legal Aid Institutions, Business Entities and/or NGOs.

Paragraph 3

Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Empowerment

Article 17

1. Related SKPD responsible for social affairs and Protection of Women and Children shall organize Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Empowerment in the form of:a. Assistance for Women and Child victims;
b. provision of Safe houses;
c. healing or recovery;
d. return to family and Community;
e. facilitating the development of interests and talents for Women and Children;
f. developing economic enterprises for adult Women;
g. developing creative spaces for Children; andh. conducting Supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Empowerment process.
2. Implementation of Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) letters a through d may cooperate with educational institutions, Rehabilitation centers, Safe houses, private institutions and/or NGOs.
3. The mechanism for Organizing Protection against Violence against Women and Children shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and Service Standards (SP) which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 4

Legal Aid

Article 18

Legal aid services are intended to provide Assistance and Protection to Women and Child victims of Violence with a gender-responsive approach so that victims and perpetrators obtain justice and certainty of their legal rights.

2. Types of legal aid services include:a. litigation legal aid; andb. non-litigation legal aid.
3. The Regional Government shall organize legal aid in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
4. In providing legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3), the Regional Government cooperates with advocate organizations in the Region.

Paragraph 5

Handling of Children in Conflict with the Law

Article 19

1. The Regional Government plays a role in facilitating the handling of Children in conflict with the law.
2. handling of Children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:a. capacity building of government apparatus, social workers and the Community;
b. increased coordination with law enforcement officials;
c. provision of supporting facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of the juvenile criminal justice system;
d. development of effective methods through information support, facilities and positive activities as well as taking immediate action on gaps that encourage Children and/or groups of Children to commit legal violations;
e. provision and delivery of legal and psychosocial assistance services in realizing restorative justice and diversion processes for Children in conflict with the law;
f. encouraging a paradigm shift in the Community towards Children in conflict with the law; andg. developing diversion mechanisms for Children in conflict with the law in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
3. Related SKPD responsible for social affairs and education shall organize social Rehabilitation and education for Children in conflict with the law in the form of:a. provision of Safe houses;
b. psychosocial Rehabilitation;
c. mental spiritual Rehabilitation;
d. fulfillment of the right to education; ande. social Reintegration.

Paragraph 6

Cultivating a Gender-Just Social System

Article 20

1. Cultivating a gender-just social system includes:a. gender-based planning, budgeting and development systems;
b. gender-based human resource capacity building; andc. gender-based political rights.
2. The provisions referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in the form of gender mainstreaming in every policy and Community life.

Article 21

Further provisions regarding the Organization of Protection of Women and Children shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

General

Article 22

The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect Women and Children from acts of Violence that occur in the form of:
a. physical Violence;
b. sexual Violence;
c. economic Violence;
d. social Violence;
e. psychological Violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty;andh. threat of certain actions.

Article 23

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of Violence as referred to in Article 22 is obliged to make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide Protection to victims of acts of Violence;
c. provide emergency assistance; and/ord. assist in the process of submitting an application for Protection order.

Part Two

Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 24

1. Regional Government shall prevent Violence against Women and Children by:a. socializing laws and regulations;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education on the dangers of domestic Violence;
d. conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
e. forming work networks in efforts to prevent Violence;
f. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of Violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
g. establishing a Violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to Violence;andh. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms and morality.
2. In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. the Community;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. community social institutions; andf. business sector and other institutions.

Article 25

1. Regional Government is obliged to prepare prevention programs or activities as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (1) in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan.
2. Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) are to support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Part Three

Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 26

1. Regional Government shall implement Integrated Services for Women and Children victims of acts of Violence through activities:a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social Rehabilitation services;
f. legal assistance and advocacy services; and/org. repatriation and Reintegration.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:a. special service rooms in police lines;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/ord. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
3. Implementation of Services for victims of acts of Violence shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A with other social institutions.
4. P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner.
5. Integrated Services for victims of acts of Violence as referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be implemented in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures.

Article 27

Procedures and procedures for Protection of Women and Children victims of Violence shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V

STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPMENT OF INSTITUTIONS PROVIDING PROTECTION SERVICES FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 28

In the context of Protection of Women and Children, the following shall be established in the Region:a. Integrated Service Center, in the form of Integrated Service Center for Women Empowerment and Child Protection (P2TP2A);
b. Child Protection Institution (LPA); andc. other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29

1. P2TP2A as referred to in Article 28 letter a functions as a coordinative institution among Regional Government, law enforcement apparatus, service institutions, educational institutions, Legal Aid institutions, individuals, private sector and/or NGOs, which have capacity in Protection of Women and Children.
2. The duties of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. providing Services, including:1) preparing and developing information related to Women and Children and coordinating throughout the Regency and reporting to the Province/Province of West Nusa Tenggara;
2) developing a central database obtained from the Region regarding the condition of Violence against Women and Children;
3) receiving complaints both in writing and orally;
4) conducting Services, mediation and advocacy for victims of Violence against Women and Children;
5) conducting education/training; and6) coordinating with related institutions/individuals both in other Regencies/Cities, Provincial Government in the context of providing Protection for Women and Children.
b. providing Protection for victims of acts of Violence, reporters and witnesses.
3. Appointment of P2TP2A management as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.
4. P2TP2A shall be under the coordination of the SKPD or work unit handling women empowerment and Child Protection.

Article 30

1. In order to increase the effectiveness of Implementation of Child Protection, the Regent shall establish LPA as referred to in Article 28 letter b which is independent in nature.
2. LPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the duties of:a. conducting Supervision of the implementation of Protection and fulfillment of Children's rights;
b. providing input and proposals in the formulation of policies regarding Implementation of Child Protection;
c. collecting data and information regarding Child Protection;
d. receiving and conducting review of public complaints regarding violations of Children's rights;
e. conducting mediation on disputes regarding violations of Children's rights;
f. conducting cooperation with community institutions, Government and NGOs in the form of work networks, for the fulfillment and Protection of Children's rights; andg. conducting handling activities for cases of violations and neglect of Children's rights.

CHAPTER VI

PARTICIPATION

Part One

Community Participation

Article 31

1. The Community may participate in Protection of Women and Children.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out in the form of:a. assisting the Regional Government in the form of Supervision of Protection of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
b. reporting to the competent authorities if they know of Women and Children who experience Violence; andc. participating in the process of prevention, recovery, Rehabilitation, Reintegration and Empowerment of victims.

Part Two

Child Participation

Article 32

1. Every Child has the right to participate in expressing opinions, ideas, thoughts and others and be involved in decision-making processes concerning their lives either directly or indirectly, which is implemented with the consent and will of all Children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of thinking maturity.
2. Child participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through Child Forums/Child Councils starting from the Village, Sub-district, and Regency levels.
3. Child Forums/Child Councils as referred to in paragraph (2) represent Children, both representation of Children's geographical domicile, Children's socio-cultural groups, Children with special needs and Children's educational backgrounds.
4. Establishment of Child Forums/Child Councils as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be facilitated by the Regional Government.
5. Establishment of Child Forums/Child Councils as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 33

Funding sources for Child Forums/Child Councils may come from:
a. donations from the Community/Business Entities that are non-binding in nature;
b. assistance from the Regional Government; and/orc. other funding sources in accordance with laws and regulations.

Article 34

1. In every formulation of policies related to Children, the Regional Government shall consider and accommodate the opinions of Children submitted through Child Forums/Child Councils.
2. The Regional Government may include representatives of Child Forums/Child Councils in Regional Development Planning Deliberations.

CHAPTER VII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 35

The Regent is obliged to conduct guidance and Supervision of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: organizing technical guidance and training; and providing facilities for the fulfillment of Service Standards.

The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted to realize the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children in accordance with Service Standards implemented by P2TP2A and Institutions that implement services for the fulfillment and Protection of Women and Children.

Article 36

Supervision as referred to in Article 35 paragraph (1) includes: conducting monitoring and evaluation of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children; and receiving and following up on reports.

The implementation of Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted transparently and accountably.

CHAPTER VIII

REPORTING

Article 37

1. SKPD that carries out the duties and functions in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection submits a report to the Regent regarding the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children in the Region.
2. The report as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted at least 1 (one) time per year.

CHAPTER IX

FINANCING

Article 38

Financing for the implementation of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children is charged to the APBD and other lawful and non-binding sources of funds.

CHAPTER X

CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Part One

Criminal Sanctions

Article 39

Any person or Institution that violates the provisions as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) is threatened with imprisonment of a maximum of 6 (six) months and/or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) is a violation.

Any person or legal entity that violates the provisions of Article 23 is threatened with criminal sanctions based on the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Part Two

Administrative Sanctions

Article 40

For Civil Servants who perform an action or do not perform an action that can obstruct or complicate one of the parties being served resulting in losses for those being served in the matter of civil rights administration regarding the fulfillment of Children's rights as referred to in Article 11 letter e and letter f, disciplinary punishment is imposed in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and/or administrative sanctions in the form of temporary dismissal from position.

The mechanism for imposing sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 41

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 42

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of North Lombok Regency.

Stipulated in Tanjung on 30 March 2017

REGENT OF NORTH LOMBOK,

H. NAJMUL AKHYAR

Promulgated in Tanjung on 30 March 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY,

H. SUARDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 1

REG NO REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE NUMBER 9 YEAR 2017

ELUCIDATION

ON

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY

NUMBER   YEAR 2017

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

GENERAL

The State has an obligation to provide Protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. That Women and Children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence and therefore need to receive Protection. Violence against Women and Children is a violation of human rights and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination.

Violence is any act unlawfully with or without means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering or hardship for Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in suffering or hardship physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens the integrity of the body and degrades the dignity of the Child.

The existence of Women and Child Victims of Violence has not received adequate Services and therefore minimum Services are required for victims of Violence. In order to prevent and overcome Violence against Women and Children in North Lombok Regency so that they are protected from Violence, threats of Violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to implement Protection for Women and Children in the form of a Regional Regulation. This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for Women and Child Victims of Violence, particularly in terms of Services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and Supervision.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear

Article 2

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

Sufficiently Clear

Article 5

Sufficiently Clear

Article 6

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 7

Letter a Sufficiently Clear Letter b Restorative Justice is the settlement of criminal cases by involving the perpetrator, victim, family of the perpetrator/victim, and other related parties to jointly seek a fair settlement by emphasizing restoration to the original state, and not retaliation.

Letter c Sufficiently Clear Letter d Sufficiently Clear Letter e Sufficiently Clear Letter f Sufficiently Clear

Article 8

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear

Article 10

Letter i

Article 11

Sufficiently Clear

Article 12

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear

Article 13

Sufficiently Clear

Article 14

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 15

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 16

Sufficiently Clear

Article 17

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 18

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 19

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Letter e Diversion is the transfer of settlement of Child cases from the criminal justice process to a process outside the criminal justice.

Article 20

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 21

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear

Article 22

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 23

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 24

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 25

Sufficiently Clear

Article 26

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 27

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 28

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 29

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 30

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 31

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 32

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear Verse (3) Sufficiently Clear Verse (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 33

Sufficiently Clear

Article 34

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 35

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear Verse (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 36

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 37

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 38

Sufficiently Clear

Article 39

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear Verse (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 40

Verse (1) Sufficiently Clear Verse (2) Sufficiently Clear

Article 41

Sufficiently Clear

Article 42

Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH LOMBOK REGENCY NUMBER 63
