Considering:

COPY

REGENT OF DONGGALA

CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY

NUMBER 5 OF 2014

CONCERNING

PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF DONGGALA,
a. that women and children are creations of Almighty God who constitute important elements of Indonesian society and nation;
b. that Indonesian women have an important role in community activities, development and family life and have the obligation to care for, protect and raise Indonesian children to grow and develop as the nation's next generation;c. that Indonesian children are Indonesian human resources who will become actors in all fields of social and state life;
d. that in social life women and children in Donggala Regency often experience violence or unpleasant treatment so that it is considered important to protect them;
e. based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, a Regional Regulation is established
In View of:
1. 6.

Donggala Regency concerning Protection for Women and Children.

Law Number 29 of 1959 Concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Donggala, Sulawesi (State Gazette of 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);

Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3143);

Law Number 6 of 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039) ' Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143): Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941): Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235): Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of

9. Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional

10. Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of

11. Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning

12. Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720); Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formulation of
13. Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning

14. Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning

15. Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82; Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
16. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
17. Presidential Decree Number 33 of 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF DONGGALA REGENCY and

REGENT OF DONGGALA,

DECIDES:

To Enact: REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY CONCERNING PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

BAB I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article I

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Buoati is the Regent of Donggala.
2. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution of Donggala Regency as an element of regional government administration.
3. Regional Government is the Regent of Donggala and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the regional apparatus work unit of Donggala Regency that handles women's and children's interests.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the apparatus work unit within the SKPD of Donggala Regency.
6. Child is a human being who is not yet 18 years old, including a child in the womb and a person recognized by law.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person recognized by law.
8. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
9. Protection is all actions and services to fulfill rights, as well as guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence.
10. Child protection is an effort to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Referral is an effort made to protect victims of violence.
12. Violence against women and children is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering and physical, sexual, psychological suffering, neglect, including threats of certain acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
13. Physical violence is an act that results in pain, injury, or causes miscarriage or fainting.
14. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feeling helpless or severe psychological suffering in a person.
15. Sexual violence is the coercion of sexual relations, coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
16. Victim of acts of violence hereinafter referred to as victim is an individual or group of people who suffer physically, mentally or economic loss, emotional, deprivation of basic rights as a result of an act of violation of human rights (HAM), or criminal acts and acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or regional government apparatus or others.
17. Service is an immediate activity and action carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is an activity and action carried out by an assistant during the service process.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
20. Institution is a non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
21. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for related agencies and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
23. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
25. Supervision is an activity of observing, listening, examining, reviewing, assessing the implementation of protection of women and children.

BAB II

PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 2

The implementation of protection of women and children is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. non-discrimination;
c. justice.

Article 3

The objectives of protection of women and children are to:
a. provide and increase a sense of security for women and children;
b. help prevent acts of violence against women and children;
c. help prevent exploitation activities against women and children;
d. provide services to women and children in facing problems;
e. help improve the quality of life of children.

Article 4

The scope of regulation of protection for women and children includes:
a. Rights of women and children;
b. Duties and authorities;
c. Handling of acts of violence;
e. Financing;
f. Supervision;
g. Community participation.

BAB III

FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S AND WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Part One

Children's Rights

Article 5

In the implementation of child protection in the region, children have the right:
a. to live, grow and develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth and receive guidance and protection from violence, negligence and discrimination;
b. to a valid birth certificate obtained and/or sought by their parents in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations;
c. to worship according to their religion, think and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under parental guidance;
d. to know, be raised and cared for by their own parents;
e. in the event that for some reason parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development or the child is in a neglected state, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual and social needs;
g. to obtain education and teaching according to their abilities, interests and talents;
h. to express opinions and have their opinions heard;
i. to rest and utilize time to develop talents and abilities;
j. to receive protection from family, community and Regional Government against discriminatory treatment and exploitation both economically and socially, neglect, cruelty, violence, persecution, injustice and other mistreatment;
k. to regain formal or non-formal education for children who drop out of school;
l. to receive exclusive breast milk (ASI) as a priority;
m. to receive guidance;
n. to obtain other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two

Women's Rights

Article 6

In the implementation of protection of women in the region, women have the right to:
a. basic needs;
b. comfort;
d. security;
e. maximum health services in facing acts of violence;
f. assistance services, legal aid and spiritual guidance in facing acts of violence; and
g. confidentiality regarding the problems faced.

BAB IV

DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES

Part One Duties

Paragraph 1

Duties of the government in the implementation of Child Protection

Article 7

The duties of the Regional Government in the implementation of Child Protection include:
a. preparation of long-term, medium-term and short-term strategic plans for Child Protection as an integrated part of the Development Planning Document;
b. implementation and supervision of the implementation of Child Protection.

Article 8

The regional government provides guidance and direction for children to embrace religion in accordance with the religion and beliefs of their parents.

Article 9

1. The regional government provides facilities and organizes comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains an optimal degree of health from the womb through community health centers and hospitals.
2. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
3. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are provided free of charge for families who are unable or poor families. (4) The regional government carries out activities to support the provision of breast milk to babies.

Article 10

1. The regional government organizes basic and secondary education for (r) ;"ilH T"":organizes education as referred to in paragraph (1) -i"r"or from families who are unable or The regional government is obliged,""''-.*oparents-education fees or free education for students who poor families or abandoned children.

Article 11

1. The regional government is obliged to accommodate and care for children who are abandoned by ,r, g#:#""ffi1fft:1"::|1il::,fan children as referred to:** in paragraph (1) can be done ."r"rui r."ri""-"1i" with institutions, social foundations or orphanages.

Article 12

The regional government provides special protection for children who are victims of riots or::H::ffi::" H""ffian basic consisting 1t?" 911s31^indane' housing' education, health, o.r"i", i"n Lr"rr"asi, security guarantees' and equality ,. fiHlll;lllbduhan special for children who have disabilities and children who experience psychosocial disorders.

Article 13

1. The regional government carries out prevention "": T-?1t:l"Olantation of children's organs to other parties and acts of violence against children.
(2\ prevention efforts *0"n"'#ij;;;;t'"0 o"o" "v"r 1i1 oit"tukan with forms of activities that include:a. Detection and early intervention;b. Socialization and education;
c. Seminars or workshops;
d. Preparation of an effective information system: - e. Cooperation with institutions that have activities in preventing acts of violence against children.

Article 14

The regional government is obliged to assist in handling acts of violence against children.

Paiag.at 2 Government Duties in Organizing Women's Protection

Article 15

The Regional Government's Duties in Organizing Women's Protection include: - a. preparation of long-term, medium-term strategic plans for Women's Protection' ' and- short-term as an integrated part of the Development Planning Document;

, b. implementation and supervision of the Organization of Women's Protection.

Article 16

1. The regional government carries out prevention of acts of violence against women.

(21 Prevention efforts against acts of violence against women are carried out with forms of activities that include:
a. Regional Action Planb. Socialization;
c. Seminars or workshops;
d. Preparation of an effective information system;
e. Cooperation with institutions that have activities in preventing acts of violence against women.

Article 17

The regional government is obliged to assist in handling acts of violence against women.

Part Two

Authority

Article 18

1. The Regent may cooperate with related parties in assisting efforts to accommodate and/or care for abandoned children or handle acts of violence against women and children.
2. The Regent in carrying out cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may assign officials within the regional government. (2) Officials assigned as referred to in paragraph (2) act for and on behalf of the Regent.
3. Assignment to officials as referred to in paragraph (2) is stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 19

1. Related parties with whom the Regent cooperates as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) include:a. Social community organizations, institutions or orphanages that have activities related to the protection, care, accommodation, guidance, empowerment of children and/or women;
b. Social workers or volunteers;
c. Advocates andd. Clergy (2, Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of a cooperation agreement.

CHAPTER V

HANDLING ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST

WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 20

1. The regional government is obliged to prepare medical personnel at community health centers (Puskesmas) or hospitals that specifically handle victims. (2) Medical personnel as referred to in paragraph (1) are obliged to provide complete health services to victims.

Article 21

The regional government is obliged to assist in providing adequate special rooms for victims at the Resort Police Station (Pohes) and at every Sector Police station.

Article 22 (1) Social workers or volunteer personnel as referred to in Article 19 paragraph ' (1) letter b are tasked with accompanying victims in facing the process of resolving acts of violence.

2. Social workers or volunteer personnel in addition to being tasked as referred to in paragraph (1) carry out activities including:a. counseling or guidance to strengthen and provide a sense of security for victims;
b. providing information regarding the rights of victims to obtain protection from the police and the establishment of protection orders from the court;
c. escorting victims to safe houses or alternative residences; and d. carrying out integrated coordination in providing services to victims with agencies or related parties needed by victims.

Article 23

1. The regional government is obliged to prepare Safe Houses to be used in - temporary handling for victims of violence against women and children. (2) Safe Houses as referred to in paragraph (2) are provided in every Sub-district.

Article 24

Advocates as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) letter c assist (1) in providing legal services for victims or providing legal consultation in the form of information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;

Advocates are obliged to accompany and/or represent victims at the investigation level, (21 prosecution, and examination in court hearings and assist victims to fully describe the violence they experienced.

Information on violence from victims that is private in nature must be kept confidential by (3) advocates.

Advocates may coordinate with fellow law enforcers, volunteer (3) companions, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 25

Clergy as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) letter d are tasked (1) with providing spiritual guidance or strengthening faith and piety to victims. (21 In addition to providing spiritual guidance, clergy are obliged to provide explanations regarding the rights and obligations of victims.

CHAPTER VI

FINANCING

Article 26

1. Activity costs related to the organization of women's and children's protection are charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget as well as other lawful receipts in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Expenditure for activities sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (2) is budgeted in the Regional Work Unit that oversees the affairs of 93 organizing women's and children's protection in accordance with the needs and financial capacity of the Region.

3. Budget allocation as referred to in paragraph (1) must be budgeted by the Regent and DPRD and stipulated every fiscal year in the APBD.

CHAPTER VII

SUPERVISION AND GUIDANCE

Article 27 (1) Supervision and guidance of the organization of women's and children's protection is carried out by the Regent.

2. Supervision and guidance activities as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out daily by the Regional Work Unit that oversees child protection.
3. Results of supervision and guidance activities by the Regional Work Unit: must be reported to the Regent.

aAB V I

##: COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 28

1. The community has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to participate in assisting/supporting efforts to protect women and children. (2) The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 29

1. Forms of community participation may include: a. Supervision; or b. Provision of assistance;

(2) Community supervision includes activities:
a. observing or seeing the condition of the fulfillment of the rights of women and children; and b. providing information on any condition that tends to lead to acts of violence against women and children to the police apparatus and/or regional government.
3. Provision of assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b shall be in the form of: a. securing or temporary shelter for victims;

b. financial support to meet the needs of victims according to the community's capacity;
c. Financial assistance and/or facilities to the regional government in supporting the implementation of protection for women and children.

CHAPTER IX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 30

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Donggala Regency. Enacted in Donggala On the date of August 28, 2014

REGENT OF DONGGALA,

KASMAN LASSA

Promulgated in Donggala on the date of August 28, 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF DONGGALA REGENCY,

ABDUL NUR, SH., M.Si Principal Supervisor NIP. 19600511 198603 1 019 REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DONGGALA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 5 Copy in accordance with the original:

DONGGALA REGENCY

A-" NOREG 86 REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY, CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE: 05/YEAR 2014

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF DONGGALA REGENCY

NUMBER 5 YEAR 2014

CONCERNING

PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

The state through the government and regional government currently places very great attention on the existence of children. Based on their existence as the next generation of a quality and dignified nation, the government and regional government are obliged to recognize the existence of children's rights in their entirety. The human rights inherent in children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, the Right to Growth and Development, the Right to Protection and the Right to Participation. To fulfill the Right to life, children need food in sufficient quantities, healthy and nutritious, as well as optimal health access. In supporting the realization of children to grow and develop, children need various adequate educational facilities and infrastructure, development of talents and interests. In order to realize the right to protection and the right to participation, children need serious attention from various parties, both the government, regional government and the community.

Specifically regarding efforts to protect against violence that threatens the safety and health of children and women must be provided from an early age. Protection is needed to prevent physical, mental and sexual violence and exploitation. For example, women and children who are victims of abuse, neglect, eviction and maltreatment by parents or others. For women and children experiencing such problems, the government must provide Safe Houses and adequate budgets, the role of various parties to help handle violence problems faced by women and children include social community organizations, volunteers, social workers, medical personnel, advocates and clergy.

The condition of children's decline along with their rights and the condition of violence against women and children that often occurs in the region should be a common concern for all stakeholders, including the regional government, to play a role in preventing and overcoming such decline and violence.

For the regional government of Donggala Regency in facing the universe of conditions above, various actions are taken to fulfill children's rights and: prevent and assist in handling acts of violence against women and children which are endeavored by establishing a Regional Regulation on Protection for Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 3

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7 Sufficiently clear. .

Article 8

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear. Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Letter a:

Article 14

Article 15

Article 16

Letter b: Letter c: Letter d: Letter e: Sufficiently clear.

Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (1) Early detection and intervention is carried out on potential violations of children's rights from all forms of violence, maltreatment, exploitation, neglect and discrimination.

Socialization activities in the form of explanations regarding children's rights, implications of violations of children's rights and laws and regulations related to child protection to the community.

Socialization can use various means or media adjusted to the material to be conveyed. Education is carried out related to children's rights, maltreatment and violence against children.

Seminar and workshop activities can be carried out by Universities in Central Sulawesi, NGOs or other institutions that handle child protection.

Seminars or workshops are focused on the theme "protection of children's rights".

Preparation of information systems in the form of providing data on the condition of regional children or telephone facilities, facsimile, website or other means for the purposes of oral reports/complaints from victims/the community.

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Letter a: Sufficiently clear Letter b: Socialization activities in the form of explanations regarding children's rights, implications of violations of women's rights and laws and regulations related to the protection of women to the community.

Socialization can use various means or media adjusted to the material to be conveyed.

Letter c: Seminar and workshop activities can be carried out by Universities in Central Sulawesi, NGOs or other institutions that handle women's issues.

Seminars or workshops are focused on the theme "protection of women".

Letter d: Preparation of information systems in the form of providing data on the condition of regional children or telephone facilities, facsimile, website or other means for the purposes of oral reports/complaints from victims/the community.

Letter e: Sufficiently clear

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Paragraph (1) Letter a: Sufficiently clear Letter b: Sufficiently clear Letter c: Sufficiently clear Letter d: What is meant by clergy in this provision are religious experts, religious leaders, imams, pastors, priests both personally and institutionally, structurally Paragraph (2) Cooperation agreements with related parties are made in writing.

Article 20

Paragraph (1): What is meant by hospital in this provision is prioritized for hospitals owned by the regional government.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Regional government assistance is in the form of budget support and/or goods needed by the Police in providing special rooms. Article 22 Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Construction of Safe Houses is prioritized within the environment of each Sub-district Office.

Article 24 - Sufficiently Clear. '

Article 25

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Article 27 At the time of drafting the RAPBD, the Regent allocates and proposes a budget for the purposes of implementing protection for women and children.

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DONGGALA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 5 Copy in accordance with the original: &\Ed*

NOREG 86 REGIONAL REGULATION OF REGENCY

CENTRAL SULAWESI: o5/YEAR m14

DONGGALA. PROVINCE
