Considering : 1. 2. 3. 4. (5. (2

KULON PROGO REGENCY
REGIONAL GAZETTE
YEAR: 2015
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KULON PROGO REGENCY
NUMBER 7 OF 2015
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF KULON PROGO,
Considering: a. that violence against women and children is an act that violates the rights and dignity of women and children as human beings;
b. that protection efforts for women have not been optimal, violence and institutional strengthening of regulations that can guarantee its implementation;
that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary regarding Regional Victims Children

NUMBER : 7
CONCERNING
VIOLENCE
child victims and necessary therefore
c.
Regulation establishing Women Protection Violence;
Establishing : PPDd1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 4 Number 58, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
Government Regulation Number 32 Year 1950  6.
concerning Determination of Commencement of Law 1950 Number 12, 13, 14 and 15 regarding Formation of Regency Areas in East/Central/West Java and Special Region of Jogjakarta (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 59);
Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006  7.
Cooperation  and Implementation concerning Shelter  Within Violence Victims Recovery Household, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
Empowerment  State Minister Regulation
8.
Women and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards;
Empowerment  State Minister Regulation
9.
Women and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
10.Special Regional Regulation of Yogyakarta Number 3 Year 2012 concerning Protection of Women and Regional  (Regional Gazette Violence Victims Children Province Special Region of Yogyakarta Year 2012 Number 3);
With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
KULON PROGO REGENCY
REGENT OF KULON PROGO

8. Protection, empowerment and services are all actions to ensure and protect the prevention of rights and protect women and children from acts of violence.

9. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.

10. Services are actions taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.

11. Empowerment is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

12. Companion is a person who has the expertise to provide accompaniment to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

13. Accompaniment is activities and actions carried out by companions to women and children victims of violence during the service process.

14. Counseling is the provision of assistance by someone who is expert/trained in such a way that the psychological understanding and capacity of the victim and/or perpetrator increases in solving the problems faced.

15. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a functional integrated work unit that organizes services for victims of violence.

d. best interests for victims; and

e. empowerment.

Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to: maintain the integrity of the household
a.
realize a harmonious family;
prevent violence against women and children;
b.
protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
c.
provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence;
d.
provide protection to reporters and witnesses; and
e.
carry out empowerment of women victims of violence.
f.

Article 4
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes: prevention;  a.
services and assistance; and  b.
empowerment.  c.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of violence include: physical violence; a.
psychological violence; b.
sexual violence; c.
neglect; d.
c. KPa. b. (1 committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
acts of deliberately neglecting to b.
maintain, care for, or look after a child committed by parents, guardians, or other parties who should be responsible for their care as appropriate;
acts of neglecting a person within the scope of c.
their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or acts that result in dependency d.
and/or by means of restricting or prohibiting economic work that is proper inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 10
Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e is caused by: acts that exploit economically or a.
sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
acts that with or without the consent b.
of the victim among other practices prostitution, forced labor or slavery, similar services, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting tissue and/or organs or utilizing the body or capabilities of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or (1 (2 to anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government provides and organizes services for victims in the form of: facilitating the implementation of PPT for a.
victims by involving community elements; and encouraging community awareness of the b.
importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Government implements the provision and organization of services as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a in accordance with the minimum service standards that have been established.
(4) Further provisions regarding the minimum service standards as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 13
Every person who knows, sees, or hears the occurrence of domestic violence is obligated to make efforts according to their capacity to:
a. prevent the continuation of the criminal act;
b. provide protection to the victim;
c. provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. assist in the process of submitting a request for a protection order.

Article 14
(1) Prevention as intended in Article 14 paragraph (1):
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. Non-Governmental Organizations.

Second Part
Article 15
Region, educational institution; and Services

Article 16
victims regarding services are implemented with: safe and comfortable;
non-discriminatory;
easily accessible;
not subject to fees; and guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 17
(1) Forms of services for victims include:
a. consultation, complaint, and accompaniment services;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. legal services; and
e. social reintegration services.
(2) In addition to being carried out by the Government, services can be carried out by:
a. community;
b. family; and
c. volunteers.
(3) Implementation of services must be based on:
a. quick response;
b. empathy;
c. non-discrimination;
d. confidentiality;
e. accessibility;
f. professionalism; and
g. free of charge.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. counseling;
b. medical examination;
c. treatment;
d. medical rehabilitation;
e. issuance of medical evidence; and
f. referral to health services.
(5) Health services as referred to in paragraph (4) are carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to health services.

Article 21
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 17 letter d constitute accompanying services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims.
(2) The form of services as referred to in paragraph (1) is through the provision of safe houses and social support.
(3) Social support as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 22
Legal services as referred to in

Article 17 letter e to assist victims in
undergoing the judicial process by means of: providing legal consultation which includes a.
information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
accompanying victims at the investigation level, b.
prosecution, and examination in court hearings and assisting victims to comprehensively explain the violence experienced; and conducting coordination with fellow law c.
enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.
(1 (2 (1 (2 (3 (1 (2 18 skills training; a.
field work practice; and b.
apprenticeship. c.

Article 26
Economically productive groups and/or joint ventures as referred to in Article 24 letter b include: entrepreneurial skills training; a.
facilitation of the formation of group ventures
b.
joint; and assistance in the implementation of ventures.

Article 27
c.
Capital assistance as referred to in

Article 24 letter c includes:
assistance for work facilities and infrastructure; and  a.
facilitation of working capital assistance.  b.

Paragraph 2
Fulfillment of the Rights of Child Victims of Violence

Article 28
(1) The Government, Regional Government, and PPT are obligated to fulfill the rights of child victims of violence.
(2) The form of fulfillment of the rights of child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is the fulfillment of the basic rights of children according to their needs.

(1) PPT consists of several counseling fields.
(2) The implementation of counseling as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out in a networked manner with the prosecutor's office, police, courts, legal services if necessary, Health Office, Hospitals, ministry of religious affairs and religious leaders.
(3) The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of at least:
(1) counseling in the field of law
(2) counseling in the field of health with health companions
(3) counseling in the field of psychology with psychology companions and/or spiritual counseling with Religious Institutions

Article 32
Article 33
deemed to involve related parties.
Community Self-Reliance;
state, legal field;  a.
health field;  b.
spiritual field; and  c.
psychology field.  d.
as follows: in counseling a.
involve court advocacy institutions
b.
involve Regional General others;
c.
involve religion; and
d.
involve psychologists.
(2) In (2 (1 synchronize and coordinate a.
empowerment and services, prevention, for victims of violence against women and children;
maintain and develop FPKK in  b.
empowerment and services, prevention, victims of violence in a networked manner and referral system;
conduct education on non-discrimination values toward women and children;
c.
legislation regulations socialization conduct
d.
with related that invitations implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence;
present and compile, collect, e.
report data on victims of violence; and conduct monitoring and evaluation of  f.
implementation of protection of women and children victims of violence.

Third Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 36
(1) Forms of services provided by PPT to victims include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims, carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical services for the purpose of evidence in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in the context of recovery from the traumatic condition of victims;
g. right to handling of complaints;
h. right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
i. right to assistance.
(2) Children who become victims of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (1), also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. right to basic services;
c. right to receive spiritual guidance;
d. right to equal protection;
e. right to be free from various stigma; and/or
f. right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 38
(1) The community participates and plays a role in the implementation of protection for Victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing partner families at the village/kelurahan level;
b. establishing women and children protection units in community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and So that everyone may know of it, orders with REGIONAL PROTECTION REGULATION

GENERAL
I.
THE REGENT OF KULON PROGO,
constitutes women their dignity and natureViolencecausingwhich women inNumber in Regency59 cases (3cases (26 pcases (40 pcases (54 perIn ragainst womenavoid frtreatment humanitywomen Basic RegulationTherefore tguarantee pacts of violAct

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF DISTRICT REGULATION
District Regulation promulgation Official Gazette in its placement Kulon Progo Regency.
Enacted in Wates on the date of May 6, 2015 Seal/signature

HASTO WARDOYO
Promulgated in Wates on the date of 6 May 2015

# REGIONAL SECRETARY
KULON PROGO REGENCY,
Stamp/signature

ATTENTION
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KULON PROGO REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2015
KULON PROGO, SPECIAL REGION OF YOGYAKARTA
(NUMBER 7/2015)
Article 3
Sufficient

Article 4
Sufficient

Article 5
Sufficient

Article 6
Sufficient

Article 7
Self-explanatory

Article 8
Sufficient

Article 9
Sufficient

Article 10
Sufficient

Article 11
Self-explanatory

Article 12
Sufficient

Article 13
Self-explanatory

Article 14
Paragraph (1 Paragraph (2 Based on the considerations mentioned above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Kulon Progo Regency concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "respect for the rights of victims" is the guarantee of fulfillment to ensure that the basic rights of victims are met.
Letter b What is meant by "justice" and gender equality is a situation where women are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare;
What is meant by "gender equality" is the equality of opportunities, rights, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is that all actions taken by the Regional Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies concerning victims, so that the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter LemmyLetter C

Article 16
Sufficient

Article 17
Self-explanatory

Article 18
Letters of Credit

Article 19
Letter Letters Ypprilhmvi Letter Letter C Letter d What is meant by "violence prevention system" includes: mapping of locations or and violence occurrence of vulnerable areas preventive and promotive efforts to the community.
Letter e Socialization can be carried out through mass media, electronic media, and direct counseling to the community.
Letter f Critical education for women victims to build is an effort violence awareness of women about their rights.
critical education its implementation The purpose is can help decisions and not become victims of repeated violence. Forms victims women for critical education trainings of: consists violence equality and gender justice, education for reproductive health about understanding provision and women, field in legislation regulations protection of women and children.

Article 15
Letter a Prevention efforts can be carried out with the closest relatives and/or family in strengthening resilience within the household such as: the practice of religious values, managing household time, and communication between family members.
Letter b Prevention efforts in the community include: fostering environmental awareness towards acts of violence that occur in their environment.

Article 30
Self-explanatory

Article 31
Paragraph (1) has been deleted
Paragraph (2)

Article 32
Paragraph (1) Paragraph (2) H H H H Shelter for victims of violence. This service unit can be located at the Integrated Service Center (PPT) and Integrated Crisis Center (PKT) which are hospital-based, Center What is meant by "other service units" for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A), Unit integrated service functions for women and children Women and Children Service (UPPA), House is a unified unit that organizes Community Health Center, Integrated Service Center

(RPTC),
Trauma Protection Center Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Letter g Letter e Paragraph (1) Paragraph (2) Letter f

Article 20
Article 21
Article 22
Article 23
Article 24
Article 25
Article 26
Article 27
Article 28
Article 29
Paragraph (2

Article 37
Self-explanatory

Article 38
Self-explanatory

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Sufficiently clear



Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b What is meant by "medicolegal" is providing assistance for law enforcement and justice by utilizing medical science to provide optimal professional medical services.
Medicolegal services include, among others: visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum.
What is meant by "visum et repertum" is a written statement made by a doctor in forensic medical science at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of medical examination of the victim based on their expertise and under oath, for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
What is meant by "visum et psikiatrikum" is a statement given by a Psychiatrist regarding the mental health condition of the victim that is needed to clarify a case and for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Letter c Sufficiently clear