REGENT OF KLATEN
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KLATEN REGENCY
NUMBER 17 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF KLATEN,

Considering : a. that the fulfillment of constitutional rights and protection of human rights of women regarding empowerment and protection of women is one of the values contained in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution;
b. that women play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations, therefore requiring a sense of security, obtaining guarantees of protection from acts of violence and discrimination, and need to be empowered so that they can actualize their potential optimally;
c. that efforts for empowerment and protection of women in Klaten Regency require direction of regulation and legal certainty;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 Year 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Regions Within the Province of Central Java;
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
5. Law Number 20 Year 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
9. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
10. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5324);
11. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
12. Government Regulation Number 61 Year 2014 concerning Reproductive Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 169, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5559);
13. Regional Regulation of Klaten Regency Number 13 Year 2013 concerning Health Services (Regional Gazette of Klaten Regency Year 2013 Number 13, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Klaten Regency Number 99);
14. Regional Regulation of Klaten Regency Number 8 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Klaten Regency (Regional Gazette of Klaten Regency Year 2016 Number 8, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Klaten Regency Number 138);

With Mutual Approval
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KLATEN REGENCY
and

REGENT OF KLATEN
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Klaten Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Klaten.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Klaten Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion either directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
7. Assistance is any action in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of strengthening victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
8. Women's empowerment is any effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge and skills capabilities so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Protection of women is any effort aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, regional government, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Violence is any act unlawfully, with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or causes the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Regional cooperation is an agreement between a governor and a regent/mayor or between a regent/mayor and another regent/mayor, and or a governor, regent/mayor with a third party, which is made in writing and creates rights and obligations.
12. Community is religious institutions, business world/associations, non-governmental organizations, labor/worker unions, community organizations, teachers/educational institutions, mass media.
13. Formal education is an educational pathway that is structured and tiered consisting of basic education, secondary education, and higher education.
14. Non-formal Education is an educational pathway outside formal education that can be implemented in a structured and tiered manner.

Article 2
The Empowerment and Protection of Women aims to: a. increase the participation of women in the development process; b. improve the quality of life of women;
c. provide guarantees to women in the fulfillment of rights as human beings; and
d. provide a sense of security by increasing protection for women from various acts of violence.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 3
(1) Regional Government is responsible for efforts to empower women.
(2) Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so as to be able to play a role and participate in educational, health, employment, economic, social security as well as political and governmental activities in order to enjoy the results of development.

Second Part
Field of Education

Article 4
(1) Regional Government is responsible for the implementation of formal and nonformal education for women in the region.
(2) Nonformal education as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve the capabilities of women.
(3) Nonformal education as referred to in paragraph (1) includes women's empowerment education, skills education and job training.
(4) Formal and nonformal education as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by separate Regional Regulation.
(5) The implementation of nonformal education as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be under the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of women.

Third Part
Health Sector

Article 5
(1) Women have the right to obtain health services in undergoing reproductive life and sexual life that is healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. adolescent reproductive health services;
b. reproductive health services for women of childbearing age;
c. health services for the period before pregnancy, during pregnancy, childbirth and after childbirth; and
d. pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health services;
(3) Women have the right to obtain health services according to the life cycle of women.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (3) shall be implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Fourth Part
Employment Sector

Article 6
(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
(2) Employers who employ female workers are obligated to provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.
(3) Protection as referred to in paragraph (2) is: a. health protection/insurance;
b. health services at the workplace;
c. opportunity and facilities to express breast milk or breastfeed at the workplace at designated times;
d. obtain maternity leave for 3 (three) months after giving birth; and
e. obtain balanced nutrition for pregnant women.
(4) Employers who are unable to provide protection as referred to in paragraph (2) will be subject to administrative sanctions.
Further provisions regarding administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated in the Regent's Regulation.

Fifth Part
Economic Field

Article 7
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for advancing women's economic independence.
(2) Women's economic independence as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve the independence and economic living standards of women.
(3) Women's economic independence as referred to in paragraph (1) can be implemented through:
a. Provision of skills and job training;
b. Ease in obtaining employment;
c. Facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups; d. ease of business capital;
e. facilitation of marketing network development; and
f. Ease of access to information and technology.
(4) Further provisions regarding the implementation of women's economic independence as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Sixth Part
Social Security

Article 8
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for providing guidance facilities for women with social problems.
(2) The Regional Government provides the right to social security for women with social problems.
(3) The responsibility for providing guidance facilities for women with social problems is under the Regional Apparatus that administers affairs in the field of women.
(4) Further provisions regarding social security for women with social problems as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Seventh Part
Political and Governmental Sector

Article 9
(1) The Regional Government provides guarantees to women to have the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, Regional Head elections, Village Head elections and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) The Regional Government provides opportunities for women to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in government.
(3) The Regional Government and/or Political Parties are responsible for providing political education for women.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 10
The Regional Government is responsible for preventing acts of violence against women by means of:
a. Disseminating laws and regulations;
b. Providing counseling/guidance;
c. Providing education on the dangers of domestic violence;
d. Conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
e. Conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention; and
f. Increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms and social norms.

Article 11
(1) Women victims of acts of violence have the right to obtain protection and assistance.
(2) Further provisions regarding forms of assistance for women victims of violence are regulated in the Regent's Regulation.

Article 12
The implementation of protection of women as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1), can be carried out through efforts to:
a. provide and facilitate services for women victims of violence; b. Strengthen and develop service institutions for women victims of violence;
c. implement coordination of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women among Regional Apparatus;
d. compile a data system for the protection of women; and e. conduct regional cooperation in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 13
(1) To make effective and guarantee the implementation of protection as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1), the Regional Government establishes institutions for the protection of women and children as follows: a. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) at the Regional level;
b. Integrated Service Center (PPT) at the Sub-district Level; and
c. Task Force for the Protection of Women and Children at the Village/Sub-district Level.
(2) The institutions for the protection of women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations and researchers/academics.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of institutions for the protection of women and children shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 14
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be realized through actions of providing information and/or reporting violence against women to law enforcement or the authorities, or participating in handling acts of violence against women.

CHAPTER V
FUNDING
Article 15
Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women in the Region is sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. Other legitimate and non-binding sources of funds.

CHAPTER VI
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 16
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to identify developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically starting from planning up to policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection for the current year.
(4) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(5) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.

CHAPTER VII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 17
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all regulations or provisions regarding the empowerment and protection of women must be adjusted to conform with the provisions of this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 19
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Klaten Regency.
Certifying the Copy/Photocopy In Accordance with the Original
o.b.o THE REGENT OF KLATEN

REGIONAL SECRETARY
on behalf of

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
Luciana Rina Damayanti, SIP, MM Pembina Tk. I

NIP. 19710724 199003 2 001
Promulgated in Klaten on the date of 17 September 2018 Enacted in Klaten on the date of 17 September 2018

REGENT OF KLATEN,
SRI MULYANI
REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KLATEN REGENCY,
JAKA SAWALDI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KLATEN REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 17 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KLATEN REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE: (17/2018)

ELUCIDATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KLATEN REGENCY
NUMBER 17 OF 2018
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL
Humans as beings and development resources constitute an inseparable unity. Development efforts are directed for the benefit of the entire population without distinguishing a particular gender. This is as regulated in Article 27 paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution, which explains the recognition of the principle of equality for all citizens without exception. This principle of equality eliminates discrimination, therefore every citizen has equal rights before the law and government regardless of religion, ethnicity, gender, position, and class.

By following the principle of equal rights in all fields, both men and women have equal rights or opportunities to participate in every aspect of social and state life. The struggle to achieve equality and justice that has been carried out since long ago, has apparently not been able to elevate the dignity and worth of women to be equal with men. The existence of Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and protection of women, provides responsibility to the Regional Government starting from prevention of acts of violence to handling victims of acts of violence. In its implementation, the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments and the community.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Paragraph 1 Sufficiently Clear Paragraph 2 Sufficiently Clear Paragraph 3 Sufficiently Clear Paragraph 4 What is meant by promotive approach is an activity and/or series of activities of health services that prioritize activities that are promotional in nature for health.
What is meant by preventive approach is an activity of prevention against a health problem/disease.
What is meant by curative approach is an activity and/or series of treatment activities aimed at curing disease, reducing suffering due to disease, controlling disease, or controlling disability so that the quality of the patient can be maintained as optimally as possible.
What is meant by rehabilitative approach is an activity and/or series of activities to return former patients to society so that they can function again as useful members of society for themselves and society as maximally as possible according to their capabilities.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1) What is meant by women with social welfare problems are those who meet the criteria:
a. Poverty
b. Neglect
c. Disability
d. Remoteness
e. Social dysfunction and behavioral deviation
f. Victims of disaster and/or
g. Victims of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KLATEN REGENCY NUMBER 18