COPY
REGENT OF KEBUMEN
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KEBUMEN REGENCY NUMBER 01 YEAR 2025
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION AND EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF KEBUMEN,

Considering : a. that women are citizens who have human rights that must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or seized by anyone, thus requiring guaranteed protection from acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination and need to be empowered so they can actualize their potential optimally;

b. that in society there are still many women who experience violence, discrimination, and injustice and often face major obstacles in accessing adequate education, health, and social protection services which have a negative impact on their welfare and self-development;

c. that in the context of protection and means of self-actualization for women in society in Kebumen Regency, regulation is needed regarding the protection and empowerment of women;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection and Empowerment of Women;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 42);

3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);

4. Law Number 11 of 2023 concerning Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6867);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KEBUMEN REGENCY and

REGENT OF KEBUMEN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION AND EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Kebumen Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Kebumen.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Kebumen Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in government affairs that are the authority of the region.
6. Implementation is the execution of a matter carried out to achieve a goal.
7. Woman is a person of female sex starting from infants, adolescents, adults up to the elderly, who has been recognized by law.
8. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting and providing a sense of security to women as well as the fulfillment of their rights through consistent, structured, and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
9. Empowerment of Women is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that women can regulate themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and actively participate in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
10. Discrimination against Women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
11. Gender Equality is an equal condition and position between men and women to obtain their rights as human beings, in accessing and controlling resources, participating in all development processes and decision-making, as well as obtaining benefits from development.
12. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, mentally, psychologically, including intimidation, forced eviction, threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, neglect as well as hindering the ability to enjoy all rights and freedoms.
13. Violence Against Women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, and psychologically, including threats of certain actions, arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the private or public sphere.
14. Economic Violence is a form of violence in which the perpetrator controls, manipulates, or limits the victim's access to economic resources with the aim of controlling and dominating the victim, including acts of: taking full control over the victim's income, including salary, savings, or other financial assistance received by the victim, limiting or prohibiting the victim from having or using money, so that the victim is completely dependent on the perpetrator for financial needs, prohibiting or preventing the victim from working or continuing education with the aim of limiting the victim's financial independence, using the victim's assets or property for personal gain or damaging such assets as a form of punishment, and making all financial decisions without involving the victim, so that the victim has no control over household finances.
15. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
16. Psychological Violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.
17. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of rape, indecent acts, forced contraception, forced sterilization, sexual torture, sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, electronic-based sexual violence, acts violating decency that are contrary to the victim's will, forced prostitution, criminal acts of trafficking in persons intended for sexual exploitation and other forms of sexual violence that are expressly stated as criminal acts of sexual violence as regulated in the provisions of laws and regulations.
18. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and their children, or mother and their children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
19. Household is husband, wife, children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, foster care, and guardianship representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
20. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
21. Women's Rights is a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly committed by state apparatus or by the state or by regional government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by God Almighty.
22. Prevention is all efforts to prevent acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women and the recurrence of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against victims.
23. Services is all efforts and actions to fulfill the rights of women victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women which include complaint services, health, social rehabilitation, legal assistance and enforcement, repatriation, social reintegration, and restitution.
24. Victim Recovery is all efforts and actions to strengthen the capacity of women victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination physically, psychologically, legally, socially, politically and economically so as to obtain a dignified and prosperous life.
25. Integrated Services is the implementation of integrated, multi-aspect, cross-functional and cross-sectoral services for victims, victim citizens, and/or witnesses of criminal acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination.
26. Complaint is a series of reporting actions carried out by victims and/or companions to the Integrated Service Center organizers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against victims of violence.
27. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims of violence from the health disorders they suffer.
28. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring the psychological condition and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
29. Legal Assistance is legal services provided by companions, law enforcement officers which include providing legal consultation, exercising power, representing, accompanying, defending and taking other legal actions for victims of violence.
30. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the receiving area/area where violence occurred to the area of origin or family.
31. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims of violence with family, community, institutions or other social environments that can provide protection.
32. Exploitation is an act with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
33. Discrimination as referred to is any restriction, harassment, or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields, and other aspects of life.
34. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an operational technical implementation unit in a work unit that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, which functions as an organizer of integrated services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, and other problems.
35. Village/Sub-District Women and Children Protection Group hereinafter abbreviated as KPPAD/KPPAK is a community-based women and children protection institution that is domiciled and carries out women and children protection work in the village/sub-district area according to their place of residence.

Article 2
The Implementation of Protection and Empowerment of Women is based on:
a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. gender justice and gender equality, and
d. benefit.

Article 3
(1) The Implementation of Protection and Empowerment of Women is intended to realize protection for women from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination as well as to increase the capacity and welfare of Women in various aspects of life.
(2) The implementation of protection and empowerment of women aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence, exploitation, and discrimination against women;
b. provide services and recovery for victims; c. fulfill the special needs of women; and
d. improve the quality of life of women.
(3) The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. women's rights;
b. efforts to protect women;
c. empowerment of women;
d. obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government; e. institutions;
f. coordination and cooperation;
g. participation;
h. monitoring, evaluation, and reporting;
i. awards; and
j. funding.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
Fundamental Rights of Women

Article 4
(1) Every person, both women and men, has the right and responsibility to create an environment that supports gender equality and Women's Empowerment in various aspects of life including the right for every mother.
(2) Every woman has the right:
a. to life;
b. to form a family and continue descendants;
c. to self-development;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.
(3) The right to life as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. the right to maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. the right to obtain tranquility, security, peace, happiness, physical and spiritual welfare; and
c. the right to a good and healthy living environment.
(4) The right to form a family and continue descendants as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b is the right to form a family and continue descendants through legal marriage in accordance with religion and the provisions of laws and regulations.
(5) The right to self-development as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c includes:
a. the right of women to basic needs to grow and develop properly;
b. the right to protection for personal development, to obtain education, educate oneself and improve quality of life in order to become a human being who is faithful, pious, responsible, of noble character, happy, and prosperous in accordance with human rights;
c. the right to develop and obtain benefits from science and technology, arts and culture in accordance with human dignity for the welfare of oneself, the nation, and humanity;
d. the right to communicate and obtain information necessary to develop oneself and one's social environment in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
e. the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available means in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
f. the right to fight for the right to self-development, both personally and collectively, to build society, nation, and state in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
g. the right to perform social work in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
h. the right to participate in the planning and implementation of government policies in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
i. the right to organize and form organizations in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
j. the right to organize education and teaching in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms.
(6) The right to obtain justice as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d includes:
a. the right to receive equal treatment without discrimination;
b. the right to obtain justice;
c. the right to submit applications, complaints, and lawsuits, whether in criminal, civil, or administrative cases; and
d. the right to be tried through a free and impartial judicial process, in accordance with procedural law that guarantees objective examination by honest and fair judges to obtain a just and correct decision.
(7) The right to personal freedom as referred to in paragraph (2) letter e includes:
a. the right not to be enslaved or subjugated, trafficked, and all acts with similar purposes;
b. the right to personal integrity, both spiritual and physical;
c. the right not to be the object of research without her consent; and
d. the right to freely express and convey opinions with due regard to religious values, morality, public order, public interest, and national integrity.
(8) The right to security as referred to in paragraph (2) letter f includes:
a. the right to protection of oneself, family, honor, dignity, and property rights;
b. the right to recognition before the law as a human person; and
c. the right to be free from threats to do or not do something that violates religious, social, and legal norms.
(9) The right to welfare as referred to in paragraph (2) letter g includes:
a. the right to have welfare, either alone or together; and
b. the right to perform work and receive fair wages in accordance with one's work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(10) The right to participate in government as referred to in paragraph (2) letter h includes:
a. the right to be elected and to vote in general elections, regional head elections, and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to applicable laws and regulations;
b. the right to pursue a career in government; and
c. the right to convey aspirations directly or through intermediaries in government.

Second Part
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 5
(1) Every woman, including persons with disabilities and members of other social inclusion groups, has the right to obtain protection and empowerment in various aspects of life to ensure equality and social justice.
(2) The rights as referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. accessing inclusive education at all units, paths, types, and levels of education without discrimination, with the support of inclusive facilities and infrastructure; b. obtaining decent work and livelihood in accordance with their capacity, skills, and special needs, as well as a supportive work environment; c. obtaining equal treatment to play an active role in development and enjoy the results of development fairly;
d. obtaining accessibility in various fields of life, including infrastructure, technology, transportation, public services, and information, in order to increase independence and social participation;
e. obtaining equal treatment before the law, including legal protection that is sensitive to the needs of vulnerable groups;
f. obtaining rehabilitation services, social assistance, and other support to improve welfare and social independence; and
g. having equal opportunities in developing talents, abilities, and social life without structural or cultural barriers.
(3) The Government, society, and the business sector are obliged to play an active role in realizing equality for women with disabilities and other social inclusion groups by providing inclusive and sustainable policies, programs, and services.

Third Part
Rights and Forms of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination

Article 6
(1) Every Female victim of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination has:
a. the right to handling;
b. the right to protection; and
c. the right to recovery.
(2) The right to handling as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes:
a. the right to information regarding all processes and results of Handling, Protection, and Recovery;
b. the right to obtain documents of handling results;
c. the right to legal services;
d. the right to psychological strengthening;
e. the right to health services including examination, treatment, and medical care;
f. the right to services and facilities in accordance with the special needs of victims; and
g. the right to deletion of sexual content for cases of sexual violence using electronic media.
(3) The right to protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b includes:
a. provision of information regarding rights and facilitation of protection;
b. provision of access to information on the implementation of protection;
c. protection from threats or violence by perpetrators and other parties as well as recurring violence;
d. protection of identity confidentiality;
e. protection from attitudes and behavior of law enforcement officers that demean victims;
f. protection from loss of employment, job transfer, education, or political access; and
g. protection of victims and/or reporters from criminal prosecution or civil lawsuits for criminal acts of sexual violence that have been reported;
(4) The right to recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. medical rehabilitation;
b. mental and social rehabilitation;
c. social empowerment;
d. restitution and/or compensation;
e. social reintegration; and
f. obtaining skills training for economic improvement for vulnerable women.

Article 7
(1) Forms of violence as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (1) include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence; and
d. Economic violence.
(2) Forms of exploitation as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (1) include:
a. utilizing female labor by providing inadequate wages, forcing excessive working hours, or not providing safe and healthy working conditions;
b. utilizing women for sexual purposes, by coercion, deception or pressure, including human trafficking for the purpose of prostitution or pornography production; and
c. utilizing women unfairly in economic transactions, such as providing loans with very high interest rates or manipulating the market for personal gain.
(3) Forms of discrimination referred to in Article 6 paragraph (1) include:
a. deprivation of a person's life;
b. persecution;
c. rape;
d. indecent acts;
e. theft with violence; and
f. or deprivation of liberty

CHAPTER III
EFFORTS FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 8
The implementation of protection of women includes efforts to:
a. prevent violence, exploitation, and discrimination;
b. provide services to victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination;
c. fulfill the special needs of women; and
d. improve the quality of families.

Part Two
Prevention of Violence, Exploitation and Discrimination Article 9 (1) The Regional Government undertakes integrated efforts to prevent violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in the Region.
(2) The prevention of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women is intended to create a safe environment for women and to reduce the vulnerability to violence, exploitation and discrimination of vulnerable women groups.
(3) Vulnerable women groups as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. women in disaster and social conflict situations; b. women with disabilities;
c. women with Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS); d. women migrant workers;
e. girls;
f. women heads of household;
g. domestic women workers;
h. home-based women workers;
i. elderly women;
j. informal women workers;
k. women in situations of intolerance; and
l. other vulnerable women groups.
(4) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by means including:
a. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of prevention of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination based on partnership patterns;
b. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women's rights.
c. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system for the prevention of violence, exploitation and discrimination;
d. providing ease of access to obtain civil rights, education, health, employment, training and funding, welfare improvement and services;
e. developing communication media, information, education, and public campaigns through media;
f. developing educational materials and curriculum; g. developing safe transportation systems and public spaces;
h. building early detection systems, security and integrated complaint services in industrial areas, companies, residential environments, educational environments, Islamic boarding schools and other public spaces;
i. providing consultation services for families, prospective brides and grooms, students, Islamic students, youth, university students and vulnerable groups;
j. encouraging behavioral change of parents and society;
k. developing policies related to regencies, sub-districts, schools, Islamic boarding schools, and universities that are safe and friendly for women and integrated with regional spatial planning policies;
l. forming and developing cadres, communities, and groups from among youth, students, Islamic students, university students, journalists, social media, educators, and religious leaders for prevention;
m. conducting education and advocacy to owners, managers and/or users of social media;
n. developing protection systems and special support for vulnerable women groups;
o. conducting awareness-raising for perpetrators;
p. increasing the capacity of Regional Apparatus, government agencies, educational institutions, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, media, religious leaders, community leaders and communities; and
q. forming cooperation networks in prevention efforts from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination with law enforcement officers, government agencies, Regional Apparatus, community institutions, educational institutions, community leaders, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, and media.
(5) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (4) may involve Regional Apparatus, agencies, community institutions, educational institutions, community leaders, family learning centers, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions, business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, and media.
(6) Further provisions regarding efforts to prevent violence, exploitation, and discrimination as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 10
Prevention of violence, exploitation, and discrimination against women shall be implemented in an integrated and coordinated manner, coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Three
Services for Victims of Violence, Exploitation, and Discrimination Article 11 (1) Services are implemented to fulfill the rights of women victims carried out with the following principles: a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. confidentiality;
d. empathy;
e. inclusion;
f. empowerment;
g. victim-based decisions;
h. honesty;
i. professionalism;
j. integration; and
k. sustainability.
(2) The provision of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by UPTD PPA.
(3) In the provision of services as referred to in paragraph (1), UPTD PPA may cooperate with: a. community health centers, hospitals, and other health service facilities;
b. technical implementing units that handle affairs in the social sector;
c. detention centers, correctional institutions, and correctional centers;
d. police;
e. prosecutor's office;
f. courts;
g. technical implementing units of agencies that administer the protection of migrant workers;
h. provincial regional offices of ministries that administer government affairs in the field of religion; i. regional offices and technical implementing units of ministries that administer government affairs in the field of law and human rights;
j. social welfare organizing institutions;
k. community-based service provider institutions; l. universities;
m. mass media;
n. religious organizations; and
o. other institutions.

Article 12
(1) Forms of services for victims of violence, exploitation, and discrimination include:
a. receiving reports and outreach to Victims;
b. providing information about the Rights of Victims;
c. facilitating the provision of health services;
d. facilitating the provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitating the provision of psychosocial services, social rehabilitation, and social reintegration;
f. providing legal services;
g. identifying economic empowerment needs;
h. identifying temporary shelter needs for Victims and Families of Victims that need to be immediately fulfilled;
i. facilitating the needs of Victims with Disabilities;
j. coordinating and cooperating on the fulfillment of the Rights of Victims with other institutions; and
k. monitoring the fulfillment of the Rights of Victims by law enforcement officials during the judicial process.
(2) The implementation of forms of services for victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Fourth Part
Fulfillment of Special Needs of Women

Article 13
(1) The fulfillment of special needs of women is related to the protection of women from all matters that may threaten the safety and/or health of women's reproductive organs.
(2) The fulfillment of special needs as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. health services, particularly family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth, post-childbirth, breastfeeding and menstruation;
b. fulfillment of the right to obtain paid leave including maternity leave; and
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure for women.

Part Five
Improvement of Family Quality

Article 14
(1) The implementation of family quality improvement aims to: a. integrate policies, programs, and development activities whose targets are directed toward family quality improvement;
b. strengthen and develop institutions providing family quality improvement services; and
c. provide standardized family quality improvement services.
(2) Provisions regarding family quality improvement shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 15
(1) Women's empowerment is carried out in an effort to improve the quality of life of women.
(2) In order to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. respecting and guaranteeing the rights of women without discrimination in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. implementing gender mainstreaming in the Region; c. enhancing women's empowerment in terms of role, quality, and capacity in the fields of:
1. health;
2. education;
3. economy;
4. law;
5. employment;
6. politics;
7. government;
8. social affairs;
9. culture; and
10. environment.

Part Two
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Health Sector Article 16 (1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the health sector as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 1 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the health sector.
(2) The form of empowerment in the health sector as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of health services that are healthy, safe, and free from coercion and/or violence, including for persons with disabilities, the elderly, and women with psychological problems.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) shall include:
a. health services according to life cycle starting from health services for women during infancy and childhood, adolescence, adulthood and old age;
b. maternal health services starting from pre-pregnancy period, pregnancy period, childbirth and postpartum period;
c. contraceptive and sexual health services;
d. reproductive health services;
e. health services in family planning; f. nutrition services;
g. dental and oral health services;
h. vision and hearing health services; i. mental health services;
j. communicable disease control services and non-communicable disease control services;
k. family health services;
l. school health services;
m. occupational health services;
n. sports health services;
o. environmental health services;
p. dimensional health services;
q. health services in disasters;
r. blood services;
s. organ and/or body tissue transplantation services, cell-based and/or stem cell therapy, as well as reconstructive and aesthetic plastic surgery;
t. traditional health services;
u. other health services;
v. services and provision of adequate lactation rooms at every Regional Government institution, public facilities and industries; and
w. health services provided by taking into account the special needs of persons with disabilities, the elderly, and women with psychological problems to ensure accessibility and equal quality of services.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented through promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative approaches.

Part Three
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Education Article 17 (1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of education as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 2 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of education in the form of organizing formal and non-formal education.
(2) Non-formal education as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to improve women's capabilities.

Part Four
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Economic Field Article 18 The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 3 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs in the field of micro, small and medium enterprises and related agencies in the form of:
a. facilitation of the establishment and strengthening of productive economic business groups; and
b. facilitation of the development of marketing networks.

Part Five
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Law Article 19 The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 4 shall be carried out by the work unit responsible for law in the form of:
a. enhancement of awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information, and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.

Sixth Part
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Employment Article 20 The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of employment as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 5 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of labor and related agencies in the form of:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment; and
c. employers who employ female workers, provide access and skills training.

Seventh Part
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Politics and Government

Article 21
(1) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of politics and governance as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 6 and number 7 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of national unity and politics, Regional Apparatus and related agencies in the form of:
a. capacity development of women in the field of politics;
b. self-development through organizations for association, assembly, and expression of opinion;
c. involvement of women in public decision-making;
d. provision of access for women to hold public office; and
e. participation in general elections, regional head elections and other political positions in the Region.
(2) Regional Government and/or political parties shall be responsible for providing political education for women.

Eighth Part
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Social Field Article 22 The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the social field as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 8 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the social field and related agencies in the form of:
a. awareness efforts and self-capacity enhancement in the social field;
b. provision and development of access for women to participate in the social field;
c. enhancement of women's competence through training and social education for women;
d. involvement of women in social activities; and e. developing and fostering forums or women's institutions in the social field.

Ninth Section
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Culture
Article 23 The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of culture as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 9 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of culture and related agencies in the form of:
a. awareness efforts and self-capacity building in the field of culture;
b. provision and development of access for women to participate in the field of culture;
c. enhancement of women's competence through training and cultural literacy education for women;
d. involvement of women in cultural activities; and
e. fostering and developing forums or institutions for women in the field of culture.

Tenth Part
Enhancement of Women's Empowerment in the Field of Environment

Article 24
The Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of environment as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (2) letter c number 10 shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of environment and related agencies in the form of:
a. awareness raising and formation of environmentally conscious behavior of women;
b. capacity building and competency enhancement of women through environmental training and education;
c. provision and development of access for women to participate in the field of environment;
d. involvement of women in environmental activities; and
e. fostering and developing forums or institutions for women in the field of environment.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 25 The obligations of Regional Government in the implementation of protection and empowerment of women are as follows:
a. guarantee the implementation of fulfillment of women's rights and provision of assurance of safety from acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in the Region;
b. establish policies, programs, activities for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women as well as guarantees for handling victims to eliminate all forms of acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination against women in the Region; and
c. provide guidance and supervision in efforts to implement protection and empowerment of women carried out by Regional Apparatus that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment.

Article 26
Regional Government is responsible for:
a. implementing policies, programs, activities for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women in order to realize the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. facilitating facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women; and
c. applying service standards for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
General

Article 27
In the context of implementing the protection and empowerment of women, the Regional Government establishes:
a. UPTD PPA;
b. Women and Children Protection Forum;
c. Village/Sub-district Women and Children Protection Group; and
d. Other women protection and empowerment institutions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Two
UPTD PPA
Article 28
(1) The Regional Government in an effort to provide and implement handling of protection services for women victims of violence, exploitation and acts of violence establishes UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is under and responsible to the head of the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties and functions as well as management of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Forum for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 29
(1) Regional Government conducts coordination in handling protection services for women victims of violence, exploitation, and discrimination at the sub-district level by establishing a women and children protection forum.
(2) The membership of the women and children protection forum as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements from the Sub-district, Sector Police, Military District Command, Community Health Center, Office of Religious Affairs and other elements.

Part Four
Village/Sub-District Women and Children Protection Group Article 30 (1) The Regional Government in its efforts to provide and implement protection services for women victims of violence, exploitation and discrimination shall establish KPPAD/KPPAK.
(2) KPPAD/KPPAK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be under and responsible to the Regional Apparatus implementing governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection through the Village Head/Sub-District Head with the knowledge of the local Sub-District Head.
(3) KPPAD/KPPAK as referred to in paragraph (2) shall have the duties to:
a. conduct advocacy, mediation, socialization, and facilitation regarding the need for fulfillment of women's and children's rights, as well as the right of women's and children's participation in development;
b. collect data and information related to the protection of women and children;
c. receive complaints from the community;
d. conduct cooperation and coordination in implementing the fulfillment of women's and children's rights in accordance with applicable laws and regulations; and
e. make referrals in cases that cannot be resolved by KPPAD/KPPAK to UPTD PPA. (4) Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties and functions as well as management of KPPAD/KPPAK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Part One
Coordination

Article 31
In the context of implementing the protection and empowerment of women, the Regional Government carries out coordination with the central government, provincial government, other regency/city governments, related agencies, law enforcement institutions, service institutions, educational institutions, religious institutions, community social institutions, Islamic boarding schools, professional organizations, legal aid organizations, youth organizations, broadcasting supervisory institutions, media, communities, professional institutions, business sector and other stakeholders.

Part Two
Cooperation

Article 32
(1) In the context of implementing the protection and empowerment of women, Regional Governments may conduct cooperation.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
PARTICIPATION
Article 33
(1) Every person and/or legal entity may participate in the implementation of protection and empowerment of women in the Region.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, law enforcement institutions, service institutions, religious institutions, Islamic boarding schools, professional organizations, legal aid organizations, youth organizations, broadcasting supervisory institutions, media, communities, professional institutions, business entities and other related stakeholders.
(3) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of: a. providing information or reporting to the competent authority if aware of acts of violence, exploitation and discrimination against women;
b. taking preventive action against violence against women; and
c. conducting skills training.

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND REPORTING
Part One
Monitoring

Article 34
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the administration of protection and empowerment of women, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to identify developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the administration of protection and empowerment of women in the Region.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted periodically starting from planning up to policies, programs and activities for the administration of protection and empowerment of women for the current year.

Second Part
Evaluation

Article 35
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection and empowerment of women shall be conducted by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment on a regular basis.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the administration of protection and empowerment of women shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities.

Third Part
Reporting

Article 36
(1) To improve coordination of service delivery to women in the Region, the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment shall submit a report to the Regent.
(2) The reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the administration of handling issues related to the protection and empowerment of women in the Region.

CHAPTER X
AWARDS
Article 37
(1) The Regent grants awards to individuals, educational institutions, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions and business entities, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, and media that have rendered meritorious service in efforts to implement the protection and empowerment of women;
(2) Further provisions regarding procedures for granting awards shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING
Article 38
Funding for the implementation of protection and empowerment of women in the Region is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 39
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 40
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Kebumen Regency.
Enacted in Kebumen on the date of 27 May 2025

HEAD OF THE REGIONAL EMPLOYMENT AGENCY OF KEBUMEN REGENCY,

ttd.

YAZID MAHFUDZ

REGENT OF KEBUMEN,
ttd.

LILIS NURYANI
Promulgated in Kebumen on the date of 27 May 2025

REGIONAL SECRETARY
KEBUMEN REGENCY
signed.

EDI RIANTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KEBUMEN REGENCY YEAR 2025 NUMBER 01 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KEBUMEN REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE : (1-35/2025) Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF KEBUMEN REGENCY,
signed.

AKHMAD HARUN, S.H.
Supervisor Level I

NIP 19690809 199803 1 006
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KEBUMEN REGENCY
NUMBER 01 OF 2025
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION AND EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
Women are an inseparable part of citizens who have human rights that must be protected and fulfilled without exception. However, various problems such as violence, exploitation, and discrimination are still frequently experienced by women in Kebumen Regency. In addition, access to education services, health, employment, as well as participation in development is still limited, which causes gender inequality and impacts the low quality of life of women. This Regional Regulation is formulated as a manifestation of the Regional Government's responsibility in providing guarantees for the protection of women's rights and creating a system that is fair, inclusive, and pro-vulnerable groups. This Regional Regulation aims to prevent acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination against women, provide services and recovery for victims, fulfill the special needs of women, as well as improve the welfare and quality of life of women comprehensively and sustainably.
It is expected that through this Regional Regulation it can become a comprehensive legal foundation to strengthen protection efforts as well as encourage the empowerment of women so that they are capable and independent in all aspects of life.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by respect for human rights is respect, upholding the inherent human rights of citizens, as well as protecting dignity and worth as human beings.
Letter b What is meant by non-discrimination is protection for all women without distinguishing tribe, religion, belief, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, political choice, legal status and physical or mental condition. Special treatment or actions toward vulnerable women's groups with the aim that they obtain equality of rights is not included as an act of discrimination.
Letter c What is meant by gender justice is fair treatment given to women as well as men.
What is meant by gender equality is a condition and position that describes equal, harmonious and balanced relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development as well as enjoying the results of development in family life, as well as in society, nationhood and statehood.
Letter d What is meant by benefit is the implementation of women's protection that provides benefits to women in the form of welfare, equality and justice, security and avoidance of all forms of violence, exploitation and discrimination.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Verse (1) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (2) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (3) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (4) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.
Letter l What is meant by social media influencer is a person or group who has the ability to influence society widely through social media (youtube, instagram, facebook, twitter, web, and vlog as well as other social media) including bloggers, youtubers, vloggers, celebrities to experts who generally have a large number of followers.
Letter m Sufficiently clear.
Letter n What is meant by special support includes provision of clothing needs, food, sanitation facilities, mobility support, communication support, special service assistance and other infrastructure facilities to prevent violence, exploitation and discrimination against women in vulnerable situations.
Letter o Sufficiently clear.
Letter p Sufficiently clear.
Letter q Sufficiently clear.
Verse (5) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (6) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by respect for human rights is the right not to be prosecuted on the basis of retroactive law can be excluded in gross violations of human rights classified as crimes against humanity.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by inclusion is the implementation of protection of women carried out by inviting and involving all people with various diversities of abilities, backgrounds, characteristics, status, conditions, ethnicity, culture and others as well as facilitating special needs based on such diversity and eliminating barriers that may hinder the equality of every woman in obtaining her rights Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g What is meant by victim-based decision is decision-making on services provided must be based on consent/confirmation with the victim.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j What is meant by integration is services to women victims carried out by various elements or components that integrate with each other or cooperate harmoniously and synergistically to achieve certain objectives in accordance with the needs of victims.
Letter k What is meant by sustainability is services to women victims carried out thoroughly and completely in accordance with the needs of victims and having interconnection between one form of service and other forms of service.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Verse (1) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (2) Sufficiently clear.
Verse (3) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by nutrition services includes the provision of blood-supplementing tablets to adolescent girls, women of childbearing age and pregnant women.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.
Letter l Sufficiently clear.
Letter m Sufficiently clear.
Letter n Sufficiently clear.
Letter o Sufficiently clear.
Letter p Sufficiently clear.
Letter q Sufficiently clear.
Letter r Sufficiently clear.
Letter s Sufficiently clear.
Letter t Sufficiently clear.
Letter u Sufficiently clear.
Letter v Sufficiently clear.
Letter w Sufficiently clear.
Verse (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field, which may include State-Owned Enterprises, Regional-Owned Enterprises, micro, small and medium enterprise associations, as well as universities and/or training institutions.

Article 19
What is meant by work units in the field of law are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law including the Legal Division of the Regional Secretariat, law enforcement apparatus, police, state prosecutor's office, district court, religious court, and legal aid institutions, which may coordinate with universities, non-governmental organizations and the national commission on women.

Article 20
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the field of employment, which may include Regional Apparatus that administer government affairs in the field of employment, Job Training Centers, cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises, State-Owned Enterprises, Regional-Owned Enterprises, women's organizations, Employment Social Security Administering Bodies and Health Social Security Administering Bodies, as well as other agencies that have a role in efforts to implement women's empowerment in the field of employment.

Article 21
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the field of national unity and politics, as well as other agencies and institutions including the General Election Commission, the Election Supervisory Board, political organizations, and communities organized in political parties, non-governmental organizations, women's associations or organizations, universities or research institutions, as well as mass media.

Article 22
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the social field, which may include women and children protection institutions, legal aid organizations and assistance for victims of violence, safe houses (shelters) that handle victims of gender-based violence, psychology practitioners and counselors, universities/educational institutions, community organizations, Family Welfare Empowerment, gender study centers at universities, family counseling consultation institutions, religious organizations that have women's empowerment programs, social rehabilitation centers.

Article 23
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the field of arts and culture, which may include universities/academic institutions, non-governmental organizations, youth organizations and local cultural organizations.

Article 24
What is meant by related agencies are agencies that have a role in the implementation of women's empowerment in the field of environment, among others, which may include universities/academic institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations concerned with the environment.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by other women's protection and empowerment institutions are institutions or organizations that provide services, counseling, consultation, provision or dissemination of information, outreach and empowerment for families proportionally including referring targets to other service institutions needed by families whose establishment is in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by other elements are related Regional Government agencies or work units, community social institutions and/or women's organizations, community leaders, religious leaders, representatives of disability groups as well as parties who have interests therein.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "periodically" is the time to conduct monitoring and evaluation at least once every 3 (three) months or at any time if necessary.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KEBUMEN REGENCY NUMBER 222