REGENT OF SAMPANG
PROVINCE OF EAST JAVA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMPANG REGENCY NUMBER 7 OF 2017
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF SAMPANG,

Considering : a. that every citizen has equal rights to live a dignified life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality, and justice;
b. that women's empowerment is carried out so that women can actualize their potential optimally to participate in development in accordance with their capacity;
c. that women who constitute a vulnerable group need to receive special protection so that they do not experience violence and can live a decent life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality and justice;
d. that with the enactment of Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 Concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, the regional government needs to improve the quality of life of women and protect children.
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

- 2 - In View of :1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 concerning the Amendment of the Territorial Boundaries of Surabaya Municipality and Surabaya Level II Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
5. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
6. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
7. Presidential Regulation Number 87 of 2014 concerning Implementing Regulations of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 199);

- 3 -
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
11. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
12. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SAMPANG REGENCY and

REGENT OF SAMPANG
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Sampang Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the Regional Government and DPRD according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the broadest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
3. Regent is the Regent of Sampang.
4. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Sampang Regency.
- 4 -
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regional Head and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of Governmental Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. The Office of Family Planning for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter referred to as DKBP3A, is a Regional Apparatus Organization that has the main duties and functions in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in Sampang Regency.
7. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including a child still in the womb.
8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination;
9. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights, so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination;
10. Violence is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
11. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
12. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, mentally, socially, psychosocially, and sexually.
13. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
14. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
- 5 -
15. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
16. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment, or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
17. Victim is a woman including Female Workers who work abroad and children who experience misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of such violence.
18. Women's Empowerment is any effort to improve physical, mental, spiritual, social, knowledge, and skills capacity so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
19. Gender equality and justice is equal opportunity between men and women to participate in the development process, equal access to all forms of services, and have balanced social and economic status.
20. Integrated service is a series of activities to provide protection for victims of violence including criminal acts of human trafficking carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation of health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance;
21. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A, is an integrated service institution for victims of violence against women and children;
22. Protection of women is any act aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will, is, or has occurred.
23. The system of women's empowerment and child protection is the entire process of implementing women's empowerment and child protection carried out comprehensively, inclusively, integratively starting from the stage of report/complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance up to - 6 - repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of crime and violence to their social environment;
24. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
25. Legal act is any act or action of a legal subject that has legal consequences and such legal consequences are indeed desired by the legal subject.
26. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is, or has occurred;
27. Companion is a person who has expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
28. Social worker is a person who has expertise to listen empathetically and explore problems to provide counseling in efforts to strengthen the victim's psychology.
29. Medicolegal is an effort to collect evidence for the purposes of proof in the judicial process.
30. Women's Crisis Center is a service center for women and children victims of violence.
31. Safe House is a temporary residence for victims, in order to obtain a sense of security and not be reached by the perpetrator or the perpetrator's messenger, while their case has not been resolved.
32. Standard Operational Procedure, hereinafter referred to as SOP, is a procedure that serves as a reference for service actions established by Regent's Decree.
33. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The principles in the Empowerment of women and protection of children are: a. Non-discrimination;
b. Best interests of the child;
c. Right to life, survival and development;
d. Respect for the views of the child;
- 7 -
e. Gender equality;
f. Gender justice;
g. Legal certainty

Article 3
The system of women's empowerment and child protection aims to: a. improve the quality of life of women, children, and family quality; b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection in the regions, including the development of gender and child data systems; and
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article 4
In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter a, efforts shall be made through:
a. providing access for women and children to education services, health and other strategic fields;
b. encouraging the involvement of women and children in the development process; c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals and family resilience; and
d. encouraging programs that can increase the independence of women in the economic, political, legal, social, cultural and other strategic fields.

Article 5
In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter b, efforts shall be made through:
a. establishment, development, and capacity strengthening of institutions for the protection of women and children including complaint service units for violence against women and children, as well as legal aid services;
b. improvement of the quality of human resources management;
c. institutional capacity strengthening of Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) and children;
d. strengthening and development of gender and children data systems.

Article 6
In order to implement the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter c, the Regional Government shall undertake promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
- 8 -

Article 7
Promotive efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows: a. strengthening coordination mechanisms and networks between service units in efforts to handle cases of violence;
b. providing Communication, Information, and Education (IEC) materials related to prevention and handling of violence;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and social campaigns in the context of prevention and handling of violence.

Article 8
Preventive measures as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. conducting legal awareness education for the community, especially for women and children;
b. conducting massive and sustainable movements involving the community in prevention and handling of violence;
c. instilling character values, morals, and family resilience;
d. involving the role and participation of the community in women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 9
Curative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows: a. optimizing technical services related to complaints of violence against women and children;
b. providing adequate facilities and infrastructure for handling health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance;
c. conducting handling for victims of crime and violence quickly, precisely, and accurately by law enforcement officials.

Article 10
Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows: a. providing accompanying personnel for victims of crime and violence which includes among others psychologists, psychiatrists, religious counselors/spiritual companions, lawyers, medical personnel;
b. strengthening work networks and coordination in the reintegration process as well as the return of victims to their families and/or social environment.
- 9 -

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION SYSTEM
Article 11
The Regional Government assisted by regional apparatus must have a strong commitment to build a women's empowerment and child protection system that is comprehensive, inclusive and integrative.

Article 12
(1) Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, or other institutions establish technical service units in realizing an integrated, one-stop and networked system for women's empowerment and child protection;
(2) The technical service unit as referred to in paragraph (1) is P2TP2A.

CHAPTER IV
P2TP2A
Article 13
(1) P2TP2A is positioned in the Region and sub-district;
(2) Provisions regarding the Establishment of P2TP2A are further regulated in the Regent Regulation.

Article 14
P2TP2A is under the coordination of DKBP3A or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 15
P2TP2A is one form of integrated service unit that functions as:
a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and c. an empowerment center for women and children.

Article 16
Institutional structure of P2TP2A:
a. established based on the decision of the Regent/Sub-district Head;
- 10 -
b. its membership consists of structural and non-structural elements originating from professionals, academicians, community leaders; and c. sources of funding for the establishment, development, and strengthening of P2TP2A are derived from the Regional Budget (APBD) and other legitimate and non-binding sources based on statutory provisions.

Article 17
Provisions regarding P2TP2A shall be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
COORDINATION MECHANISM
Article 18
In carrying out the functions as referred to in Article 15, coordination shall be conducted with Regional Apparatus or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 19
P2TP2A may consult and coordinate with the Ministry that administers affairs of women's empowerment and child protection by first coordinating with Regional Apparatus or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 20
Coordination may be conducted in the form of:
a. coordination meetings with work networks;
b. consultation;
c. submission of data and information; and/or
d. follow-up on case handling.

CHAPTER VI
PARTICIPATION
Article 21
The community, business sector, academics, and other professional groups may participate in the implementation of the women's empowerment and child protection system.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND REPORTING
- 11 -

Article 22
Reporting on women's empowerment and child protection is conducted 1 (one) time per year and is coordinated by DKBP3A with the province to the Minister who administers government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection through the Secretary of the Ministry.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 23
Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD);
b. other legal and non-binding sources based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 24
Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be established no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 25
This Regional Regulation shall come into force from the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sampang Regency.
Enacted in : Sampang on date : 27 April 2017

VICE REGENT OF SAMPANG,
H. FADHILAH BUDIONO
- 12 - Promulgated in : Sampang On the date : 27 April 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SAMPANG REGENCY
PUTHUT BUDI SANTOSO, SH,M.Si Principal Young Supervisor

NIP. 19610114 198603 1 008
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAMPANG REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER : 7 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMPANG REGENCY NUMBER 77-7/2017 - 13 - - 1 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMPANG REGENCY
NUMBER 7 OF 2017
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

1. GENERAL
The Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates regional governments to regulate and manage their own regions for the realization of community welfare through improved services, empowerment and community participation. One of the authorities of regional government is to make regional policies with the aim of improving the welfare of the people in their region.

In addition, the constitution of the Republic of Indonesia has also mandated in Article 28D Paragraph 1 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia that every person has the right to recognition, guarantee, protection, and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law. Article 28B Paragraph 2 also states that every child has the right to survival, growth, and development as well as the right to protection from violence and discrimination. This shows that children and women should be protected by the state, particularly against violence because their rights are already regulated in the constitution.

Therefore, it is necessary to carry out efforts to prevent and eradicate all forms of discrimination and violence against women and children, particularly for the Sampang Regency area. The Government of Sampang Regency is one of the parties most authorized in carrying out women's empowerment and child protection by implementing and formulating regulations in order to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and child protection.

One form of such regulation is the Regional Regulation of Sampang Regency. The regulation is expected to be able to encourage - 14 - efforts to improve the physical and mental conditions of women and children - 2 - victims of violence.

2. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Letter b What is meant by the principle of the best interests of the child is that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.
Letter e Gender equality means equal conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, legal, economic, social and cultural activities, education and national defense and security, as well as equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter f Gender justice constitutes a process and fair treatment of women and men. With gender justice it means there is no stereotyping of roles, double burden, subordination, marginalization and violence against women or men

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
- 15 - - 3 - The Implementation Guidelines and/or Technical Guidelines of P2TP2A contain technical matters regarding services for handling women and children victims of violence including service human resources, facilities and infrastructure, rights and obligations of victims, referral system including handling starting from complaint services, medical rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation services, spiritual guidance services, repatriation and social reintegration services. In addition, it also contains service flow and Standard Operating Procedures for each service.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Monitoring and evaluation are intended to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities that have been established. Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of OPD implementing policies, programs, and activities - 16 - for the empowerment of women and child victims of violence. This monitoring - 4 - is conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the empowerment of women and child victims of violence for the current year and evaluation will be conducted at the end of each fiscal year.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAMPANG REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER: 7 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMPANG REGENCY NUMBER 77-7/2017