REGENT OF WEST BANGKA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY
NUMBER 13 OF 2013
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WEST BANGKA,
Considering : a. that children and women are creatures created by Almighty God who need to receive protection from violence for the sake of their dignity as human beings;
b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
7. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
8. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
9. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
10. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
15. Regional Regulation of West Bangka Regency Number 2 of 2008 concerning the Authority of West Bangka Regency (Regional Gazette of West Bangka Regency of 2008 Number 1 Series D);
16. Regional Regulation of West Bangka Regency Number 15 of 2011 concerning Cooperation in the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of West Bangka Regency of 2011 Number 2 Series E);
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY and

REGENT OF WEST BANGKA
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS

VIOLENCE.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regent is the Regent of West Bangka.
2. Regional Government is the Government of West Bangka Regency.
3. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in a Hospital, managed jointly in the form of medical care (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
4. Social Community Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including those in the womb.
6. Woman is a person who has female genitalia who can menstruate and become pregnant or has obtained legal status as a woman.
7. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim;
8. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life;
9. Violence against children is any action that results in misery or suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom.
10. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causes death.
11. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
12. Economic violence is any act that deliberately neglects family members in the form of not providing a proper living, care or maintenance.
13. Psychological violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences and/or suffers either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, Court, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear or violence against women has occurred.
16. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
17. Optimal Service is a dynamic effort consisting of various parts that are regularly related, followed by performance offered by one party to another party by providing benefits, in order to achieve the best goal.
18. Information is a message (speech or expression) or collection of messages consisting of an order sequence of symbols, or meaning that can be interpreted from the message or collection of messages and can be recorded or transmitted.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on the principles of respect and recognition of equal rights and human dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of the human rights of Women and Children and the best interests of victims.

Article 3
The Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to provide protection and services that include aspects of prevention, services and assistance, reunification and empowerment.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to the victim's status as a family member as well as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 5
(1) The Regional Government has the duty to undertake prevention, handling and recovery efforts for victims of violence against Women and Children, by:
a. collecting data and information about Women and Children Victims of Violence;
b. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
c. providing education about anti-violence values toward children and women; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for Women and Children victims of violence.
(2) The Regional Government has the obligation to undertake prevention, handling and recovery efforts for victims of violence against Women and Children, providing and organizing services for victims in the form of:
a. providing and facilitating the establishment of integrated services for victims by involving institutions and community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness about the importance of protection for victims; and
c. conducting community empowerment for the prevention of acts of violence.

CHAPTER V
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 6
(1) The Regional Government in implementing protection for Victims of Violence may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against Women and Children;
b. submitting reports to the authorities if acts of violence against Women and Children occur; and
c. providing assistance to victims.

Article 7
(1) Social community organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for victims as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (2), shall be given guidance by the Regional Government.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS
Article 8
(1) The Regional Government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) as the Implementing Institution for Prevention and Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of:
a. health;
b. law enforcement;
c. social affairs and empowerment;
d. education and religious affairs;
e. Non-Governmental Organizations; and
f. private sector.
(3) Further provisions regarding the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION AND FORMS OF PROTECTION
Article 9
(1) The Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of PPT.
(2) PPT in handling medical, legal, medicolegal, psychological and economic protection which in its implementation may conduct partnerships with Social Community Institutions engaged in the field of protection of Women and Children.
(3) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) must pay attention to religious norms, customs and the rights and obligations of parents/guardians, husbands and/or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 10
(1) Every victim of violence has the right to receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
(2) Protection of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided to residents of West Bangka Regency whether committed within the territory of West Bangka Regency or outside the territory of West Bangka Regency.
(3) In addition to protection of victims who are residents of West Bangka as referred to in paragraph (2), protection shall also be provided to non-residents of West Bangka where the incident occurred within the territory of West Bangka Regency.

Article 11
(1) Forms of protection provided to Victims organized by PPT in the form of protection:
a. medical;
b. legal;
c. medicolegal (Forensic Medicine);
d. psychological; or
e. economic.
(2) The form of medical protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is in the form of treatment and recovery from physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
(3) The form of legal protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
(4) The form of medicolegal protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, is in the form of medical services for the purposes of evidence in the field of law.
(5) The form of psychological protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, is in the form of assistance in order to restore traumatic conditions including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving problems.
(6) The form of economic protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), is in the form of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

CHAPTER VIII
SOURCE OF FUNDS
Article 12
(1) The source of funds for the implementation of victim protection shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(2) In addition to the source of funds as referred to in paragraph (1), funds may come from other legitimate sources.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING
Article 13
(1) PPT is obligated to report in writing the implementation of protection services for Women and Children victims of violence to the Regent.
(2) The report as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of the report as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 14
Further provisions regarding the technical implementation shall be regulated by Regent Regulation no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 15
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of West Bangka Regency.
Enacted in Muntok on 31 December 2013

REGENT OF WEST BANGKA,
DTO.
Ust. H. ZUHRI M. SYAZALI Promulgated in Muntok on January 2, 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY
WEST BANGKA REGENCY,
SIGNED.
RAMLI NGAD JUM
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 6 SERIES E