REGENT OF DOMPU
PROVINCE OF WEST NUSA TENGGARA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY
NUMBER 02 YEAR 2024
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF DOMPU,

- Considering : That women and children are very valuable assets to ensure the continuity of the nation's existence, therefore protection from all forms of violence and injustice is necessary;

. That protection is carried out to guarantee constitutional rights and the fulfillment of the rights of women and children to be free from violence and treatment that degrades the dignity of women and children;

That to provide direction and foundation to all parties involved in the implementation of protection for women and children, a regulation is needed that can guarantee legal certainty effectively and efficiently;

. That based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

Law Number 69 of 1958 Concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Within Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);

. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Form Of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of International Labour Organization Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Convention Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as has been amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2014 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

- Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government
10. (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 224, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 238, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);

Law Number 12 of 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
11,

Has Resolved to Establish :

14. Regional Regulation of Dompu Regency Number 6 of 2014 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Dompu Regency Year 2014 Number 6);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
DOMPU REGENCY
REGENT OF DOMPU
DECIDES:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: Region is Dompu Regency
1.
Regional Government is the Regent as an element of 2.
regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of regional autonomy.
Regent is the Regent of Dompu.
Regional House of Representatives hereinafter 4.
abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Dompu Regency.
. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are regional authority.
. Office hereinafter referred to as PPPA Office is the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Dompu Regency.
. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including a child who is still in the womb.
8.
10.
11. 12, 13.
14.
Woman is a person who is female in gender.
Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, or psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including threats of certain actions, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
Violence Against Children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
Domestic violence is any action or act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or neglect of the household including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
Criminal Act of Sexual Violence hereinafter abbreviated as TPKS is any act that meets the elements of a criminal act as regulated in the Law on Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence and other sexual acts regulated in the Law as long as determined in the Law on Criminal Acts of Sexual Violence.
Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, police, prosecution, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will, is, or has occurred.
15.
16. 17
18.
19. 20. 21.
22.
Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is, or has occurred.
Companion is a person or representative from an Institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy, advocacy, reintegration for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering either physical, mental or emotional, economic loss either physical suffering, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights as a result of human rights violations or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or individuals including the victim's heirs.
Prevention is an effort made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
Outreach is an action to respond to reports of alleged problems of women and children that need to be verified and followed up.
Social rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out social functions properly in community life.
Coordination is an effort made to realize integration and harmony in the context of services for women and children experiencing problems.
23. 24.
25. 26.
27 28. 29.
30. 31.
Task Force for Handling Women's and Children's Problems hereinafter abbreviated as Satgas PPA is a task force formed to handle women's and children's problems reported to women's and children's service organizations that have been established by the regional government.
Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women's and Children's Protection hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a Regional Technical Implementation Unit formed by the Regional Government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
Regional Child Protection Commission hereinafter abbreviated as KPAD is an independent institution formed by the Regent to support supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region.
Community-Based Integrated Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as PATBM is a movement of networks or groups of citizens at the community level who work in a coordinated manner to achieve child protection goals.
Regional Long-Term Development Plan hereinafter referred to as RPJPD is a regional planning document for a period of 20 (twenty) years.
Regional Medium-Term Development Plan hereinafter referred to as RPJMD is a regional planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating efforts to prevent and handle criminal acts of human trafficking in Dompu Regency.
Task Force for Prevention of Child Marriage is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating efforts to prevent child marriage in Dompu Regency
Task Force for Protection of Women and Children is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating efforts to implement protection of women and children in Dompu Regency.
32.
Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
.Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marriage relationship, or a person who is a dependent of women and/or children. 33
Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations. 34.
Child-Friendly Regency is a regency that has a 35.
child rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and resources of government, community, business world, and media that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights and special protection of children.
Private Sector is Non-Governmental Institutions, Business World and Mass Media. 36.

Article 2
The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a.
o0 g  ™0 ® humanity;
justice and gender equality; non-discrimination;
order and legal certainty; transparency;
protection; and the best interests of victims. Article 3 The purpose of implementing Protection for Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence is to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. provide protection and services to women and children victims of gender-based violence;
c. provide a sense of security to women and children victims of violence;
d. restore the physical, psychological and economic condition of women and children victims of violence; and
e. take action against perpetrators of violence against women and children.

Article 4
The scope of Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence in this Regional Regulation includes: forms of violence;
rights of Women and Children, obligations and responsibilities; implementation of protection; special protection for Children;
guidance and supervision;
cooperation and partnership;
monitoring, evaluation and reporting; and financing.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of Violence against Women and Children, include:  a. Physical violence;
a0 o  0 ~ ® Psychological violence;
Sexual violence;
Domestic neglect;  Exploitation;
Human trafficking; and/or  Other violence.

Article 6
(1) Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a, constitutes an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or causes death of Women and/or Children.
(2) Physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) results in:
a. the victim suffering from serious illness or injury;
b. death of the victim; and/or
c. causing illness or impediment to carry out work, position or livelihood or daily activities.

Article 7
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b, constitutes an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or psychological suffering to Women and/or Children.

Article 8
(1) Sexual violence as referred to in article 5 letter c, includes: non-physical sexual harassment;
physical sexual harassment;
contraception coercion;
sterilization coercion;
forced marriage;
sexual torture;
sexual exploitation;
sexual slavery; and electronic-based sexual violence.
(2) In addition to sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1), sexual violence also includes: rape;
a.
obscene acts;
b.
intercourse with a Child, obscene acts  c.
against a Child, and/or sexual exploitation of a Child;

acts violating decency that are contrary  d.
to the will of the Victim;
e. pornography involving a Child or pornography that  explicitly contains violence and sexual exploitation;
f. forced prostitution;
g. criminal acts of trafficking in persons intended  for sexual exploitation;
h. sexual violence within the domestic sphere;  i. criminal acts of money laundering where the predicate  offense constitutes TPKS; and
j. other criminal acts explicitly stated  as TPKS as regulated in the provisions  of laws and regulations.

Article 9
Neglect within the household as referred to in Article 5 letter d, includes:
a. acts of deliberately neglecting a woman within the scope of the household, whereas according to the law applicable to him or due to agreement or contract he is obligated to provide livelihood and care to the said woman;
b. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
c. acts of deliberately neglecting to care for or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care; and
d. deliberate neglect of a child who still requires care by their biological mother in order to become an Indonesian Migrant Worker abroad.

Article 10
(1) Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e, includes:
a. acts of economic or sexual exploitation with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, physical exploitation, sexual exploitation, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and
c. acts of exploiting children in horse racing activities as jockeys by disregarding the rights of children and/or with the intention of exploiting the labor or capabilities of children to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
(2) The involvement of children in horse racing activities as jockeys as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, shall be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 11
Other violence as referred to in Article 5 (1) letter g, constitutes threat of violence and coercion. Threat of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) @) includes every unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, image, symbol, or body movement, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
Coercion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes a @) situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

BAB III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Pasal 12
Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to recovery;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to social rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling that is appropriate, comfortable, and in accordance with needs;
h. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
i. the right to assistance; and
j. to receive continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 13
Child Victims of Acts of Violence in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Article 12 shall also receive special rights as follows:
a.
aoao  o the right to survival, growth, and development;
the right to basic population services;
the right to equal protection;
the right to be free from various stigma; and the right to obtain freedom.

Article 14
In the event that a Victim of an Act of Violence as referred to in Article 13 requires continuous handling, then the victim may be placed in a safe house or alternative residence.
Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at every stage that is required.

Article 15
(1) The safe house as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) provides a place and/or temporary safe shelter for victims of violence.
(2) The operation and/or management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the PPPA Office.
(3) For security and at the request of the victim of violence, the manager or operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) may place the victim of violence in a certain place that is kept confidential.
(4) Provisions regarding the operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 16
The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence is a joint obligation and responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Private Sector and Community Institutions;
c. Society; and
d. Family and/or Parents.

Article 17
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 16 letter a include:
a. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
b. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
c. conducting cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, and various non-governmental organizations concerned with women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children, in accordance with regional financial capacity;
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children; and
g. realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and activities for victim protection action in the Regional Action Plan and Key Performance Indicators in supporting the main regional programs as a basis for the Region in implementing the protection of women and children.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the RPJMD.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 18
The Regent in carrying out obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 17 delegates to the relevant Regional Apparatus/Institutions.

Article 19
Obligations and Responsibilities of Private Parties and Institutions (1) The Community as well as the Community as referred to in Article 16 letter b, letter c, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
The form of community participation as referred to (2) in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of violence against women and children;
b. providing emergency assistance to victims; c. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties;
d. protecting victims; and e. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence;
The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 20
The Obligation of Family and/or Parents as referred to in Article 16 letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as Family members.

BAB V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional

Article 21
The Regional Government conducts empowerment and (1) awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community. The empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to (2) in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by means of:
a. providing materials on the prevention of acts of violence against women and children in both formal and informal education;
b. providing accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. creating a friendly and safe work environment atmosphere for women;
d. building community participation and concern towards the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing an information system that is easily accessible;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and g. providing information, guidance and/or counseling and realizing a Child-Friendly Regency.

Article 22
In order to implement services and protection (1) for women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government establishes UPTD PPA UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1), functions (2) to implement services:
a. public complaints;
b. victim outreach;
a0 ™0 case management;
temporary shelter; mediation; and victim assistance. Article 23 (1) (2) (3) (1) In implementing protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government may also establish a task force.
The task force as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking;
b. Task Force for Protection of Women and Children; c. Task Force for Prevention of Child Marriage; Further provisions regarding the position, organizational structure, duties and functions as well as working procedures of the task force as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 24
The Regional Government may establish KPAD in the supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region. Further provisions regarding the position, organizational structure, duties and functions as well as working procedures of KPAD shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 25
The Regional Government may establish a PPA Task Force in (1) an effort to coordinate the provision of services for Women and Children victims of acts of violence.
The PPA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) aims (2) to:
a. coordinate and synchronize protection services for women and children carried out by the Regional Government, Regional Apparatus/Institutions and the community;
b. improve cooperation and referral systems; and collect, compile and present reports on violence.
The establishment of the PPA Task Force as referred to in (3) paragraph (1) shall be determined by Regent's Decree.

Article 26
(1) The Village Government and/or Lurah as representatives of the Regional Government in the implementation of child protection at the village/kelurahan level may establish PATBM.
(2) PATBM functions as a network or community group that works in a coordinated manner in the implementation of child protection at the village/kelurahan level.
(3) The establishment of PATBM as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by a Village Head Decree.

Part Two
Prevention

Article 27
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against Women and Children shall be carried out in an integrated manner by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. PPPA;
b. social affairs;
c. health;
d. education;
e. manpower;
f. population and civil registration;
g. law;
h. cooperatives and micro enterprises;
i. mental and spiritual; and
j. peace and order.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by means of:
a. building cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as Educational Institutions, Health institutions, hospitals, various NGOs that care about women and children;
b. building participation and awareness of the community, family, towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence;
e. providing critical education about the rights of women and children as victims of violence to the community; and
f. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(3) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the RPJPD and RPJMD.

Third Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 28
Forms of services for acts of violence experienced by (1) Women and Children include: complaint services;
a.
health services;
b.
a0  ™o ™ legal assistance;
submission of reports;
repatriation and social reintegration, rehabilitation, and assistance services.
(2) In implementing the forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with regional apparatus/related institutions.

Pasal 29
Complaint services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter a, include:
a. identification or initial recording of victims; and b. consent for action to be taken (informed consent).

Article 30
Health services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter b, include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics; and
c. referral to health services.
d. medicolegal;
psychological assistance.

Article 31
(1) Legal aid services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter c, aim to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process.
(2) Legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the level of reporting, investigation, prosecution, and examination in court hearings and assisting victims to comprehensively describe the violence they have experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 32
The service for submission of reports as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter d, aims to assist women and children as victims of acts of violence after mediation results are obtained from UPTD PPA.

Article 33
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter e, aim to return victims to be accepted back into their social environment.
(2) Repatriation and social reintegration services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out after socialization related to the rights of women and children as victims of violence.
(3) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (2) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with regional apparatus/related institutions, and the community.

Article 34
Social rehabilitation services as referred to in 1)

Article 28 paragraph (1) letter f, includes:
a. motivation and psychosocial diagnosis;
b. assistance and social assistance;
c. care and nurturing;
d. vocational training and entrepreneurship development;
e. spiritual mental guidance;
f. physical guidance;
g. social guidance and psychosocial counseling;
h. accessibility services;
i. resocialization guidance;
j. follow-up guidance; and/or
k. referral.
(2) Forms of vocational training and entrepreneurship development as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, include:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice;
c. apprenticeship;
d. entrepreneurial skills training;
e. facilitation of joint business group formation;
f. business capital in the form of business support tools; and
g. business implementation assistance.

Article 35
Accompaniment Services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (1) letter g, include:
a.
1) accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
accompanying victims during the medicolegal process;
accompanying victims during the mediation process and/or examination at the Police, Prosecutor's Office, and Court;
monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
coordinating with other companions; and
providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 36
The provision of services to Victims as referred to in Article 28 shall be implemented every day (including holidays), in a manner that is:
a. prompt;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. empathetic;
d. non-discriminatory;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(2) (1)  ) (3) (1)  (2) Service providers or service managers are prohibited from charging any fees to victims of violence.

Part Four
Assistance

Article 37
The Regional Government may provide assistance to women and children victims of acts of violence. The assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims, which are carried out in health service units, education, police, prosecutor's office, courts, and social service institutions.
The assistance as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out by UPTD PPA assistants and other Assistants.

CHAPTER VI
SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
Article 38
The Regional Government and other institutions are obligated and responsible to provide Special Protection to Children.
Special Protection to Children as referred to in paragraph (1), is provided to:
a. Children in Emergency Situations;
b. Children in Conflict with the Law;
c. Children from Minority and Isolated Groups;
d. Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually;
e. Children who are Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and other Addictive Substance Abuse;
f. Children who are Victims of Pornography;
g. Children with HIV and AIDS;
h. Child Victims of Kidnapping, Sale, and/or Trafficking;
i. Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence;
j. Children with Disabilities;
k. Child Victims of Sexual Crimes;
l. Child Victims of Terrorism Networks;
m. Children who are Victims of Stigmatization from Labeling;
n. Child Victims of Mistreatment and Neglect;
o. Children with Deviant Social Behavior; and
p. Related to the Condition of Their Parents.
(3) Special Protection for Children is carried out through efforts:
a. rapid handling, including treatment and/or physical, psychological, and social rehabilitation, as well as prevention of diseases and other health disorders;
b. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery;
c. provision of social assistance for Children who come from underprivileged families; and
d. provision of protection and assistance in every judicial process.
(4) Special Protection to Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided at the UPTD PPA that has been established with reference to the service standards that have been determined.
(5) Special Protection to Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented quickly, comprehensively and in an integrated manner.

Article 39
(1) Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter a, shall be provided to:
a. Children who become refugees;
b. Children victims of riots;
c. Children victims of natural disasters; and
d. Children in armed conflict situations.
(2) In addition to children as referred to in paragraph (1), Special Protection for Children in Emergency Situations shall also be provided to:
a. Children victims of social disasters;
b. Children victims of non-natural disasters; and
c. Children of female convicts/detainees.
(3) Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. prevention so that children do not become victims in emergency situations;
b. recording the number of children requiring Special Protection in emergency situations;
c. mapping the basic and specific needs of children requiring Special Protection in emergency situations;
d. guarantee of security and safety of children in emergency situations;
e. data collection of children and their families for tracing and family reunification;
f. priority emergency actions for rescue, evacuation, and security;
g. recovery of physical, psychological and social health of children in emergency situations;
h. provision of legal assistance, accompaniment, physical, psychological and social rehabilitation of children in emergency situations;
i. care;
j. improvement of facilities needed by children in emergency situations;
k. fulfillment of basic and specific needs of children consisting of food, clothing, shelter, Education, provision of health services, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment;
l. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial problems;
m. exemption from Education fees whether conducted in formal or non-formal Educational Institutions during the emergency period;
n. provision of services for fulfillment of children's identity rights and important documents lost due to emergency situations; and/or
o. provision of social reintegration services.
(4) Special Protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be provided in the form of care, nurturing, as well as fulfillment of basic needs and special needs of children in accordance with their age level and development.

Article 40
Special Protection for children in Conflict with (1) the Law as referred to in Article 38 Paragraph (2) letter b, shall be carried out through:
a. humane treatment with attention to needs according to their age, separation from adults;
b. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
c. implementation of recreational activities;
d. freedom from torture, punishment, or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane, and degrading to dignity and degree;
e. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
f. avoidance of arrest, detention, or imprisonment, except as a last resort and for the shortest period of time;
g. provision of justice before a juvenile court that is objective, impartial, and in a hearing closed to the public;
h. avoidance of publication of their identity;
i. provision of accompaniment by parents/guardians and persons trusted by the child;
j. provision of social advocacy;
k. provision of private life;
l. provision of accessibility, especially for children with disabilities;
m. provision of Education;
n. provision of health services; and
o. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Special Protection for Children in Conflict with the Law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through efforts of:
a. prevention,
b. administrative settlement of cases;
c. rehabilitation; and
d. social reintegration.

Article 41
Special Protection for Children from Minority and Isolated Groups as referred to in Article 38 Paragraph (2) letter c, shall be carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to enable them to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

Article 42
(1) Special Protection for Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter d, shall be carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and c. involvement of various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the community in the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of children.
(2) In the event that Children who are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually require recovery to their original condition, services must be provided in the form of:
a. medical rehabilitation;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. legal assistance and social assistance; and/or d. repatriation and social reintegration.

Article 43
Special Protection for Children who become Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic, and Other Addictive Substance Abuse as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter e, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 44
(1) Special Protection for Children who Become Victims of Pornography as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter f, shall be implemented through guidance, assistance, and social, physical health and mental recovery efforts.
(2) Provisions regarding guidance, assistance, social recovery, physical health and mental as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 45
Special Protection for Children with HIV and AIDS as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter g, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 46
Special Protection for Child Victims of Abduction, Sale, and/or Trafficking as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter h, is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care and rehabilitation.

Article 47
(1) Special Protection for Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter i, is carried out through efforts to:
a. disseminate and socialize the provisions of laws and regulations that protect Child victims of acts of violence; and
b. monitor, report, and impose sanctions. 28 (2) Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of:

P  P
prevention;
assistance;
medical rehabilitation; and
d. social rehabilitation (3) The Handling of Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 48
Special Protection for Child Victims of Sexual Crimes as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter j, shall be carried out through:
a. education on reproductive health, religious values, and moral values;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery; and
d. provision of protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, up to examination in court proceedings.

Article 49
(1) Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter k, is carried out through efforts:
a. education about education, ideology and nationalism values;
b. social rehabilitation, and counseling about the dangers of terrorism;
c. rehabilitation about the dangers of terrorism;
d. social assistance.
(2) Special Protection for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks is also provided in the form of:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Terrorism Networks to care and psychological health recovery;
b. medical rehabilitation;
c. re-education and social reintegration; and
d. safety guarantees both physical, mental, and social for Child Victims of Terrorism Networks.

Article 50
Special Protection for Child Victims of Mistreatment and Child Victims of Neglect as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter m, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation and social assistance efforts.

Article 51
Special Protection for Children with Deviant Social Behavior as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter n, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation and social assistance efforts.

Article 52
Special Protection for Children who Become Victims of Stigmatization and Labeling related to the Condition of Their Parents as referred to in Article 38 paragraph (2) letter o, shall be carried out through counseling, social rehabilitation, and social assistance.

Article 53
Further provisions regarding Special Protection of Children as referred to in Article 38 through Article 52 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 54
(1) The Regent shall conduct guidance and supervision over the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in the region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision of implementation instructions;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. supervision;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation of service implementation.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 55
In order to achieve the objective of protection of women (1) and child victims of acts of violence, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with:
a. central government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city government;
d. law enforcement institutions/ and/or law enforcement officers;
e. non-governmental organizations;
f. community;
g. universities/ academics; and
h. mass media.
The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: (2)
a. exchange of data and information;
b. recovery of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration;
d. provision of evidence and witnesses; and
e. followed up in accordance with applicable law.
The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (3) (2) shall be set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Second Part
Partnership

Article 56
(1) Regional Government may establish partnerships with the Business Sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for Women and Child Victims of Acts of Violence, and
b. education and training for Women and Child Victims of Acts of Violence.

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Article 57
(1) Monitoring, evaluation and reporting on the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence includes supervision in preventive, rehabilitative and curative efforts.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted every 3 (three) months.
(3) Evaluation and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted every 6 (six) months.
(4) Monitoring, evaluation and reporting shall be conducted by the agency that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 58
Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and b. other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER XI
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 59
(1) Officials who are appointed, who do not carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 18, shall be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 60
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Dompu Regency.
Enacted in Dompu on the date of 29 January 2024

REGENT OF DOMPU,
Promulgated in Dompu on the date of 20 Jov

REGIONAL SECRETARY,
GATOT GUNAWANFPARANTAUAN PUTRA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DOMPU REGENCY YEAR 2024 NUMBER O2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY, WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE NUMBER OL{

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DOMPU REGENCY
NUMBER 02 OF 2024
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
Acts of violence against women and children have experienced an increasingly rising trend. Triggering factors such as economic, social, cultural and social environment are becoming more complex along with the influence of technological development. Concrete steps are needed to provide protection by all elements of Citizens as a unity of society, as well as the role of Regional Government as protector for its citizens with various programs to prevent acts of violence against women and children. One of the efforts to prevent violence against women is carried out through women's empowerment and optimization of previously possessed potential, so that it is expected to be able to improve and develop themselves to play a role and be protected from potential acts of violence. This condition will strengthen the form of appreciation and respect for women while maintaining their role and nature as a woman to play a role in educating and supporting the welfare and happiness of their family.
Efforts to prevent violence against children are a shared obligation of parents, family, community and the private sector in a holistic manner and inseparable from one another. Community services are the front line when there is potential violence against children. The mechanism for preventing violence and protecting child victims of violence involves multi-sectors coordinated by the Regional Government. The said efforts are carried out with the direction of providing social rehabilitation for child victims of violence, reuniting child victims of violence with their family and/or environment, and increasing the empowerment of child victims of violence.
In connection with the above matter, to realize the provision of protection efforts for women and child victims of violence as well as for legal certainty in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence in the Regional area, it is necessary to regulate this in a Regional Regulation.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Paragraph (2) Letter h What is meant by sexual violence in the household is any act in the form of forced sexual relations, forced sexual relations in an unnatural and/or undesired manner, forced sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Paragraph d What is meant by medicolegal services is medical services to provide optimal professional assistance in utilizing medical science for the purposes of law enforcement and justice, including medicolegal services among others: visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum.
Paragraph e What is meant by psychological services is an action taken to restore the psyche of women and children as victims of acts of violence.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

Article 32
Sufficiently clear

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Sufficiently clear

Article 41
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear

Article 43
Sufficiently clear

Article 44
Sufficiently clear

Article 45
Sufficiently clear

Article 46
Sufficiently clear

Article 47
Sufficiently clear

Article 48
Sufficiently clear

Article 49
Sufficiently clear

Article 50
Sufficiently clear

Article 51
Sufficiently clear

Article 52
Sufficiently clear

Article 53
Sufficiently clear

Article 54
Sufficiently clear

Article 55
Sufficiently clear

Article 56
Sufficiently clear

Article 57
Sufficiently clear

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Sufficiently clear

Article 60
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DOMPU REGENCY YEAR 2024 NUMBER.L.Z