REGIONAL GAZETTE

BEKASI CITY

NUMBER: 4 2023 SERIES: E

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY

NUMBER 4 OF 2023

CONCERNING

EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF BEKASI,

Considering:
a. that every citizen has equal rights to live a dignified life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality and justice;
b. that women are national assets who play a very important role in the national development process, continuation and creation of quality generations, therefore they need to receive protection from acts of violence and discrimination and need to be empowered so that they can actualize their potential optimally;
c. that in order to guarantee the fulfillment of women's constitutional rights to be able to develop their potential optimally so that they can participate in various fields of life in accordance with human dignity and honor, and receive protection from violence, discrimination and other violations of women's rights, efforts need to be made to empower and protect women;
d. that Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 12 of 2012 which regulates the Protection of Women is deemed no longer appropriate with legal developments and community needs, therefore a new Regional Regulation needs to be established to ensure its implementation;
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
3019. as amended by Law Number 16 of 2019 concerning Amendment to Law Number 1 of 1974 on Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 186, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
6401. ;
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1948 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 9 of 1996 concerning the Establishment of the Second Level Municipality of Bekasi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1996 Number 111, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3663);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
4419. ;
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
6856. ;
8. Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 06 of 2016 concerning Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Bekasi City Region (Regional Gazette of Bekasi City of 2016 Number 6);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BEKASI CITY

AND

MAYOR OF BEKASI

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. City Region is the City Region of Bekasi.
2. City Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Bekasi.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the region.
5. Regional Apparatus in charge of women and child protection is the Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in the City of Bekasi.
6. Woman is a person of female sex outside the definition of child.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in the family, society and culture of the society in which we live, including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
8. Discrimination is any distinction, restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, sex, language, political belief, which results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
10. Household is husband, wife, children, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, foster care, and guardianship, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
11. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
12. Women's empowerment is any effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social, knowledge and skills capabilities so that women are ready to be utilized according to their abilities.
13. Women's protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights carried out consistently and systematically by the family, community/social institutions, government, advocates, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
14. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially and discrimination against victims that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
15. Violence against women is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering either physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially and discrimination, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
16. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or threats of domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
17. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
18. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to a person.
19. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain other purposes.
20. Human trafficking is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring or receiving a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the Country or between Countries, for the purpose of exploitation or causing a person to be exploited.
21. Women's rights are a set of rights inherent in a woman or group of people not to experience discrimination, misery or suffering either directly or indirectly committed by State apparatus or by the State or by Regional Government apparatus or individuals which are natural rights given by God Almighty.
22. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and or knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
23. Integrated service is a series of activities to provide protection for witnesses and victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as a unified implementation of health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
24. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
25. Safe House is a temporary shelter for victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
26. UPTD PPA (Women and Child Protection) is an integrated service institution for victims of violence against women and children established by the government according to needs.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 2

1. The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection shall be carried out based on the principles of:a. respect for human rights;
b. the best interests of women;
c. gender justice and equality;
d. protection of women's rights;
e. non-discrimination; andf. legal certainty.
2. The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection shall be carried out with the objectives to:a. guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so that they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity;
b. provide gender justice and equality;
c. improve the quality of life of women:d. carry out empowerment for women both individually and in groups as potential and resources in the implementation of social community life;
e. prevent and address risks from women's vulnerability so that their survival can be fulfilled in accordance with minimum basic needs;
f. provide protection and a sense of security for women victims of violence and discrimination, including criminal acts of trafficking in persons;
g. prevent and eliminate all forms of violence, discrimination and exploitation against women;
h. provide services to women victims of acts of violence, reporters and witnesses;
i. carry out recovery for women victims of violence; and  j. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
3. The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:a. human rights and fundamental freedoms of women;
b. obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government;
c. women's empowerment;
d. protection and Prevention of Acts of Violence;
e. special protection for women;
f. community participation;
g. funding;
h. monitoring, evaluation and reporting; andi. sanctions.

CHAPTER III

HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS OF WOMEN

Part One

General

Article 3

Human rights and fundamental freedoms consist of:
a. the right to life;
b. the right to form a family and continue offspring;
c. the right to self-development;
d. the right to obtain justice;
e. the right to personal freedom;
f. the right to security;
g. the right to health;
h. the right to welfare; andi. the right to participate in government and development.

Article 4

1. Every woman has the right to:a. live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously physically and spiritually;
b. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
c. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, live in a family within a legal marriage bond and continue offspring;
d. maintain life and improve her standard of living;
e. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
f. perform legal acts;
g. have a job she likes and is also entitled to fair employment conditions;
h. be involved in every stage of the development process;
i. receive fair wages in accordance with her work that is comparable and commensurate;
j. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and paths of education in accordance with the specified requirements;
k. obtain a healthy and clean environment;
l. develop her personality and improve her quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
m. freely choose and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, and/or other political office elections based on equal rights according to laws and regulations;
n. receive special protection in the implementation of her work or profession against matters that may threaten safety and/or health related to women's reproductive function; ando. special rights inherent in women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.
2. Women who are adults and or are married have the right to perform legal acts themselves unless otherwise determined by their religious law.
3. A legal marriage can only take place upon the free will of the woman and the man in accordance with laws and regulations.
4. A wife during the marriage bond has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband over all matters relating to their married life, relationship with their children and ownership rights and management of joint property.
5. After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights and responsibilities as her former husband over all matters relating to their children, taking into account the best interests of the child.
6. After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights as her former husband over all matters relating to joint property without reducing the rights of the child, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
7. Every woman who is in a condition of disability, old age, pregnant is entitled to receive facilities and special treatment.
8. Every elderly woman, with physical and/or mental disabilities, is entitled to receive care, education, training and other special assistance at the expense of the regional government in accordance with applicable provisions.

Part Two

Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 5

Every woman with disabilities has the right to obtain:  a. education in all units, paths, types and levels of education both public and private;
b. work and a decent livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. provision of accessibility services in the context of their independence (such as preparation of wheelchair lanes in government offices, schools or other public facilities);
e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards;
f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life;
g. special services at public facilities and commercial centers (such as road markers on sidewalks, provision of special parking for women and persons with disabilities at Malls, provision of special toilets for persons with disabilities);
h. special treatment and facilities to obtain health services, population affairs and other matters (such as waiting rooms specifically designated for persons with disabilities, mobile car services specifically for persons with disabilities for processing population documents, and others); andi. actively participate in social, arts, sports, economic activities including in politics.

Part Three

Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 6

Every woman victim of violence (physical, psychological, sexual, domestic violence and criminal acts of trafficking in persons) has the right to obtain:
a. the right to have her dignity respected as a human being;
b. recovery of health, education and psychosocial services from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. the right to determine her own decision to take legal action against the perpetrator of violence or forgive the perpetrator based on humanitarian considerations;
d. complete and reliable information;
e. complaint handling services, consultation and legal assistance;
f. free visum services for victims of violence at health facilities of the Regional General Hospital owned by the Regional Government of Bekasi City and Private Hospitals that have visum service competence through Regional Apparatus in charge of health;
g. protection both as a victim, witness including for her family;
h. assistance in the legal process either by advocates, Regional Apparatus related to the protection of women, or other community institutions;
i. the right to rehabilitation and social reintegration;
j. protection from fear and trauma in safe houses owned by the government or private sector.

Part Four

Rights of Women in Emergency Situations

Article 7

1. Every woman has the right to obtain special services when in an emergency situation caused by:a. Women who become refugees;
b. Women victims of riots;
c. Women victims of natural disasters and non-natural disasters;
d. Women in armed conflict situations;
e. Women victims of terrorism networks;
f. Women victims of abduction, sale and victims of sexual exploitation;
g. Women victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
h. Women with HIV/AIDS.
2. The Regional Government through the authorized Regional Apparatus, the community and the business sector must be actively involved in efforts to handle and fulfill the basic rights of women in emergency situations.
3. The Regional Government may allocate special funds for handling emergency situations.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Part One

General

Article 8

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide empowerment and protection to women so that they can realize and enjoy a decent standard of living.
2. Efforts to empower and protect women as referred to in paragraph (1), include:a. determination of policies, programs and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services by related Regional Apparatus;
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities; ande. provision of facilities, Infrastructure and facilitation.

Part Two

Determination of Policies, Programs and Activities

Article 9

1. The Regional Government facilitates the establishment of women's empowerment and protection institutions.
2. The Mayor determines policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to eliminate all forms of discrimination and violence against women in the Region.
3. Implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by establishing, developing, strengthening or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions.
4. Membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) consists of related Regional Apparatus, community leaders, religious leaders, the business sector and the education sector.
5. Further provisions regarding the establishment of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Three

Implementation of Policies, Programs and Activities

Article 10

Implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection, may be carried out through efforts to:
a. cooperate with the business sector, non-governmental institutions, private companies, foundations, the education sector and other domestic institutions as well as international institutions, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
b. conduct regional cooperation, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. provide and facilitate women's empowerment and protection services;
d. compile a data system for women's empowerment and protection;
e. compile prevention programs through comprehensive education and socialization in order to prevent violence against women; andf. implement coordination of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection among Regional Apparatus.

Part Four

Provision of Facilities, Infrastructure and Facilitation

Article 11

1. Provision of facilities, infrastructure and facilitation of women's protection services as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (2) letter e in the form of:a. victim identification;
b. legal assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. psychosocial rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration;
f. repatriation assistance;
g. providing safe houses; orh. other forms.
2. Provision of facilities, infrastructure and facilitation of women's protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to women:a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. elderly who are not independent;
d. with disabilities;
e. victims of terrorism networks;
f. victims of natural and non-natural disasters;
g. women refugees;
h. victims of sexual exploitation;
i. women heads of households;
j. conflict and disaster prone areas;
k. women workers; andl. other vulnerable groups.

CHAPTER V

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Part One

General

Article 12

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility in efforts to empower women.
2. Efforts to empower women as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with laws and regulations.
3. Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings so as to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:a. economy;
b. socio-culture;
c. politics and government;
d. law;
e. education;
f. health;
g. employment; andh. social security.

Part Two

Empowerment in the Economic Field

Article 13

1. Women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter a is implemented by Regional Apparatus in charge of economy, employment, industry and trade, welfare, tourism and culture, cooperatives and SMEs, individuals, the community, the education sector and the business sector.
2. Implementation of Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint economic enterprises;
c. capital assistance and employment accessibility;
d. marketing network development facilities.
3. Job training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes:  a. briefing, workshops, mentoring for women to be ready to work;
b. field work practice; andc. apprenticeship.
4. Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b include:a. entrepreneurship skills training;
b. facilitation of the establishment of joint business groups; andc. business implementation assistance.
5. Capital assistance and employment accessibility is the responsibility of regional financial institutions facilitated by the Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises as referred to in (2) letter c includes:a. assistance with work facilities and infrastructure;
b. facilitating working capital assistance by the Regional Apparatus in charge of cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises; and  c. employment accessibility that is fair for women.
6. Marketing network development facilities as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d include:a. marketing assistance for women's business products through government programs;
b. facilitating the marketing of women's business products domestically and abroad;
c. involving women's business groups to introduce their business products.

Part Two

Empowerment in the Socio-Cultural Field

Article 14

1. Empowerment of women in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter b, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for social, cultural and tourism affairs, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Empowerment of Women in the socio-cultural field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts;
c. strengthening of women's capacity through social institutions, cultural preservation center institutions;
d. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
e. active participation of women in socializing and educating the community to develop themselves in the social and cultural fields;
f. inclusion of women in various socio-cultural events at various levels, whether local, national or international; and
g. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and develop science, technology, sports, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Part Three

Empowerment in the Field of Politics and Governance

Article 15

1. Empowerment of women in the field of politics and governance as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter c, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for governance and political affairs, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Empowerment of Women in the field of politics and governance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in political activities at various levels including general elections;
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
3. Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.
4. Women shall be given the opportunity to obtain the right to vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, or other political office elections based on equal rights through voting in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
5. Women shall be given the opportunity to be appointed as Regional Government officials and occupy strategic positions in the Regional Government.
6. The Regional Government shall endeavor to have the proportion of positions in the Bekasi City government filled by women (such as in the positions of school principals (elementary and junior high schools), Village Heads, Sub-district Heads, Heads of Regional Apparatus, Heads of Divisions and so forth, in accordance with needs through established mechanisms
7. Women shall be given the opportunity to receive political education and the government is obliged to facilitate it.

Part Four

Empowerment in the Field of Law

Article 16

1. Empowerment of women in the field of law as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter d, shall be implemented by work units responsible for legal affairs, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Empowerment of Women in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:a. enhancement of awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, consultation, information and education services;
b. facilitating access and consultation services and legal aid;
c. conducting socialization and education regarding women's rights and women's obligations;
d. providing capacity strengthening to women so that they can perform legal acts independently and responsibly;
e. promotion of discussion activities, FGDs, training that raises issues/problems regarding law in local, national and international perspectives; andf. encouraging women to be actively involved in advocacy education, and government and business entities to contribute to its implementation.
3. Implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part Five

Empowerment in the Field of Education

Article 17

1. Empowerment of women in the field of Education as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter e, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for education, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Empowerment of Women in the field of education as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:a. provision of formal, non-formal and informal education for women;
b. provision of formal compulsory education of at least 12 (twelve) years for women implemented by government and private institutions;
c. non-formal education aimed at improving women's abilities and skills conducted through equivalency education package A, Package B and Package C as well as courses/training;
d. women who become victims of violence shall have their rights protected to obtain continuity of education both online and offline in formal schools, or through non-formal/equivalency education pathways;
e. in order to strengthen women's capacity in the field of education, every education provider shall facilitate the continuity of education for female students.

Part Six

Empowerment in the Field of Health

Article 18

1. Empowerment of women in the field of health as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter f, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for Health, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Women have the right to obtain health services in order to undergo a healthy, safe reproductive life and sexual life, free from coercion and/or violence.
3. Empowerment of women shall be carried out through education, socialization, assistance and guidance on women's rights in the field of health, basic health, sexual education, reproductive health, provision of nutritional intake and other related matters.
4. Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:a. health services during the period before pregnancy, pregnancy, childbirth and after childbirth;
b. pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health; andc. reproductive health services.
5. Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.
6. Health empowerment shall be carried out by strengthening health service institutions conducted by women such as posyandu cadres or other units that have similar functions.

Part Seven

Empowerment in the Field of Employment

Article 19

1. Empowerment of women in the field of employment as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter g, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus responsible for employment affairs, individuals, communities, educational institutions and business entities.
2. Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
3. Employers who employ female workers must provide protection that includes welfare, safety and health.
4. Women shall be given the opportunity to be appointed, receive promotions and occupy strategic positions in their workplace in accordance with applicable provisions.
5. Empowerment and protection of female workers shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Part Eight

Empowerment in the Field of Social Security

Article 20

1. Responsibility for women's empowerment in the field of social security as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (3) letter h, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus with authority in social welfare, women's empowerment.
2. Women shall be given opportunities to obtain social security development facilities.
3. Women shall be given opportunities to obtain rights to social security.
4. Regional Government may allocate social assistance funds for old age security for women in accordance with regional capacity.
BAB VI

PROTECTION AND PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

General

Article 21

1. Efforts to protect and prevent acts of violence against women shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the Regional Apparatus having the principal tasks and functions of coordination in the field of protection and empowerment of women.
2. Protection and prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:a. establishing cooperation networks in efforts to protect women's rights and prevention of acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, the education sector and various non-governmental organizations engaged in and/or concerned with women;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of prevention of acts of violence based on partnership patterns that may involve community organizations, the education sector, professionals as well as customary leaders and/or community leaders;
c. establishing a violence prevention system;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of rights of women victims of violence;
e. opening accessibility to obtain education, health, employment, training and funding, welfare improvement and social services;
f. providing education regarding women's rights for the community
g. building community participation and concern for the protection of women from acts of violence;
h. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system; andi. providing integrated service institutions for victims of violence against women in the form of UPTD PPA (Protection of Women and Children).

Article 22

1. Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in Article 21, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus whose tasks and functions are in the fields of:a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. employment;
e. protection of women and empowerment of women;
f. mental and spiritual; andg. peace and order.
2. Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner.

Article 23

Efforts to protect women's rights and prevent violations of women's rights carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 22, protection and prevention efforts shall also be carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community leaders and/or customary leaders;
c. educational institutions; andd. private parties.

Part Two

Service Providers

Article 24

1. Provision of services to women victims of violence shall be carried out in an integrated manner by Regional Apparatus with authority in women and child protection, UPTD PPA (protection of women and children) or other service institutions having the same function.
2. Regional Apparatus with authority in women and child protection, UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked and tiered manner.

Part Three

Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 25

Services for women victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services and/or legal aid; andf. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Article 26

Complaint, consultation and counseling services as referred to in Article 25 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims; andb. informed consent.

Article 27

1. Assistance services as referred to in Article 25 letter b include:a. assisting victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. assisting victims during the medicolegal process;
c. assisting victims during the examination process at the Police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, prosecutor's office and court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all interested parties, including coverage by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is an activity and action carried out by an assistant originating from an individual or representative of an institution having expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Article 28

Health services as referred to in Article 25 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims at all health service facilities in Bekasi City;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel;
c. implementation of visum et repertum for investigation purposes shall be the responsibility of and implemented by the Regional General Hospital of Bekasi City and private hospitals;
d. financing of the implementation of visum et repertum for investigation purposes shall be the responsibility of the Regional Apparatus authorized for the health sector;
e. provision of services in accordance with SOP to women victims of violence; andf. referral to health services for women in accordance with applicable provisions.

Article 29

1. Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 25 letter d include:a. provision of spiritual guidance to victims; andb. psychological recovery of victims.
2. Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) are services provided by assistants in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect witnesses and victims from various threats and intimidation.

Article 30

Legal services as referred to in Article 25 letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding victims' rights and the judicial process;
b. assisting victims at the level of investigation examination, prosecution and court decisions that have permanent legal force; and
c. coordinating with law enforcement apparatus, volunteer assistants and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 31

1. Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in article 25 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
2. Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. Regency/city governments within one provincial territory and outside the provincial territory;
b. Related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Part Four

Victim Protection Coordination

Article 32

1. In an effort to provide and organize service handling for victims, the Regional Government optimizes the function of UPTD PPA.
2. UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:  a. coordinate and synchronize service handling by UPTD PPA based on partnerships with related stakeholders;
b. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and  c. collect, compile and present reports on the protection of women.
3. Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties and functions as well as membership of UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

SPECIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN

Article 33

1. Women have the right to obtain special protection from matters that threaten their safety and/or health.  (2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive function is guaranteed and protected by law.
3. Special protection as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of health services related to:a. menstruation;
b. pregnancy;
c. childbirth; andd. breastfeeding.
4. Women are given special protection to take maternity/menstruation leave.
5. The mechanism and duration of leave shall be further regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Article 34

Women victims of violence have the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling whether from individuals, groups or institutions, both government and non-government.

Article 35

1. Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment.
2. Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through the fulfillment of women's rights to receive equal treatment from employers.
3. Employers who employ female workers must provide protection in accordance with laws and regulations.
4. Protection that must be provided by employers to women as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 36

1. The community may participate in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, the business sector, groups or social community organizations.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:a. active role in policy formulation;
b. provision of access and services;
c. cooperation; and/ord. complaints/reports.
4. Procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX

FUNDING

Article 37

Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Bekasi City; and  b. other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X

MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 38

1. To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
2. Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection in the Region.
3. Monitoring is conducted periodically starting from planning up to policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection for the current year.
4. Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection is conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
5. The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.
6. The Mayor submits a report on the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and protection to the Governor.
7. The implementation of reporting as referred to in paragraph (6) is conducted annually and/or when necessary.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 39

At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, Regional Regulation of Bekasi City Number 12 of 2012 concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Bekasi City Year 2012 Number 12) is revoked and declared invalid.

Article 40

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Bekasi City.

Enacted in Bekasi  on 28 July 2023 Acting MAYOR OF BEKASI,

TRI ADHIANTO TJAHYONO

Promulgated in Bekasi on 28 July 2023 Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BEKASI CITY,

JUNAEDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 4

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY WEST JAVA PROVINCE:  (6/90/2023)

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BEKASI CITY

NUMBER 4 OF 2023

CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL

The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the authority of regional governments to regulate and manage their own governmental affairs directed towards accelerating the realization of public welfare through improved services, empowerment and community participation. The authority of Regional Governments is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.

The implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare while always paying attention to the interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, governmental affairs related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled.

Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to human beings by nature, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or deprived by anyone. In the context of Upholding Human Rights (HAM) to ensure justice for every individual by seeking to prevent all forms of unbalanced treatment or treatment deemed detrimental to other parties, whether between individuals, between groups of individuals, or between individuals and between government and society, including the process of marginalization of women that causes women to be vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in both domestic and public spheres.

Women have the same and equal rights as men, however in some discriminatory conditions, the government is obliged to implement affirmative action so that the rights of women and women in vulnerable groups need to receive protection so that they do not experience violence and can live a decent life in accordance with the principles of humanity, equality and justice.

Women's empowerment and women's protection are implemented in order to realize gender equality and justice. To carry out these affairs, efforts are needed to increase the capacity of women's resources and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender-disaggregated data.

The Regional Government of Bekasi City as the party that has the authority to regulate and protect the citizens of Bekasi City, deems it necessary to continuously carry out and formulate regulations to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and women's protection in Bekasi City.

This Regional Regulation is expected to be able to encourage efforts to improve the physical and mental conditions of women in fulfilling their rights and life needs as part of human rights from various fields of development, increase the commitment and effectiveness of regional governments in implementing policies, programs and activities and encourage the institutional capacity of government and society that improves the quality of life of women.

I. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear

Article 2

Sufficiently clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

paragraph (1) letter a Sufficiently clear letter b Sufficiently clear letter c Sufficiently clear letter d Sufficiently clear letter e Sufficiently clear letter f Sufficiently clear letter g Sufficiently clear letter h What is meant by the stages of the development process is through the preparation of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD), Strategic Plan (RENSTRA), Regional Government Work Plan (RKPD), and Work Plan (RENJA).

letter i Sufficiently clear letter j Sufficiently clear letter k Sufficiently clear letter l Sufficiently clear letter m Sufficiently clear letter n Sufficiently clear letter o Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (8) Elderly women are women who have reached 60 (sixty) years of age and above.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear

Article 6

Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Sufficiently clear

Article 10

Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Sufficiently clear

Article 13

Sufficiently clear

Article 14

Sufficiently clear

Article 15

Sufficiently clear

Article 16

Sufficiently clear

Article 17

Sufficiently clear

Article 18

Sufficiently clear

Article 19

Sufficiently clear

Article 20

Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Sufficiently clear

Article 22

Sufficiently clear

Article 23

Sufficiently clear

Article 24

Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Sufficiently clear

Article 26

Sufficiently clear

Article 27

Sufficiently clear

Article 28

Sufficiently clear

Article 29

Sufficiently clear

Article 30

Sufficiently clear

Article 31

Sufficiently clear

Article 32

Sufficiently clear

Article 33

Sufficiently clear

Article 34

Sufficiently clear

Article 35

Sufficiently clear

Article 36

Sufficiently clear

Article 37

Sufficiently clear

Article 38

Sufficiently clear

Article 39

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BEKASI CITY NUMBER 3

This excerpt sits under: CHAPTER XI > CLOSING PROVISIONS > Article 40
