Considering

MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG

PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN

REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINGKAWANG CITY

NUMBER 4 OF 2017

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG,

a . that girls as creations of Almighty God need to be protected and their honor, dignity, and self-esteem safeguarded from all forms of discrimination, acts of violence, and exploitation to improve the quality of life of children and women physically, spiritually, and socially in realizing an advanced, just, prosperous, welfare, and democratic society based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b . that the fate of children and women in Singkawang City needs attention from the Regional Government and the community because cases of violence against children and women still occur, and children in conflict with the law, so efforts are needed to provide legal protection for children and women;

JDIH Kota Singkawang Considering
c. that to provide protection for children and women, also as implementation of higher Laws and Regulations and as one of the mandatory government affairs that is the authority of the Regional Government, the regulation of protection of children and women needs to be regulated in a Regional Regulation;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Children and Women;
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On the Elimination of All Form of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4 . Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

5. Law Number 12 of 2001 concerning the Establishment of Singkawang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2001 Number 92, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4119);

JDIH Kota Singkawang 6 . Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 14 of 2009 concerning Ratification of the Protocol To Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking In Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nation Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4990);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

9. Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning Ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
10. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
11. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
13. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

14. Presidential Regulation Number 69 of 2008 concerning the Task Force for the Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons;
15. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 44);
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2011 concerning National Socio-Cultural Strategy to Realize Gender Equality (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 168);
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 of 2011 concerning Policy for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 168);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 12 of 2011 concerning Indicators of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 169);
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 10 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Strengthening of Task Forces for the Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 984);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

22. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 615);
23. Regional Regulation Number 3 of 2015 concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women from Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province of 2015 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 3);
24. Regional Regulation Number 4 of 2015 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province of 2015 Number 4, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 4);

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SINGKAWANG CITY and

MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG

DECIDES:

To Establish

REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is the City of Singkawang.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Singkawang City.
4. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including those still in the womb.
5. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person recognized by law as a woman.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

6. Victim is a child and woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
7. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, the community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
8. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
9. Special protection is a form of protection received by children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
10. Violence against women and children, hereinafter referred to as violence, is any act based on gender differences that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, mentally, psychologically, including intimidation, forced eviction, threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, neglect and preventing the ability of women and children to enjoy all their rights and freedoms.
11. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband and wife and their children or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
12. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
13. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
14. Every person is an individual or corporation, whether a legal entity or not a legal entity.
15. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that violence against victims will, is, or has occurred.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

16. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the empowerment of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
17. Regional Apparatus Organization, hereinafter abbreviated as OPD, is a regional apparatus organization within the Singkawang City Government.
18. Prevention is an activity carried out so that acts of violence against children and women do not occur.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to the family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions so that they can carry out their roles again properly both in the family and in society.
21. Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with families, communities, institutions or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of the Regional Government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
23. Agency is a regional apparatus work unit whose duties and responsibilities are to coordinate the handling of affairs in the field of organizing the protection of children and women.
24. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
25. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated, one-stop, and networked technical service established by the government, Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions, and other institutions in efforts to empower women and protect women and children comprehensively from various types of discrimination and violence, including human trafficking.
26. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations, and/or community organizations.
27. Regional Action Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RAD, is the foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of JDIH Kota Singkawang prevention and protection of children and women victims of violence.
28. Task Force is a coordinative institution formed by the Regional Government that coordinates policies, programs, and activities for the protection of children and women in the region.
29. Child-Friendly City, hereinafter abbreviated as KLA, is a city that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of the Regional Government, community, and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs, and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.

CHAPTER II

RIGHTS OF CHILDREN, WOMEN, AND VICTIMS

Article 2

(1) Every child has the right:
a. to live, grow, develop, and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth, and to receive protection from criminal acts, violence, exploitation, and neglect;
b. to a name as personal identity and citizenship status;
c. to worship according to their religion under the guidance of parents and to practice the teachings of their religion;

d. to know their parents, to be raised, and cared for by their own parents;

e. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
f. to obtain education and teaching in accordance with age level, physical and mental condition, intelligence and interests, and talents;
g. to express and be heard their opinions and to receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with the level of intelligence and age for self-development in accordance with the values of decency and propriety;
h. to rest and utilize leisure time, play, express themselves for self-development;
i. to receive proper care from parents/guardians or other parties responsible for their care;

JDIH Kota Singkawang j. to obtain protection from abuse in politics, involvement in armed disputes, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence, involvement in warfare, targets of persecution, torture or imposition of inhuman punishment and involvement of children in the worst forms of work;
k. to obtain protection from the dangers of narcotics, pornography, and violent shows or other things that have an impact on changes in child growth and development;

l. to have contact with parents if separated; and
m. to obtain other rights in accordance with Laws and Regulations.
2. Every woman has the right:a. to live, maintain life, and improve living standards;
b. to live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously physically and mentally;
c. to enjoy a good and healthy living environment;

d. to live in a family within a legal marriage bond based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;

e. to obtain work according to ability, conditions and fair and just wages;
f. specifically for women with disabilities, the right to receive facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. to play an active role in the field of politics and government in accordance with the potential and capabilities they possess;
h. to obtain legal information and services; and i. to obtain other rights in accordance with human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
3. Every victim has the right to receive:a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;

d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. assistance in accordance with applicable provisions;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
g. guarantees of rights related to the victim's status as a family member and community member;

h. to obtain restitution in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
i. other rights regulated in the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 3

Child victims of violence in addition to receiving rights as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1), and paragraph (3) also receive special rights as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth, and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;

d. the right to be free from various stigma; and e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 4

Every victim has the right to report and receive assistance and to receive guarantees of their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member and as a community member.

Article 5

The rights as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (3) letter c, are also given to the families of witnesses and/or victims up to the second degree, if the families of witnesses and/or victims receive threats both physical and psychological from other people relating to the testimony of witnesses and/or victims.

CHAPTER III

OBLIGATIONS OF CHILDREN

Article 6

Every child must: a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, community, and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation, and state;

d. perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and e. practice noble ethics and morals.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 7

The obligations and responsibilities of organizers of child and women protection are the joint responsibility of the Regional Government, community, family, and parents or guardians.

Article 8

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 are implemented:a. to formulate and implement policies, programs, and activities for the protection of children and women;
b. to ensure the establishment and implementation of cooperation between various parties in the Region, with and between various parties in regencies/cities and all related elements in the implementation of child and women protection;
c. to provide support for facilities, infrastructure, and availability of human resources in the implementation of child and women protection;

d. to fulfill, protect, and respect children's rights and ensure children to use their rights in expressing opinions in accordance with the child's age and intelligence; and e. to foster and supervise the implementation of child and women protection.

2. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) are coordinated by the OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
3. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government establishes programs and action activities for the protection of children and women in 1 (one) RAD as a basis for OPD in implementing the protection of children and women in the region.
4. The RAD as referred to in paragraph (3) is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan regulated by Mayor Regulation.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 9

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 shall be carried out in the form of community participation in the implementation of protection of children and women.

(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. submitting reports to the authorities if acts of violence against women and children occur;
c. providing assistance to victims; and
d. playing an active role in efforts to increase the fulfillment of children's rights and the empowerment of women.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, community organizations, professional organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, mass media, and the business sector.
(4) The role of community organizations, professional organizations, and educational institutions shall be carried out by taking the necessary steps in accordance with their respective duties, functions, authorities, and competencies to assist in the implementation of protection of children and women.
(5) The participation of mass media shall be carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials related to the implementation of protection of children and women with due regard to the best interests of the child and/or victim.
(6) The role of the business sector shall be carried out through:
a. corporate policies with a child and women perspective;
b. products intended must be safe for children; and
c. contributing to the fulfillment of children's rights and the empowerment of women through corporate social responsibility.
(7) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 10

The obligations and responsibilities of the family as referred to in Article 7, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

Article 11

(1) The obligations and responsibilities of parents as referred to in Article 7 include:
a. caring for, maintaining, educating, providing a sense of security and not committing mistreatment and violence against children;
b. developing children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. reporting every birth of a child to the agency authorized to register births;
d. preventing marriage at child age; and
e. providing character education and instilling moral values in children.

(2) In the event that parents are absent, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family, which shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) In the event that the parents and family of the child cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be transferred to a person or legal entity that meets the requirements appointed as the guardian of the child concerned.

CHAPTER V

STATUS OF CHILDREN

Part One

Identity of Children

Article 12

(1) The identity of every child must be given from birth.
(2) The identity as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be set forth in a birth certificate.

JDIH Kota Singkawang
(3) The making of a birth certificate shall be based on a certificate from the person who witnessed and/or assisted the birth process.

(4) In the case of a child whose birth process is unknown, and whose parents' whereabouts are unknown, the making of a birth certificate for such child shall be based on the statement of the person who found the child and completed with a police examination report.

Article 13

(1) The organizer of the making of birth certificates shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus Organization that administers population administration affairs.

(2) Provisions regarding the procedures and requirements for making birth certificates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Two

Children Born from Mixed Marriages

Article 14

(1) If a mixed marriage occurs between a citizen of the Republic of Indonesia and a foreign citizen, the child born from such marriage shall have the right to obtain the citizenship of his or her father or mother in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(2) In the event of divorce from the marriage as referred to in paragraph (1), the child shall have the right to choose or based on a court decision, be in the custody of one of his or her parents.
(3) In the event of divorce as referred to in paragraph (2), while the child is not yet able to make a choice, and his or her mother is a citizen of the Republic of Indonesia, in the best interests of the child or at the request of his or her mother, the Regional Government shall be obliged to arrange the citizenship status of the Republic of Indonesia for such child.

CHAPTER VI

CUSTODY

Article 15

(1) In the event that parents as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) neglect their obligations, supervisory action may be taken against them or parental custody may be revoked.
(2) Supervisory action against parents or revocation of custody as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through a court order.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 16

(1) One of the parents, biological siblings or family up to the third degree, may submit an application to the court to obtain a court order regarding the revocation of parental custody or to take supervisory action if there are strong reasons for it as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (1).

(2) If one of the parents, biological siblings, or family up to the third degree, cannot carry out their function, then the revocation of parental custody as referred to in paragraph (1) may also be submitted by an authorized official or other institution that has the authority to do so.
(3) The court order as referred to in paragraph (1) may appoint an individual or government/community institution to become the guardian of the child concerned.
(4) Individuals who carry out child care as referred to in paragraph (3) must be of the same religion as the religion adhered to by the child to be cared for.

CHAPTER VII

GUARDIANSHIP

Article 17
(1) In the event that a child is not capable of performing legal acts, while the parents or family are not known where they reside or their whereabouts, then a person or legal entity that meets the requirements may be appointed as the guardian of the child concerned.

(2) To become a child's guardian as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through a court order.
(3) The appointed guardian's religion must be the same as the religion adhered to by the child.
(4) The appointed guardian as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be responsible for the child and must manage the property belonging to the child concerned for the best interests of the child.
(5) Provisions regarding the requirements and procedures for appointing a guardian shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER VIII

ADOPTION OF CHILDREN

Article 18

1. Adoption of children may only be carried out for the best interests of the child, and is carried out based on customary practices and in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.
2. Adoption of children does not sever the blood relationship between the adopted child and his/her biological parents.
3. Adoption of children must be registered in the birth certificate without eliminating the child's initial identity.
4. Prospective adoptive parents must be of the same religion as the religion adhered to by the prospective adopted child.
5. Adoption of children by foreign nationals may only be carried out as a last resort in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.
(6) In the event that the child's origin is unknown, the child's religion shall be adjusted to the religion of the majority of the local population.

Article 19

1. Adoptive parents are obliged to inform their adopted child about his/her origin and biological parents.
2. Notification of origin and biological parents shall be carried out with due regard to the child's mental readiness.

CHAPTER IX

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

General

Article 20

Implementation of protection of children and women is carried out by:
a. planning and development of information systems for children and women;
b. prevention and protection;

c. protection of children;

d. special protection;

e. protection of women;
f. protection in the workplace;
g. handling and recovery of victims of violence;
h. rehabilitation, reintegration, and empowerment;
i. law enforcement services and legal aid; and  JDIH Kota Singkawang j. facilitation of juvenile justice.

Part Two

Planning and Development of Information Systems for Children and Women

Article 21

(1) Planning for the protection of children and women is implemented by providing data and information related to the protection of children and women in the region.

2. Data and information as referred to in paragraph (1) concerns data on gender mainstreaming (PUG), data on child rights mainstreaming (PUHA), and evaluation of programs and data services.
3. Data and information as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be provided by the Regional Apparatus that administers the affairs of protection of children and women.
(4) Information data as referred to in paragraph (3) is required for policy planning and program intervention coordinated by the Agency.

Part Three

Prevention and Protection Article 22 (1) The Regional Government is obliged to make efforts to prevent and protect against acts of violence, exploitation, discrimination, maltreatment, and neglect.

(2) Implementation of prevention and protection as referred to in paragraph (1), may cooperate with educational institutions, religious institutions, mass media, professional organizations, business entities, and/or community institutions.

3. Prevention and protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented by:a. establishing networks;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of prevention and protection based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a system for prevention of violence and protection of children and women;

d. disseminating Laws and Regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence;
e. providing education for victims of violence and vulnerable groups;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
f. organizing family support in the form of family parenting education, child parenting education, family mediation, and economic support;
g. increasing the capacity of protection services for women and children including institutional capacity development and increasing the professionalism and competence of service providers;
h. increasing the ability of vulnerable individuals and/or groups to recognize risks and dangers from situations or acts that may cause violence, exploitation, maltreatment and neglect; and i. increasing the utilization of communication, information, and education media.
4. Prevention and protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the Regional Apparatus in charge of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 23

1. Every Person and/or Institution is obliged to protect children and women from violence, exploitation, discrimination, maltreatment and neglect.
2. Protection by Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) by not making policies and actions that violate the rights of children and women.

Part Four

Protection of Children

Paragraph 1

Religion

Article 24

1. Every child receives protection to worship according to his/her religion.
(2) Before the child can determine his/her choice, the religion adhered to by the child follows the religion of his/her parents.

Article 25

1. The Regional Government, community, family, parents, guardians, and social community institutions guarantee the protection of children in adhering to their religion.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) Protection of children in adhering to their religion as referred to in paragraph (1), includes fostering, guiding, and practicing religious teachings for children.

Paragraph 2

Health

Article 26

1. The Regional Government is obliged to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb.
2. Provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), is supported by community participation.
3. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
4. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be organized free of charge for families who are unable to afford it.
(5) Implementation of the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (4) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.

Article 27

1. Parents and families are obliged to be responsible for maintaining the health of children and caring for children from the womb.
2. In the event that parents and families are unable to carry out their responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government is obliged to fulfill them.
3. The obligation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.

Article 28

Every person is prohibited from performing abortion on a child still in the womb, except for reasons and procedures justified in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.

Article 29

The Regional Government, community, family, and parents or guardians are obliged to protect children from acts that interfere with the health and development of children.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Paragraph 3

Education

Article 30

1. The Regional Government is obliged to organize basic education of at least 9 (nine) years for all children.
2. Parents are obliged to fulfill the child's right to obtain basic education of at least 9 (nine) years.

Article 31

The Regional Government, family, and parents or guardians are obliged to provide the widest possible opportunity for children to obtain education.

Article 32

Education as referred to in article 31 is directed at:
a. development of attitudes and personality abilities of children, talents, mental and physical abilities to achieve optimal potential;
b. development of respect for human rights and basic freedoms;

c. development of respect for parents, cultural identity, language, and their own values, national values where the child resides, from where the child originates, and diverse customs of the child's own area of residence;
d. preparation of children for a responsible life; and
e. development of respect and love for the environment.

Article 33

(1) Children with disabilities are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain inclusive education and/or special education.
(2) Children who have excellence are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.

3. Children who receive special protection are given opportunities to obtain their right to education.

Article 34

(1) The Regional Government is responsible for providing education costs and/or free of charge or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children who reside in remote areas.

2. The responsibility of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 35

1. Children in the educational unit environment must receive protection from physical violence, psychological violence, sexual crimes, and other crimes committed by educators, educational institutions, fellow students and/or other parties.
2. Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by educators, educational personnel, government officials and/or the community.

Article 36

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to develop a child-friendly school model.
(2) Child-friendly schools as referred to in paragraph (1) constitute a joint effort of school members to:
a. create a safe and comfortable environment for children at school;
b. develop children's participation according to their age and maturity; and
c. provide opportunities for children from poor families and/or persons with disabilities to receive equal and fair treatment to obtain services and guidance at school.

Paragraph 4

Social

Article 37

(1) The Regional Government is obliged to organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, both in institutions and outside institutions.
(2) The organization of maintenance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by institutions or the community.

3. To organize the maintenance and care of neglected children by institutions and the community, as referred to in paragraph (2), cooperation may be established with various related parties.
4. In the case of organizing maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (3), supervision is carried out by the Regional Apparatus Organization that administers affairs in the social sector in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 38

1. The Regional Government in organizing maintenance and care is obliged to strive for and assist children to be able to:
a. participate;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. freely express opinions and think according to their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information in accordance with the child's age stage and development;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and engage in cultural arts; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.
2. The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the age, level of ability of the child and their environment so as not to hinder and disturb the child's development.

Article 39

In the event that a child is neglected because their parents neglect their obligations, the institution or community as referred to in Article 37, family or authorized official may submit an application to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 40

(1) The court determination as referred to in Article 39 simultaneously determines the place of shelter, maintenance and care of the neglected child concerned.

2. The institution or community given authority is obliged to provide a place as referred to in paragraph (1).
3. The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and support the smooth care of children carried out by institutions or the community.

Part Five

Special Protection

Article 41

The Regional Government, community and other state institutions are obliged and responsible to provide special protection to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome;
h. child victims of kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking;
i. child victims of physical and/or psychological violence;

j. child victims of sexual crimes;
k. child victims of terrorism networks;

l. children with special needs;
m. child victims of abuse and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Article 42

Special protection for children is carried out through efforts to:
a. rapid handling, including treatment and/or physical, psychological and social rehabilitation as well as prevention of diseases and other health disorders;

b. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery;
c. provision of social assistance for children from underprivileged families; and
d. provision of protection and assistance in every judicial process.

Article 43

Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 41 letter a consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. child victims of riots;

c. child victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 44

Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 43 letter a is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 45

Special protection for child victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 43 letters b through letter d is implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, housing, education, health, learning, and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 46

Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 41 letter b is implemented through:
a. treatment of children in a humane manner taking into account needs according to their age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane and degrading to their dignity and degree;
f. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention or imprisonment except as a last resort and for the shortest possible time;
h. provision of justice before an objective, impartial juvenile court and in a closed hearing to the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity;
j. provision of accompaniment by parents or guardians and persons trusted by the child;
k. provision of social advocacy;

l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility especially for children with disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 47

Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 41 letter c is carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religion, and use their own language.

Article 48

Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or socially as referred to in Article 41 letter d shall be carried out through:  a. dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of Laws and Regulations related to the protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; andc. involvement of various institutions or government agencies, companies, labor unions, social community institutions, and the community in the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of children.

Article 49

Special protection for children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse as referred to in Article 41 letter e and are involved in their production and distribution shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 50

{ 1) Special protection for children who become victims of pornography as referred to in Article 41 letter f shall be implemented through guidance, assistance, and social, physical health, and mental recovery efforts.

2. Guidance, assistance and social, physical health, and mental recovery shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
3. Every person is obliged to protect children from the influence of pornography and prevent ~ses an~ to information containing elements of pornography.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 51

Special protection for children with 1wman immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome as referred to in Article 41 letter g shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 52

Special protection for child victims of kidnapping, sale, and trafficking of children as referred to in Article 41 letter h shall be carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 53

Special protection for child victims of physical and/or psychological violence as referred to in Article 41 letter i shall be carried out through efforts to:  a. disseminate and socialize the provisions of Laws and Regulations that protect child victims of acts of violence; and  b . monitor, report, and impose sanctions.

Article 54

Special protection for child victims of sexual crimes as referred to in Article 41 letter j shall be carried out through efforts to:  a . educate about reproductive health, religious values, and moral values;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery; and  d . provide protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, to examination in court hearings.

Article 55

Special protection for child victims of terrorist networks as referred to in Article 41 letter k shall be carried out through efforts to:  a . educate about education, ideology, and nationalism values;  b . counsel about the dangers of terrorism;

c . social rehabilitation; and d . social assistance.

Article 56

Special protection for children with special needs as referred to in Article 41 letter l shall be carried out through efforts to: a . treat children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;  JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. fulfill the special needs of the child; andc. obtain equal treatment with other children to achieve full social integration and individual development as much as possible.

Article 57

Special protection for child victims of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 41 letter m shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 58

Special protection for children with deviant social behavior as referred to in Article 41 letter n shall be carried out through guidance on religious values and social values, counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 59

Special protection for children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition as referred to in Article 41 letter o shall be carried out through counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 60

Further provisions regarding special protection for children as referred to in Article 41 letter a through letter o shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 61

Every child who becomes a victim as referred to in Article 41 letter d, letter f, letter h, letter i, and letter j has the right to file a claim in court in the form of the right to restitution which is the responsibility of the perpetrator of the crime in accordance with applicable provisions.

Part Six

Protection of Women

Article 62

1. For the prevention of acts of violence against women, the Regional Government shall carry out empowerment and awareness to families and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
b. opening employment opportunities for women;
c. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women from acts of violence;
d. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
e. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women; andf. opening complaint posts for the protection of women from acts of violence.

Part Seven Protection in the Workplace

Article 63

1. Every company is prohibited from recruiting child labor under age or exploiting children.
2. Companies must position female workers as work partners to grow the company.

Article 64

1. The provisions as referred to in Article 63 paragraph (1), may be exempted with due regard to the following requirements: a. age for child workers in informal sector work above 15 (fifteen) years;

b. obtain written consent from the parent/guardian of the child worker in informal sector work;
c. implementation must be set forth in a written work agreement between the company/employer and the parent/guardian of the child worker in informal sector work;

d. not employed at night;

e. working time of at most 3 (three) hours per day;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
f. not employed in a place or environment that can disrupt the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health;
g. provide opportunities to socialize with family and the surrounding environment;

h. provide opportunities to obtain education in accordance with their talents and interests;
i. employed for light types of work; and j. provide health protection for children and the opportunity for one day off per week.
2. Protection for child workers in informal sector work as referred to in paragraph (1), aims to: a. prevent all forms of exploitation, discrimination, harassment and violence against children; andb. protect children from activities that can disrupt the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health.
3. Protection efforts for child workers in informal sector work as referred to in paragraph (2), include among others: a. providing education to the community about children's rights;
b. providing assistance in the form of psychological, medical and legal services to child workers in informal sector work who experience exploitation, discrimination, harassment and violence;
c. empowering families through the provision of skills training and expenditure reduction;

d. providing scholarships to child workers in informal sector work who have dropped out of school to continue formal education to a higher level; and e. providing non-formal education and skills training for child workers in informal sector work who do not pursue formal education.

Article 65

(1) Female workers who work beyond working hours, the company is obliged to provide overtime pay in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

2. The company is obliged to protect occupational health and safety, and provide maternity leave rights to female workers.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) The company is prohibited from making policies that create discrimination against female workers.

4. Companies that violate the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning; andc. other administrative sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Eight

Handling

Article 66

(1) Handling targets include:
a. children outside the care of parents;
b. children in disaster emergency situations;
c. children in conflict with the law;

d. child victims of physical, mental and sexual violence;
e. children subjected to maltreatment and neglect;
f. child victims of economic and sexual exploitation;
g. children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse or things that cause dependence on narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances;
h. child victims of pornography;
i. children who have deviant social behavior;

j. children who experience stigmatization due to their parents' behavior;
k. children and women who become victims of human trafficking;

l. children and women who are in situations where the nature and circumstances of the workplace can endanger health, safety and morals; andm. women victims of physical, mental and sexual violence.
(2) Handling as referred to in paragraph (1) must be carried out immediately including:a. identification process and receipt of complaints/reports;
b. rescue action;
c. placement of children and women in temporary shelters;
d. rehabilitation including: JDIH Kota Singkawang
1. health recovery services;
2. psychosocial recovery services; and
3. legal assistance;
e. social reintegration.

Article 67

1. Identification and receipt of complaints/reports as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter a includes:a. ensuring readiness for complaints regarding child and women protection issues;
b. following up on information or complaints/reports received regarding child and women protection issues; and
c. identifying the type of problem, needs and handling plan.
(2) The OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs is obliged to identify problems and receive complaints/reports.

Article 68

(1) Rescue action as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter b is carried out if based on identification results it is known that the safety of the child or female victim of violence is threatened.

2. Action as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by removing the child from the situation and environment that is threatening.
(3) The OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection is obliged to carry out rescue action and coordinate with police officers or civil service police units.

Article 69

(1) Placement of children or female victims of violence in temporary shelters as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter c is carried out if based on identification results:
a. there is a threat to safety;
b. the child has no family/caregiver or guardian; and/or
c. the child cannot be reunited with family/caregiver/guardian and/or the community.
2. Placement as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out for a certain period of time while the child or victim receives recovery services and/or until the family/caregiver/guardian is deemed to have the readiness to care for and protect the child.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) Services provided to children and/or women while in temporary shelters include among others services for fulfilling basic needs and psychosocial assistance.

4. The OPD responsible for social affairs is obliged to provide temporary shelters.
5. The OPD responsible for social affairs may cooperate with civil service police or the police in efforts to maintain the security of children or women whose safety is threatened while in temporary shelters.

Article 70

(1) Health recovery services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 1 include: a. emergency services;
b. services for providing visum et repertum or visum psychiatrikum in accordance with applicable provisions;
c. follow-up services in the form of outpatient and/or inpatient care in accordance with medical provisions;
d. deoxyribose nucleic acid verification services;
e. delivery process services for pregnancy as a result of sexual violence and/or rape;
f. provision of further referral services in accordance with the victim's circumstances and condition; andg. provision of special rooms separate from general patients.
2. The OPD responsible for health affairs is obliged to provide health recovery services.

Article 71

(1) Psychosocial recovery services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 2 include: a. psychological and social assessment as the basis for preparing the treatment to be provided;
b. counseling;
c. psychological therapy and social rehabilitation programs;

d. mental and spiritual guidance;

e. assistance; and
f. provision of conducive and representative places for the implementation of psychosocial recovery service activities.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) The OPD in charge of social affairs is obligated to provide psychosocial recovery services.

Article 72

1. Legal assistance services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 3 include: a. ensuring that children are accompanied by legal counsel; and
b. facilitating assistance to children and women victims of violence, both in the examination process inside court hearings and outside court hearings.
2. The OPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection is obligated to provide or coordinate legal assistance services with related agencies.

Article 73

1. Social reintegration in the form of post-rehabilitation service support as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter e includes:
a. family member tracing;
b. reuniting children and family members/substitute families and/or the community;

c. facilitation of psychosocial assistance for families;
d. support for access to further education or health services; and
e. monitoring and evaluation.

2. The OPD in charge of social affairs is obligated to provide social reintegration.

Article 74

1. Handling as referred to in Articles 67 through 73 is implemented synergistically.
2. The implementation of handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the OPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection.
3. Further provisions regarding the technical implementation of handling children and women are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Part Nine

Law Enforcement and Legal Assistance Services

Article 75

1. Law enforcement services constitute actions by law enforcement officials in implementing Laws and Regulations to handle cases of violence against children and women, especially to impose sanctions on perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
2. Law enforcement services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by prioritizing the best interests of children and women victims of violence.
3. Law enforcement services are aimed at providing protection to children and women victims of violence or children in conflict with the law with a gender-responsive approach so that victims and perpetrators obtain justice and legal certainty.
4. For the implementation of law enforcement as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with related agencies and institutions to allocate resources to encourage the achievement of effectiveness and efficiency of law enforcement services for children and women victims of violence and children in conflict with the law in accordance with applicable provisions.

Article 76

Types of legal assistance services for children and women victims of violence and children in conflict with the law include:
a. litigation legal assistance; and
b. non-litigation legal assistance.

Part Ten

Facilitation of Juvenile Criminal Justice Article 77 (1) The Regional Government plays a role in facilitating the juvenile criminal justice process based on the principle of restorative justice.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) Facilitation of the juvenile criminal justice process as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. capacity building of human resources whose duties are related to juvenile criminal justice and the community;
b. increased coordination with law enforcement officials;
c. development of effective methods through information support, facilities and positive activities as well as taking immediate action on gaps that encourage children and/or groups of children to commit legal violations;
d. provision and delivery of legal and psychosocial assistance services in realizing the restorative justice and diversion process for children in conflict with the law;
e. encouraging a paradigm shift in society towards children in conflict with the law;
f. developing diversion mechanisms for children in conflict with the law in accordance with Laws and Regulations;
g. developing cooperation with related agencies or institutions in organizing education, coaching and guidance programs for handling children who commit criminal acts, especially children under 12 (twelve) years of age to achieve optimal development; and h. provision of facilities and infrastructure supporting the juvenile justice process by prioritizing the best interests of the child in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
3. Further provisions regarding the facilitation of juvenile criminal justice as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Eleven

Empowerment

Article 78

(1) Empowerment is implemented in the form of: a. facilitating the development of interests and talents for children and women;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. developing economic enterprises for adult women;
c. developing creative spaces for children and women; and
d. assistance for children and women victims of violence.
2. The implementation of empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with educational institutions, private institutions and/or non-governmental organizations.

CHAPTER X

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

Article 79

(1) The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System is the entire process of organizing women's empowerment and child protection carried out comprehensively, inclusively and integratively starting from the stage of report/complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance up to repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of crime and violence in their social environment.

2. The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System aims to:a. improve the quality of life of women, children and the quality of families;
b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection including the development of gender and child data; andc. provide special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.
3. The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System is carried out through:a. providing access for women and children to education, health and other strategic services;
b. encouraging the involvement of women and children in the development process;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals and family resilience;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
d. encouraging programs that can increase women's independence in the economic, political, legal, socio-cultural and other strategic fields;
e. establishment, development and strengthening of the capacity of Women and Child Protection institutions including complaint service units for violence against women and children as well as legal aid services;
f. improving the quality of human resources of managers;
g. strengthening the institutional capacity of regional gender and child mainstreaming;
h. strengthening and developing gender and child data systems; and
I. carrying out promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts in accordance with Laws and Regulations.
4. In order to achieve comprehensive, inclusive and integrative women's empowerment and child protection in the region, the Regional Government shall establish:a. P2TP2A or similar institutions that have the same functions and roles;
b. regional child protection commission or other similar institutions to support supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region; andc. other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 80

(1) P2TP2A is an integrated, one-stop and networked Women's Empowerment and Child Protection technical service unit established by the government, Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions or other institutions.

2. P2TP2A is positioned under the coordination of the Regional Apparatus Organization that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
3. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have the authority to formulate policies on women's empowerment and child protection.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (4) P2TP2A is one form of integrated service unit that functions as:
a. an information center for children and women;
b. a service center for children and women victims of violence; and
c. an empowerment center for children and women.

Article 81

1. P2TP2A is established based on a Mayor's Decree.
2. P2TP2A membership consists of structural and non-structural elements from professionals, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
3. Further provisions regarding the technical aspects of P2TP2A shall be regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Article 82

1. In order to increase the effectiveness of supervision of the implementation of the fulfillment of children's rights, the Regional Government may establish a Regional Child Protection Commission or other similar institutions to support supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region.
2. The membership of the Regional Child Protection Commission consists of 1 (one) chairperson, 1 (one) vice chairperson, and 7 (seven) members.
(3) The membership of the Regional Child Protection Commission comes from elements of the Regional Government, religious leaders, community leaders, community organizations, business community, and community groups concerned with child protection.

Article 83

1. The Regional Child Protection Commission has the following duties:
a. supervising the implementation of child protection and fulfillment of children's rights;
b. providing input and proposals in the formulation of policies on child protection implementation;
c. collecting data and information regarding child protection;
d. receiving and conducting reviews of public complaints regarding violations of children's rights;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. conducting mediation on disputes regarding violations of children's rights;
f. cooperating with institutions established by the community in the field of child protection;
g. providing reports to the authorities regarding alleged violations of the Child Protection Law; and
h. other duties in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
2. Further provisions regarding the Regional Child Protection Commission shall be regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Article 84

In the event of changes to Laws and Regulations concerning the Regional Child Protection Commission, the regulation regarding the Regional Child Protection Commission shall be guided by laws and regulations which shall be further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER XI

CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY

Article 85

To ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination, concrete integrated efforts are needed between the Regional Government, community and business community through the development of CFC.

Article 86

The development of CFC as referred to in Article 85, is implemented based on the following principles: a. good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information disclosure, and rule of law;
b. non-discrimination, namely not differentiating ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical or psychological condition of the child, or other factors;

c. best interests of the child, namely making what is best for the child the primary consideration in every policy, program, and activity;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
d. the right to life, survival, and development of the child, namely guaranteeing the right to life, survival and development of the child to the maximum extent possible; and e. respect for the views of the child, namely recognizing and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion, is given the opportunity to express their views freely on all matters affecting them.

Article 87

The development of CFC is directed at the fulfillment of children's rights which include:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;

d. education, leisure time, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.

Article 88

(1) In order to realize CFC, the stages of CFC development are prepared which include: a. preparation;
b. planning;
c. implementation;
d. monitoring;

e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.
2. In each stage of CFC development, the views of children obtained through child consultation must be considered.

Article 89

1. To make the development of CFC effective, a CFC Task Force is established which is stipulated by Mayor's Decree.
2. The membership of the CFC Task Force may come from the Regional Government, child representatives, business community, religious leaders, community leaders and other parties as needed.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 90

(1) The main duties of the KLA Task Force are as follows: a. coordinating various efforts for KLA development;
b. preparing the RAD for KLA development;
c. implementing socialization, advocacy and communication for KLA development;
d. monitoring the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the RAD for KLA development;
e. conducting evaluations at the end of each year on the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the RAD for KLA development; and f. submitting reports to the Mayor.
2. Further provisions regarding the KLA Task Force shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER XII

CHILD PARTICIPATION

Article 91

(I) Every child has the right to participate in expressing opinions, ideas, thoughts and others as well as being involved in decision-making processes concerning their lives either directly or indirectly, regarding everything related to themselves and implemented based on awareness, understanding according to age and level of maturity of thinking, as well as mutual willingness so that the Child can enjoy the results or obtain benefits from such decisions.

2. Child participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through the establishment of a Children's Forum.
3. The Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (2), is an organization whose members are children who become administrators of children's organizations, studios or children's activity groups and the like which are generally based on the development of talents, interests, abilities and use of leisure time.
4. The Children's Forum is directly fostered by the Regional Government and is intended to increase the capacity of children who have been active in various organizations in certain fields.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (5) In fostering the Children's Forum, the Regional Government may cooperate with professional organizations, community institutions, business entities that are child-responsive.

6. The establishment of the Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be stipulated by Mayor Decree.

Article 92

1. In every formulation of policies related to Children, the Regional Government must consider and accommodate the opinions of children submitted through the Children's Forum.
2. The Regional Government may include representatives of the Children's Forum in the Regional Development Planning Deliberation.

CHAPTER XIII

FUNDING AND REPORTING

Article 93

(1) Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Child and Women Protection in the region may be sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. National Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and d. other legal and non-binding sources.
2. Funding as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is based on the needs and financial capacity of the region.

CHAPTER XIV

GUIDANCE, SUPERVISION AND REPORTING

Article 94

(1) The Mayor has the authority to conduct guidance in the implementation of child and women protection.

2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in the form of: a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;

c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and e. evaluation.

JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) In the context of guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may cooperate with the Central Government, other Regional Governments, Non-Governmental Organizations, business entities and universities.

4. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented through OPD according to their duties and functions.

Article 95

1. The Mayor is obliged to supervise the implementation of child and women protection in the region.
2. The community may supervise the implementation of child and women protection organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism for submitting aspirations to the Mayor or the Regional House of Representatives.

Article 96

1. OPD that organize child and women protection are obliged to report the implementation related to their duties and responsibilities in organizing child and women protection to the Mayor.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be submitted in writing, covering: a. administration;
b. finance;

c. services; and
d. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XV

AWARDS

Article 97

1. The Regional Government may grant awards to any person and/or institution that is committed to giving full attention in organizing child and women protection.
2. Awards as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in the form of certificates and/or other forms.
3. Further provisions regarding the procedures for granting awards as referred to in paragraph (1), and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER XVI

PROHIBITIONS

Article 98

Every person is prohibited from:
a. receiving child visitors and employing children in discotheque businesses, nightclubs, bars, karaoke, pubs/music houses, massage parlors and steam baths/saunas, and/or other worst forms of child labor places.
b. producing, selling and/or promoting cigarettes in school environments.
c. selling and/or promoting cigarettes, gambling equipment, contraceptives and goods that can damage the morals of children.
d. broadcasting and showing pornographic acts in community activities that can be accessed by children.
e. receiving child visitors during school hours or allowing child visitors after nine o'clock at night to access the internet at internet cafes.
f. refusing complaints and/or charging fees in providing services to victims at Protection Service Institutions.
g. treating children in a discriminatory manner that results in children experiencing losses both material and moral thereby hindering their social function;

h. treating children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
i. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of abuse and neglect;

j. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing violence against children;
k. committing violence or threat of violence forcing a child to have sexual intercourse with him or with another person;
l. committing violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing fraud, committing a series of lies, or persuading a child to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
m. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking of children;

JDIH Kota Singkawang n. obstructing children from enjoying their own culture, recognizing and practicing the teachings of their religion and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
o. recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests, and leaving children without protection of life;

p. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of children;
q. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropic substances; and r. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

CHAPTER XVII

INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS

Article 99

(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are given special authority as investigators to conduct investigations into criminal acts regulated in this Regional Regulation as referred to in the Criminal Procedure Code.

2. The investigative authority as referred to in paragraph (1), is as follows: a. to receive, seek, collect, and examine information or reports concerning criminal acts of child and women protection so that such information or reports become more complete and clear;
b. to examine, seek, and collect information regarding individuals or entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts of child and women protection;

c. to request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts of child and women protection;
d. to examine books, records, and other documents concerning criminal acts of child and women protection;

JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, recording, and other documents, as well as to seize such evidence;
f. to request the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out the task of investigating criminal acts of child and women protection;
g. to order to stop and/or prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and to examine the identity of persons, objects, and/or documents carried;
h. to photograph persons related to criminal acts of child and women protection;
i. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;

j. to terminate the investigation; and/or
k. to take other actions necessary for the smooth investigation of criminal acts of child and women protection in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
3. In the event that the investigation meets the elements as referred to in paragraph (1), the Investigator notifies the commencement of the investigation and submits the results of the investigation to the Public Prosecutor through the Investigator Official of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XVIII

SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 100

1. Institutions or bodies designated by the Mayor to carry out service tasks that violate service principles may be subject to administrative sanctions.
2. Perpetrators of acts of violence are subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with applicable Laws.
3. Any person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the applicable Laws and Regulations.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER XIX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 101

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 102

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Singkawang City.

Enacted in Singkawang on December 12, 2017 MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG,

AWANG ISHAK

Promulgated in Singkawang on December 12, 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SINGKAWANG CITY,

SYECH BANDAR

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINGKAWANG CITY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 4

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINGKAWANG CITY,

WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (4/2017)

in accordance with the original JDIH Kota Singkawang

ELUCIDATION

OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINGKAWANG CITY

NUMBER 4 YEAR 2017

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN

I. GENERAL

The implementation of protection for children and women is carried out based on the principles of humanity, integration and justice. So that every person must obtain their right to protection against a sense of security and freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity which is contrary to what is aspired to in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, namely the creation of a just and civilized humanity.

In Article 2 of Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection that the implementation of Child Protection is based on Pancasila and is grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child including:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

In Article 3 of Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence that the elimination of domestic violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;

b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and d. victim protection.

In Article 3 of Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection that Child Protection aims to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from JDIH Kota Singkawang violence and discrimination, for the realization of quality Indonesian children who are noble and prosperous.

In Article 4 of Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence that the elimination of domestic violence aims to: a. prevent all forms of domestic violence;
b. protect victims of domestic violence;
c. prosecute perpetrators of domestic violence; and
d. maintain the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
To realize law enforcement and the fulfillment of the basic rights of children and women, the Government of Singkawang City is obliged to provide protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as the fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms which are set forth in a policy at the regional level.

The formation of a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Children and Women is an elaboration of the laws and regulations above it which regulate the rights of children and women. In the Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Children and Women, the norms formulated are efforts to overcome the problems faced in the implementation of child and women protection in Singkawang City.
The implementation of child and women protection is carried out to realize the fulfillment of the rights of children and women in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and to receive protection from violence, discrimination, exploitation, and neglect for the realization of human resource development in Singkawang City that is faithful, intelligent, quality, noble and prosperous.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by "Parents whose whereabouts are unknown" means that if the biological father/mother of the child dies or migrates, the responsibility transfers to the closest family to care for the child and if the child's parents are divorced, custody of the child is in accordance with the court's decision on child custody or with the results of deliberation between the two biological parents of the child (father and mother).

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Verse(l) What is meant by "caring for a child from the womb" is that every child starting from the womb must be protected so that they remain alive as appropriate and cared for so that they live and develop properly.

Verse (2) Sufficiently clear.

Verse (3} Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

Article 34

Sufficiently clear.

Article 35

Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Verse (1) What is meant by "child-friendly school" is a school that implements management aimed at ensuring every child is inclusively in a physically safe environment, emotionally protective, and psychologically supportive.

Verse\2} Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letterb Sufficiently clear.

Letter c What is meant by "equal treatment" is not differentiating based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 37

Verse {l) What is meant by "in institutions" is through government orphanage systems and private orphanages, while "outside institutions" is the family/individual care system.
Verse (2) Sufficiently clear.

Verse (3) Sufficiently clear.

Verse (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 38

Sufficiently clear.

Article 39

Sufficiently clear~

Article 40

Sufficiently clear.

Article 41

What is meant by "other state institutions" are the police, prosecution service, courts, and legal aid institutions.

What is meant by "economically exploited" includes actions or conduct of using, utilizing, or extorting children to obtain personal, family, or group benefits.

What is meant by "physical and/or mental violence" is treatment that causes injury and/or harm to children, and not merely physical, but also mental and social.
What is meant by "maltreatment" is acts or actions of harassment or indecent conduct toward children.
What is meant by "neglect" is actions or conduct of deliberately ignoring the obligation to maintain, care for, or look after children as appropriate.

Article 42

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 43

Lettera What is meant by "children who become refugees" is a condition where in a general refugee situation where there is a movement of people leaving a regional/national territory to avoid a disaster or calamity either due to nature or directly due to human actions such as disease outbreaks, floods, war, nuclear leaks, bomb explosions and others.

Letterb What is meant by "children victims of unrest" is a condition that occurs in conflict situations within the national territory either in the form of horizontal conflict (between citizens) or vertical (with authorities) with various causes.

Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Article 44

Sufficiently clear.

Article 45

Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Letterb What is meant by "psychosocial disorders" include among others psychological trauma and developmental disorders of children in early age.

Article 46

Sufficiently clear.

Article 47

Sufficiently clear.

Article 48

Sufficiently clear.

Article 49

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 50

Sufficiently clear.

Article 51

Sufficiently clear.

Article 52

Sufficiently clear.

Article 53

Sufficiently clear.

Article 54

Sufficiently clear.

Article 55

Sufficiently clear.

Article 56

What is meant by "receiving equal treatment" is not differentiating based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Article 57

Sufficiently clear.

Article 58

Sufficiently clear.

Article 59

Sufficiently clear.

Article 60

Sufficiently clear.

Article 61

Sufficiently clear.

Article 62

Sufficiently clear.

Article 63

Sufficiently clear.

Article 64

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 65

Sufficiently clear.

Article 66

Sufficiently clear.

Article 67

Sufficiently clear.

Article 68

Sufficiently clear.

Article 69

Sufficiently clear.

Article 70

Sufficiently clear.

Article 71

Sufficiently clear.

Article 72

Sufficiently clear.

Article 73

Sufficiently clear.

Article 74

Sufficiently clear.

Article 75

Sufficiently clear.

Article 76

Sufficiently clear.

Article 77

Sufficiently clear.

Article 78

Sufficiently clear.

Article 79

Sufficiently clear.

Article 80

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 81

Sufficiently clear.

Article 82

Sufficiently clear.

Article 83

Sufficiently clear.

Article 84

Sufficiently clear.

Article 85

Sufficiently clear.

Article 86

Sufficiently clear.

Article 87

Sufficiently clear.

Article 88

Sufficiently clear.

Article 89

Sufficiently clear.

Article 90

Sufficiently clear.

Article 91

Sufficiently clear.

Article 92

Sufficiently clear.

Article 93

Sufficiently clear.

Article 94

Sufficiently clear.

Article 95

Sufficiently clear.

Article 96

Sufficiently clear.

JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 97

Sufficiently clear.

Article 98

Sufficiently clear.

Article 99

Sufficiently clear.

Article 100

Verse (1} What is meant by administrative sanctions is that institutions or bodies that do not implement protection services for women and children are given sanctions in the form of reprimands, oral, written and revocation of permits.

Verse (2) Sufficiently clear.

Verse (3} Sufficiently clear.

Article 101

Sufficiently clear.

Article 102

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINGKAWANG CITY NUMBER 55
JDIH Kota Singkawang
