Considering Bearing in mind

MAYOR OF PAYAKUMBUH

WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY

NUMBER tl OF 2016

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF PAYAKUMBUH,
a. that the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia guarantees the welfare of every citizen, including the protection of Women and Children from all forms of violence and discrimination as mandated in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that the rise of crime and violence against women and children in society requires increased commitment and coordination from the Government, Regional Government and Society as well as all stakeholders in order to take handling and prevention measures;
c. that the fulfillment of the constitutional rights of women and children as well as the improvement of the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that becomes the duty, authority and responsibility of the Regional Government;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children.
1. The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia

Article 18 paragraph (6);

2. Law Number B of 1956 concerning the Establishment of Small City Autonomous Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region jo. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 8 of 1970 concerning the Implementation of the Solok and Payakumbuh Municipality Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 19);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 3277l;
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning amendments to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
5606.;
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3720);
8. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the second amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 Concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2008 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64); 10. Government Regulation Number 65 of 2015 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Diversion and Handling of Children Under 12 (twelve) Years of Age (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 194, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5732\;
11. Regional Regulation of Payakumbuh City Number 04 of 2008 Concerning the Organization and Work Procedures of the Inspectorate and Technical Institutions within the Payakumbuh City Government (Regional Gazette of Payakumbuh City of 2008 Number 04);
12. Regional Regulation of Payakumbuh City Number 3 of 2013 Concerning the Civil Service Police Unit (Regional Gazette of Payakumbuh City of 2013 Number 03);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

MAYOR OF PAYAKUMBUH

DECIDES:

To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN AND CHILDREN

PROTECTION

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is the City of Payakumbuh.
2. Regional Government is the Government of the City of Payakumbuh. 3. Mayor is the Mayor of Payakumbuh.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit within the Government of the City of Payakumbuh.
5. Protection of Women is all efforts to guarantee and protect the rights of women so that they can live healthily and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and obtain protection from neglect, violence and discrimination, whether in the form of protective, preventive, repressive or post-remedial (assistance and treatment) protection.
6. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and obtain protection from violence and discrimination. 7. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the Regional Government, community and Parents and/or family to prevent violations of the rights of women and children.
8. Children's Forum is a Forum for Children's Participation formed with the aim of facilitating the involvement of children in the decision-making process and enjoying changes relating to their lives either directly or indirectly which are carried out with the approval and willingness of all children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of maturity of thinking.
9. Child-Friendly Regency/City hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a Regency City that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and resources of government, community and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
10. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child who is still in the womb.
11. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled either physically, mentally, spiritually or socially.
12. Women victims of violence are women who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
13. Child victims of violence are children who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically or neglect that threatens life, body and degrades human dignity.
14. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
15. Complaint Handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children, submitted by victims, families and the community.
16. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
17. Law enforcement is the action of officials given authority by the state to implement laws and regulations. 18. Legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
20. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
21. Safe house is a temporary shelter that aims to provide protection and a sense of security to victims of violence.
22. Shelter house is a forum for guidance or welfare services for street children that carries out social assistance/guidance activities, maintenance, care, education and health, skills guidance in order to ensure that children do not carry out activities on the streets so that they can grow and develop properly.
23. Spiritual guidance is an effort to restore the psyche through strengthening the religion adhered to by the victim.
24. Gender Responsive is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers in achieving gender equality.
25. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
26. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, mother and her children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.

27. Customs are eternal and hereditary conduct from other generations as a heritage, so that it is strongly integrated with the behavior patterns of society.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE

Article 2

(1) The implementation of protection of women is based on the principles of: a. Best interests of women
b. Gender justice and gender equalityc. Local wisdomd. Legal Certainty (2) The implementation of protection of children is based on the principles of: a. Non-Discriminationb. Best interests of the childc. Right to life, survival and development d. Respect for the views of the childe. Legal Certainty

Article 3

The regulation of protection of women and children aims to:
a. serve as a guideline for the Regional Government in planning, policies and strategies for the protection of women and children.  b. protect women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate the rights of women and children.  c. prevent violations of the rights of women and children. d. increase empowerment of women.  e. increase the role and value of local wisdom and the role of custom in the protection of women and children, andf. increase the role of government and non-government institutions in efforts to protect women and children.

Article 4

The scope of regulation of protection of women and children includes: a. Prevention;
b. Implementation of protection of women and children;
c. Handling;
d. Empowerment, ande. Guidance and supervision;

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part one

Rights of women

Article 5

Every woman has the right to:
a. Obtain protection from acts of discrimination;
b. Obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;

c. Obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence and neglect;
d. Obtain decent work according to her ability; e. Obtain work leave while receiving salary/wages in accordance with laws and regulations;
f. Obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and pathways of education;
g. Obtain special protection in the implementation of work or her profession against matters that may threaten safety and or health in connection with women's reproductive function, andh. Ownership and management of joint property in marriage in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part two

Rights of children

Article 6

Every child has the right:
a. To live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity;
b. To obtain protection from acts of discrimination;
c. To obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
d. To obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence and neglect;
e. To a name as personal identity and citizenship status; f. To obtain a birth certificate free of charge;
g. To embrace religion and worship according to the teachings of their religion with the guidance of parents/guardians;
h. Not to be forced to change religion by foster parents, adoptive parents and by anyone;
i. To be recognized and know their parents, to be raised and cared for by their own parents;
j. To obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual and social needs;
k. To obtain education and teaching in accordance with their interests and talents;
1. To obtain care, education and training, to improve themselves and the ability to participate in community and state life for children with special needs; m. To express and have their opinions heard, and n. To rest and utilize leisure time for self-development' (.t\

CHAPTER IV

RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, COMMUNITY, PARENTS AND/OR FAMILY

Part One

Local Government Article 7 (1) The Local Government in efforts to protect women is responsible for:
a. Guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. Establishing and implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women's rights;
c. Cooperating with the community and/or community organizations in the implementation of women's protection in accordance with laws and regulations;
d. Conducting rehabilitation and empowerment of women who are victims of violence;
e. Providing special protection to women victims of violence and human trafficking, and f. Taking preventive actions in order to prevent violations of women's rights.
2. The responsibilities of the Local Government in efforts to protect women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 8

1. The Local Government in efforts to protect children is responsible for:

a. Guaranteeing the rights of children without discrimination in accordance with laws and regulations;

b. Providing support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of child protection;
c. Guaranteeing the right of children to express opinions in accordance with the age and level of intelligence of the child;
d. Establishing and implementing policies and programs/activities for the protection of children's rights;
e. Cooperating with the community and/or community organizations in the implementation of child protection in accordance with laws and regulations;
f. Conducting rehabilitation of children who are victims of violence;
g. Providing special protection to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children victims of violence and human trafficking, children from minority and isolated groups, children exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are victims of drug, alcohol, psychotropic abuse and children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Organizing inclusive education for children with special needs, and i. Taking preventive actions in order to prevent violations of children's rights.
2. The responsibilities of the Local Government in efforts to protect children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 9

1. In order to carry out its responsibilities, the Local Government establishes programs and activities for the protection of women and children with a Regional Action Plan as the basis for SKPD in implementing the protection of women and children in accordance with their duties and functions.
2. Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Part Two

Community

Article 10

1. The responsibilities of the community in efforts to protect women and children: a. Participate in prevention and provide support for the development of prevention programs for violations of the rights of women and children;
b. Provide information and/or report violations of the rights of women and children to the competent authorities, and c. Monitor the law enforcement process regarding cases of violations of the rights of women and children.
2. Ninik mamak, alim ulama, cadiak pandai and bundo kanduang are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and children.
3. The responsibilities of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are based on laws and regulations and the local wisdom values of the local community.

Part Three

Parents/Guardians and/or Family

Paragraph 1

Responsibilities for the Protection of Women.

Article 11

The family in efforts to protect women's rights is responsible for: a. Protecting women from conflict and domestic violence that degrades the dignity of women;
b. Providing equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural, and c. Preventing violations of women's rights in the household.

Paragraph 2

Responsibilities for the Protection of Children

Article 12

(i) Parents in efforts to protect children's rights are responsible for:
a. Caring for, maintaining, educating and protecting children;
b. Developing children in accordance with their abilities, talents and interests;
c. Providing formal and non-formal education;
d. Guiding children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics and morals as well as customs; and e. Preventing marriage at child age. (2) In the event that parents are absent, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to any reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family. ,llL I

CHAPTER V

PREVENTION

Part One

Local Government

Article 13

1. In order to prevent violations of women's rights, the Local Government: a. Organizes socialization regarding the prevention of violence against women by optimizing the role of customary, cultural, religious institutions and community organizations;
b. Provides guidelines on handling acts of violence against women;
c. Involves community participation in recovery and social reintegration;
d. Develops an integrated database and information system on acts of violence against women;
e. Develops family empowerment programs;
f. Strengthens the function of community organizations working in the field of women's empowerment; and g. Provides comfortable and safe public facilities for women.
2. In order to prevent violations of children's rights, the Local Government: a. Makes efforts to prevent acts of violence against children by optimizing the role of customary, cultural, religious institutions and community organizations;
b. Develops child-friendly schools;
c. Encourages increased participation of children through the establishment of children's forums;
d. Provides guidelines on handling acts of violence against children;
e. Involves community participation in recovery services and reintegration of child victims of violence. f. Develops an integrated database and information system on acts of violence against children;
g. Strengthens the function of community organizations working in the field of child protection; and h. Realizes the development of a Child-Friendly City. Realizes Child-Friendly Open Public Spaces (RPTRA).

Part Two

Community

Article 14

1. In order to prevent violations of women's rights, the community:a. Monitors various conditions occurring in its environment that may give rise to violations of women's rights;
b. Strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment; andc. Prevents unregistered marriages/siri marriages (2) In order to prevent violations of children's rights, the community:a. Monitors various conditions occurring in the environment that give rise to violations of children's rights;
b. Strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment; andc. Prevents the occurrence of marriage at child age.

Part three

Parents, family and/or guardians

Article 15

1. In order to prevent violations of children's rights, parents or guardians:a. Provide good examples to children in accordance with religious and customary teachings;
b. Supervise children in their activities inside or outside the home; c. Provide opportunities for children to engage in dialogue and express their opinions democratically; andd. Protect children from various acts of violation of children's rights in the household.
2. In order to prevent violations of women's rights, the family:a. Protects women from various violations of rights in the household; andb. Encourages the formation of a harmonious, educative and democratic family.

CHAPTER VI

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part one

Implementation of Protection of Women

Paragraph 1

General

Article 16

Protection of women is implemented by the Regional Government with the active participation of families, ninik mamak, bundo kanduang, customary leaders, religious leaders, the community and community organizations in the field of Protection of Women.

Paragraph 2 Marriage

Article 17

During the marriage bond or after divorce, a woman has the same rights as the man who is her husband/former husband over all matters relating to the consequences of marriage and/or divorce.

Paragraph 3

Health Sector

Article 18

The Regional Government provides adequate health and maternity facilities for women.

Article 19

Public service providers are required to provide special facilities for breastfeeding.

Paragraph 4 Employment Sector

Article 20

1. Every person is prohibited from employing and involving women in bad work. (2) Bad work as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. All work in the form of slavery or the like.b. All work that exploits, provides or offers women for prostitution, pornography production, pornographic performances or gambling.

c. All work that exploits, provides, or involves women for the production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances and/or
d. All work that endangers the health, safety and morals of women. (3) Employers who employ women are required to maintain decency, safety and security while in the workplace;
4. Employers are required to place female workers in places that are safe for women's reproductive health;
5. Employers are required to fulfill the rights of female workers to receive wages in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
6. Employers are required to provide special breastfeeding facilities in their enterprises.

Article 21

1. Female workers/laborers under the age of 18 (eighteen) years are prohibited from being employed between 23.00 WIB and 07.00 WIB.
2. Employers are prohibited from employing pregnant female workers/laborers who, according to a doctor's statement, are dangerous to the health and safety of their pregnancy or themselves if they work between 23.00 WIB and 07.00 WIB.
3. Employers who employ female workers/laborers between 23.00 WIB and 07.00 WIB are required to:a. Provide nutritious food and beverages; andb. Maintain decency and security while in the workplace. (4) Employers are required to provide shuttle transportation for female workers/laborers who depart and return from work between 23.00 WIB and 05.00 WIB.

Paragraph 5

Education Sector Article 22 Women are guaranteed freedom to obtain education at every level of formal and non-formal education.

Paragraph 6

Social Sector

Article 23

1. The regional government implements empowerment of women experiencing socio-economic vulnerability through productive economic business activities.
2. Community organizations may carry out empowerment for women experiencing socio-economic vulnerability in accordance with laws and regulations.

Part two

Implementation of Protection of Children

Paragraph 1

Health Sector Article 24 In the implementation of Protection of Children in the Health Sector, the Regional Government must: (1) Provide free health services for children from poor families.

2. Implement optimal health efforts for children, so that every child obtains a good degree of health from the womb. (3) Encourage infants to receive exclusive breastfeeding from their mothers properly and naturally.
4. Motivate children to receive adequate nutrition. (5) Protect children from efforts to transplant their body organs to other parties.
6. Conduct screening on newborns. (7) Monitor the growth and development of toddlers and pre-school age children.

Paragraph 2

Education Sector

Article 25

Children in formal and non-formal educational institutions must be protected from acts of violence.

Article 26

The Regional Government and the community implement Early Childhood Education (PAUD).

Article 27

For children aged 7 (seven) to 18 (eighteen) years who have not completed formal education/dropped out of school may pursue education through non-formal education units, namely:
a. Learning Group Package A equivalent to Elementary School and Madrasah Ibtidaiyah.  b. Learning Group Package B equivalent to Junior High School and Madrasah Tsanawiyah.  c. Learning Group Package C equivalent to Senior High School and Madrasah Aliyah and Vocational High School.

Article 28

1. Children with special needs and/or who have potential intelligence and/or special talents are given equal opportunities and facilities to obtain regular education or inclusive education. (2) Inclusive education as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 29

Every organizer of formal education is prohibited from expelling children without guaranteeing the continuity of the child's education.

Article 30

(1) The Regional Government provides scholarships and/or educational assistance for children from poor families, neglected children. (2) The implementation of scholarship programs and/or educational assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is supported by the participation of the community and community organizations. (3) The implementation of the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with laws and regulations.

Article 31

Children requiring special protection are protected in their right to obtain education, namely:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually; e. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances abuse;
f. Children who are victims of pornography;
g. Children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Child victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking; i. Child victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. Child victims of sexual crimes;
k. Child victims of terrorism networks;
l. Children with Disabilities;
m. Child victims of maltreatment and neglect; n. Children with deviant social behavior;
o. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to the condition of their Parents.

Paragraph 3

Employment Sector

Article 32

1. Employers are prohibited from employing children.
2. Employers are prohibited from forcing the use of religious attributes that are not in accordance with the religion adhered to by the worker.

Article 33

1. The provisions as referred to in Article 32 paragraph (1) may be exempted for those aged between 13 (thirteen) years to 15 (fifteen) years, to perform light work as long as it does not interfere with physical, mental and social development and health.
2. Employers who employ children in light work as referred to in paragraph (1) must meet the requirements: a. Written permission from parents or guardian;
b. Work agreement between the employer and the parents or guardian. c. Maximum working time of 3 (three) hours. d. Performed during the day and does not interfere with school time. e. Occupational safety and health.  f. Clear employment relationship.  g. Receive wages in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.
3. The provisions as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a, letter b, letter f and letter g are exempted for children who work in their family business.

Article 34

In the event that a company employs children as referred to in Article 33, the workplace for children must be separated from the workplace for adult workers.

Article 35

Children may perform work in a workplace that is part of an educational or training curriculum approved by the authorized official.

Article 36

1. Every person is prohibited from employing and involving children in the worst forms of work.
2. The worst forms of work as referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. All work in the form of slavery or similar practices. b. All work that exploits, provides or offers children for prostitution, pornography production, pornographic performances or gambling.  c. All work that exploits, provides, or involves children for the production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances and/or d. All work that endangers the health, safety and morals of children.

Paragraph 4

Social Sector

Article 37

1. The Regional Government is obliged to provide care for neglected children.

2. The care as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by Community Organizations in the social sector.

3. In the event that a child is neglected because for some reason the parents neglect, the Regional Government, Community Organizations as referred to in paragraph (2) may submit an application to the Court to determine the child as a neglected child.
4. The Court determination as referred to in paragraph (3) simultaneously determines the place of shelter and care for the neglected child concerned.

Article 38

(1) The Regional Government organizes skills training for street children and neglected children.

2. The skills training as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized by SKPD in accordance with their respective duties and functions.

Article 39

1. The Regional Government provides shelters to foster street children and social institutions for neglected children.

(2) The shelter as referred to in paragraph (1) may be organized in cooperation with community organizations.

(3) Further provisions regarding shelters as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 40

The implementation of protection for women and children is carried out by cross-sectoral SKPD whose duties and functions are related to the protection of women and children.

CHAPTER VII

HANDLING AND SERVICES

Part One

Handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Article 41

1. Reports of acts of violence against women and children may be made by reporters consisting of victims, families, the community and/or community organizations in the field of protection of women and children.
2. Reporters as referred to in paragraph (1) may make reports;
a. Directly.  b. By telephone; and c. By letter.
3. In addition to handling reports submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions as referred to in Article 43, are also authorized to handle victims of violence against women and children obtained through other information.
4. Further provisions regarding the procedures for handling complaint services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 42

The implementation of handling women and children victims of violence includes: a. Handling complaints of victims of violence.
b. Health services c. Social rehabilitation d. Law enforcement and legal assistance, and e. Repatriation and social reintegration.

Article 43

1. The implementation of handling women and children victims of violence is carried out through integrated services;
2. Integrated services for women and children victims of violence use the principles;
a. Gender responsive b. Non-discrimination.  c. Equal and respectful relationships.  d. Maintaining confidentiality.  e. Providing a sense of security and comfort.  f. Respecting individual differences.  g. Non-judgmental.  h. Respecting the choices and decisions of victims.  i. Sensitive to the background and condition of victims and the use of appropriate language understood by victims.  j. Fast and simple.  k. Empathy, and
1. Fulfillment of the rights of women and children.

Article 44

Services for handling complaints of victims of violence against women and children are carried out by:
a. Hospitals.  b. Community health centers.  c. Integrated Service Center for Women Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A) d. Women and Children Service Unit (UPPA) e. Trauma Center Shelter (RPTC) f. Children's Social Shelter (RPSA) g. Women Crisis Centre (WCC) h. Marriage Counseling, Guidance and Preservation Agency (BP4) i. Police j. Prosecutor's Office k. Legal Aid Institute (LBH) and l. Child Protection Institute.

Part Two

Health Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

Article 45

1. Health services for women and children victims of violence include efforts that cover promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
2. Health services for women and children victims of violence are carried out comprehensively, accessible 24 (twenty-four) hours, of quality and carried out in accordance with health service standards.
3. Health services specifically for child victims of violence must prioritize the best interests of the child.
4. Women and children victims of violence have the right to health services, including;
a. Medical services b. Medicolegal services c. Psychosocial counseling.
5. Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing health services as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Three

Social Rehabilitation Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence

Article 46

1. Social Rehabilitation Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence are aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of victims who experience social dysfunction to be able to carry out their social functions in society properly.
2. Social Rehabilitation Services as referred to in paragraph (1) include counseling services, provision of safe houses and spiritual guidance.
3. The implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2) is organized by;
a. SKPD that has duties and functions in the social sector. b. SKPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection.  c. Service handling institutions.

Article 47

1. Counseling services as referred to in article 46 paragraph (2) aim to;
a. Assist victims in recognizing problems and finding effective ways to overcome them independently;

b. Empower victims to determine their own future;
c. Provide moral support for victims in facing the process they are undergoing, and
d. Make victims feel accepted in the community environment. (2) Counseling services are carried out by gender-responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of;
a. Counselors;
b. Psychologists, and c. Psychiatrists.
3. Counseling services are carried out in a place that guarantees a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information from victims. (4) Stages of counseling services include;
a. Initial counseling b. Follow-up counseling.  c. Case conference; and d. Home visit.

Article 48

1. The Regional Government may provide safe houses for women and children victims of violence.
2. Safe houses aim to protect women and children victims of violence from intimidation by perpetrators and other parties.
3. The location of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.

(4) Criteria for women and children victims of violence who require safe houses include;
a. Life-threatened b. Receiving rejection from family or community c. Requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far; and/or d. Abandoned if not placed in a safe house.
5. The provision of safe house services is carried out by gender-responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of;
a. Social workers b. Volunteers c. Security officers and d. Community leaders (6) Further provisions regarding the provision of safe house services are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 49

1. Women and children victims of violence are provided with spiritual guidance aimed at psychological recovery.
2. Spiritual guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on the principles of;
a. Not imposing any religion and belief; and b. Leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self determination) (3) Spiritual guidance is carried out by spiritual guidance officers (4) Spiritual guidance officers as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of Consultants of the Advisory, Development and Preservation of Marriage Agency (BP4), Officers of the Religious Affairs Office (KUA), Ustads/Ulama, Pastors, Ministers and other gender-responsive religious leaders.

Part Four

Law Enforcement and Legal Aid Services

Article 50

1. Law enforcement and legal aid services constitute actions by law enforcement officials to implement laws and regulations in handling cases of violence against women and children, especially to impose sanctions on perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
2. Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by prioritizing the best interests of victims.

Article 51

1. Law enforcement and legal aid services are aimed at providing assistance and protection to women and children victims of violence and witnesses with a gender-responsive approach so that victims obtain justice and certainty of their legal rights.
2. Types of legal aid services include: a. Legal aid in the reporting process and preparation of BAP.  b. Legal aid in the prosecution process at the Prosecutor's Office.  c. Legal aid in the examination process at the Court.  d. Legal aid in the court hearing decision process until there is a final legal decision; and e. Legal aid in the Mediation process.  f. Legal aid in the Diversion process.
3. The Regional Government provides legal aid to children and women victims of violence.
4. In providing legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3) the Regional Government may cooperate with Legal Aid Institutions (LBH), Women Crisis Centre (WCC) Advocates and/or other gender-responsive legal assistants.

Part Five

Repatriation and Social Reintegration Services

Article 52

1. Repatriation of victims of violence is aimed at returning women and children victims of violence to their area of origin. (2) Repatriation of women and children victims of violence is accompanied by social reintegration efforts.
3. The Regional Government implements repatriation and social reintegration of women and children victims of violence in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

Article 53

(1) The Regional Government guarantees the implementation of empowerment for women.

2. The implementation of women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is supported by community participation and community organizations.

Article 54

(1) The Regional Government provides skills training to increase women's capacity.

2. In providing training as referred to in paragraph (1) the Regional Government may cooperate with training institutions organized by community organizations.
3. The Regional Government expands access and opportunities for women in obtaining employment opportunities.

Article 55

1. The Regional Government facilitates: a. Provision of business capital for economically disadvantaged women. b. Marketing of products resulting from women's businesses.  c. Organization of training for community capacity development through economic empowerment of pre-prosperous families.  d. Expansion of access, information and providing knowledge to women regarding marketing efforts for products produced; and e. Providing entrepreneurship training to women comprehensively.
2. The Regional Government in facilitating activities as referred to in paragraph (1) cooperates with the community and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER IX

CHILD PARTICIPATION

Article 56

1. Every child has the right to participate in conveying opinions, ideas, suggestions and others as well as being involved in decision-making processes concerning their lives either directly or indirectly, which are implemented with the consent and will of all children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of thinking maturity.
2. Child participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through children's forums starting from the Sub-district, District and City levels. (3) Children's forums as referred to in paragraph (2) represent children, both geographical domicile representation, socio-cultural groups and children's educational backgrounds.
4. The establishment of Children's Forums as referred to in paragraph (2) is facilitated by the Regional Government.
5. The establishment of children's forums as referred to in paragraph (4) is stipulated by Mayor Decree.

Article 57

1. In every formulation of policies related to children, the Regional Government considers and accommodates children's opinions conveyed through children's forums.
2. The Regional Government includes representatives of children's forums in Regional Development Deliberations.

CHAPTER X

CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY

Article 58

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance in the development of CFC (2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Coordination.  b. Facilitation.  c. Guidance.  d. Education and training.

CHAPTER XI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 59

1. Guidance for the implementation of protection of women and children is carried out by the Regional Government.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (i) may be carried out in the form of;
a. Providing training for government officials and law enforcement officers on the prevention and handling of violence.  b. Providing training for religious leaders, community leaders, customary leaders, educators, journalists and media managers in order to prevent violence against women and children.  c. Providing training to health workers who provide health services to women and children victims of violence at Community Health Centers, integrated service units and General Hospitals.  d. Providing training to social rehabilitation officers and spiritual guidance officers in order to protect women and children victims of violence, ande. Improving the professionalism of officers, managers of violence case data against women and children at community health centers, integrated service units and hospitals.

Article 60

The Head of SKPD as a member of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group (Pokja PUG) in accordance with their duties and functions is obliged to submit a report on the implementation of the protection program for women and children to the Mayor.

Article 61

1. The Mayor conducts supervision and evaluation of the implementation of protection of women and children on a regular basis. (2) In conducting supervision and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Mayor may appoint SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions. l (3) The results of supervision and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) constitute evaluation material for policies and protection programs for women and children in the region.

CHAPTER XII

FINANCING

Article 62

Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children is sourced from: a Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTERXIII

ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 63

1. Any person or entity that violates Article 20, Article 21, Article 32, Article 33 and Article 36 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of: a. A fine of at most Rp. 5O.OOO.OOO,- (fifty million rupiah); b. Revocation of business license.

(21The procedures for the implementation of administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER XIV

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 64

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 65

This Regional Regulation shall come into force from the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Payakumbuh City.

Stipulated in Payakumbuh on the date

MAYOR OF PAYAKUMBUH,

RIZA FALEPI

Promulgated in Payakumbuh on the date

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY

B S

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY YEAR 2016 NUMBER II REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE: (trl2016l

ELUCIDATION OF

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY

NUMBER il YEAR 2016

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

1, GENERAL

Children are a trust as well as a gift from God Almighty that we must always protect because inherent in them are dignity, honor and rights as human beings that must be upheld. The human rights of children are part of human rights included in the 1945 Constitution and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. From the perspective of national and state life, children are the future of the nation and the next generation of the nation's ideals, so that every child has the right to survival, growth and development, participation and the right to protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.

Likewise with women, women are expected to give birth to children who are healthy, strong, resilient, noble, potential and quality. Through the role of women in the family, society and state, resilient generations will be born who will continue the ideals of the nation.

As Indonesian citizens, women also have the right to improve quality and develop themselves according to their abilities, dignity and honor.

As assets and hope of the nation and state, children need to be given protection and safeguarded from all forms of violence that will hinder their growth and development. Likewise with women, women need to be protected from acts of discrimination and from acts of violence whether physical, psychological, mental, sexual and neglect. Because of their physical weakness compared to men and adults and because of the dignity of women themselves, women and children often become objects, outlets for desires, anger, economic exploitation, violence (physical, psychological and sexual), cruelty, neglect and so on.

To realize the protection of women and children, support is needed, legislation that can guarantee its implementation.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child (Child Right Convention) affirms that preventive measures must be taken so that children are protected from kidnapping, smuggling and sale. In following up on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Government established Law Number 23 of 2OO2 concerning Child Protection.

Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights has included the Rights of the Child, the implementation of the obligations and responsibilities of parents, families, communities, government and the State. Child protection in all its aspects is part of National development activities, especially in advancing the life of the nation and state.

Parents, families and communities are responsible for safeguarding and maintaining these human rights in accordance with the obligations imposed by law. Likewise, in the context of implementing child protection, the State, government and Regional Government are responsible for providing facilities and accessibility for children, especially in ensuring their optimal and directed growth and development.

Although the protection and rights of women and children have been regulated in national level legislation, because the fulfillment of the constitutional rights of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that is the duty, authority and responsibility of the Regional Government, in providing protection to women and children, the Payakumbuh City Government needs to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear Article2 Paragraph(1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter o What is meant by Gender Justice is a condition of fair treatment of women and men, so that justice for women and men is realized, steps are needed to stop discrimination that politically and socio-culturally can hinder women and men from being able to play a role and enjoy the results of their role.

What is meant by Gender Equality is the equality of conditions and positions for men and women in obtaining opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, educational, defense, national security activities and equality in enjoying the results of development and its impacts in a balanced manner.

Letter c What is meant by local wisdom is good cultural values that exist within a community.

Letter d Sufficiently clear Paragraph(2) Sufficiently clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

Sufficiently clear

Article 5

Sufficiently clear

Article 6

Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Paragraph(1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph(2) Sufficiently clear

Article B

Paragraph(1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph ( 2 \ Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Paragraph(1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph ( 21 Sufficiently clear

Article 10

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) What is meant by Ninik Mamak is a male from a clan who is respected and becomes the place to ask and deliberate (to consult) even though still young. In this case it includes mamak kepala jurai and mamak kepala waris in the clan, whether he is a religious scholar, intellectual, community leader, laborer, farmer or even as an official.

What is meant by religious scholar is a leader of Minangkabau society in religious affairs, namely a person who is considered learned. A learned person is someone who possesses extensive knowledge and has faith, whose existence in society is greatly needed. This is expressed in Minangkabau custom adat basandi syarak, syarak basandi kitabullah. The presence of religious scholars in society oversees Islamic religion/sharia.

What is meant by intellectual is a community leader who possesses extensive knowledge and insight as well as thinking that can find a way out of every problem being faced by Minangkabau society. Intellectuals are a collection of intelligent people, knowledgeable, clever, scholars and people who are quick to understand, skilled at finding problem solutions and broad thinking. What is meant by Bundo Kanduang is a term of address for the group of women in Minangkabau, bundo means mother and kanduang means true/genuine. Bundo kanduang means true mother who possesses maternal qualities and leadership. Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 13

Paragraph (1) Letter (a) Sufficiently clear Letter (b) Sufficiently clear Letter (c) Sufficiently clear Letter (d) Sufficiently clear Letter (e) Sufficiently clear Letter (f) Sufficiently clear Letter (g) What is meant by public facilities are hospitals, offices, terminals, airports, bus stops or places that are possible and appropriate Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 14

Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Unregistered marriage/Nikah Siri is a marriage conducted according to sharia law, but not performed before the Marriage Registration Officer (PPN) as an official government apparatus and or not registered at the Office of Religious Affairs, so that it does not obtain a marriage certificate as the only formal legal evidence Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 15

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 16

Sufficiently clear

Article 17

What is meant by equal rights is related to assets obtained during the marriage Article 18

Article 19

Article 20

Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3)

1. Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 22

Sufficiently clear

Article 23

Paragraph (1) What is meant by women experiencing socio-economic vulnerability is an adult woman, married, unmarried or widowed and does not have sufficient income to meet daily basic needs.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 24

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear

Article 25

What is meant by formal education is systematic, structured, tiered activities, starting from elementary school to Higher Education and its equivalent, including academic and general oriented study activities, specialization programs, and professional training conducted continuously.

What is meant by non-formal education is an educational pathway outside formal education that can be implemented in a structured and tiered manner.

What is meant by informal education is the pathway of family education (tutoring, home schooling private) and environment. Education is organized by providing exemplary behavior, building willingness and developing the creativity of students in the learning process.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear

Article 27

Sufficiently clear

Article 28

Paragraph (1) What is meant by children with special needs are children who experience limitations/exceptionalities whether physical, mental, intellectual, social, or emotional that significantly affect their growth and development process, compared to other children of the same age.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by inclusive education is an educational service system that includes children with special needs to learn together with their peers in regular schools closest to their place of residence.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear

Article 30

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 31

Sufficiently clear

Article 32

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 33

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 34

Sufficiently clear

Article 35

Sufficiently clear

Article 36

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 37

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 38

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 39

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 40

Sufficiently clear

Article 41

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 42

Sufficiently clear

Article 43

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Letter a What is meant by Gender Responsive is that all service officers must be gender sensitive when exploring problems experienced by victims and can empower victims.

Letter b What is meant by Non-Discrimination is that every woman and child without exception has the right to receive services related to the violence they experience, no one may be rejected or given priority over others except on the basis of certain emergency considerations.

Letter c What is meant by equal and respectful relationships is that whoever the victim is, the provision of services for victims must be carried out with respect for the victim without distinguishing their beliefs, values and social status.

Letter d What is meant by maintaining confidentiality is that services must be provided in a place that guarantees the victim's privacy. Every piece of information revealed in the service provision process must be kept confidential and known only by people who are relevant in providing services. Officers must convey this principle to victims Letter e What is meant by providing a sense of security and comfort is that service providers must ensure that victims are in a safe and comfortable state in telling their problems Letter f What is meant by respecting individual differences is that each individual must be viewed as unique, each person has a different background and life experience so that one victim should not be compared with another victim in any way.

Letter g What is meant by non-judgmental is that service providers must ensure that whatever the victim's condition or information that comes from the victim will not be judged or condemned.

Letter h What is meant by respecting the victim's choices and decisions is that service provision must be carried out with the victim's consent, starting from the interview process, data recording, to the handling/actions to be taken. Letter i What is meant by being sensitive to the victim's background and condition and using language that is appropriate and understood by the victim is that sometimes victims come from regions or economic, educational and other backgrounds that are not the same as the officers. It must be ensured that victims are served in a language understood by the victim. Lately, more and more disabled/difable/disable women have become victims of violence, whether deaf, blind or mentally retarded. For this category of victims, interpreters must also be provided, for example, who can be taken from special school teachers.

Letter j What is meant by fast and simple is that service provision must be given immediately without unnecessary delay. Perhaps some interventions require various parties, but with the proactive service officers, victims must be guaranteed to be able to go through everything with a simple process. If the victim comes on referral from another service provider, the receiving officer must first read the referral letter. Efforts must be made so that victims are not asked repeatedly about the same things related to identity or case narrative.

Letter k What is meant by empathy is that officers must apply an empathetic attitude, namely the ability to put oneself in the position of others (in this case the victim). Thus the victim feels accepted, understood and can openly tell their problems.

Letter l What is meant by fulfillment of women's and children's rights is that victims are entitled to respect and full use of their rights to survive, development, protection, freedom from all forms of discrimination and participation, as regulated in the convention on the rights of the children. Convention on the elimination of all forms of Discrimination against women (convention on the elimination of All Against Women)

Article 44

Sufficiently clear

Article 45

Paragraph (1) What is meant by the promotive aspect is to increase so that health status becomes increasingly improved, for example providing early breastfeeding initiation (IMD) and exclusive breastfeeding which can help increase immunity to disease because colostrum and other substances contained in breast milk, so that children are not easily affected by disease.

What is meant by the preventive aspect is to prevent disease or keep healthy people healthy, for example washing hands before eating and after defecating will prevent the occurrence of diarrhea.

What is meant by the curative aspect is the process of healing a person from a state of physical and psychological illness.

What is meant by the rehabilitative aspect is the process of maintaining so that a person who has recovered (not yet 100%) returns to being fit as before.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear

Article 46

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 47

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Letter a What is meant by counselor is a trained officer who conducts counseling who is expert/trained in such a way that the victim's psychological understanding and ability increases in solving the problems faced.

Letter b What is meant by psychologist is personnel who have the ability to carry out psychological recovery for women and children victims of violence.

Letter c What is meant by psychiatrist is a specialist medical profession whose duty is to handle mental disorder problems.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c What is meant by case conference is a conference or meeting attended by more than 1 (one) professional to discuss cases in order to solve problems when there is a case resolution that encounters a deadlock and cannot be resolved through counseling.

Letter d What is meant by home visit is a visit to the victim's social environment in order to resocialize and gather further information related to the victim's problems.

Article 48

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Letter a What is meant by social worker/volunteer is a person who has professional competence in social work obtained through formal education or practical experience in the field of social work/social welfare that is officially recognized by the government and carries out professional social work tasks that are gender sensitive.

Letter b What is meant by security includes among others the police, security units, Satpol PP, officers appointed in accordance with applicable provisions.

Letter c Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently Clear

Article 49

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b What is meant by leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim is that the counselor conveys complete information and allows the victim to make the final decision.

Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Article 50 Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Article Article Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Article 53 Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 54

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 55

Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c What is meant by Pre-Prosperous is the inability to meet basic needs minimally, such as the need for religious education, clothing, food, health.

Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e What is meant by comprehensive is comprehensive entrepreneurship training starting from business motivation, business management, marketing, packaging goods (packaging) Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 56

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear Verse (3) Sufficiently clear Verse (4) Sufficiently clear Verse (5) Sufficiently clear

Article 57

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 58

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 59

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 60

Sufficiently clear

Article 61

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear Verse (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 62

Sufficiently clear

Article 63

Verse (1) Sufficiently clear Verse (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 64

Sufficiently clear

Article 65

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PAYAKUMBUH CITY NUMBER...\, ]
