VAWA 2022 Reauthorization: Section-by-Section Summary
Sec. 2 incorporates a number of new terms and amends existing definitions established in the original 1994 Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and previous reauthorizations. Among the new and updated terms are “abuse in later life,” “female
genital mutilation or cutting,” “forced marriage,” “homeless,” “restorative practice,” “economic abuse,” “technological abuse,” “legal assistance,” and “court-based personnel.” It authorizes coordination between executive departments to prevent domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking. It sets the effective date as October 1 of the first fiscal year after enactment. It provides a sense of Congress that sex trafficking victims experience sexual violence and that recovery for victims is important. It includes a severability clause applicable to any provision of the bill.
TITLE I — Enhancing Legal Tools to Combat Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault and Stalking
Sec. 101 improves the Services, Training, Officers, and Prosecutors (STOP) grant program, which was established to assist state, territorial, local, and Tribal governments in responding to violent crimes against women and other protected individuals. This section expands eligibility for individuals and grantees, including expanding services that assist individuals 50 years of age or over, individuals with disabilities, and deaf individuals. This section expands the authorized uses of grants to include:
•	culturally specific victim service programs to improve the response to and prevention of female genital mutilation and cutting;
•	supportive services for Indian victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking;
•	programs that improve evidence collection methods for victims of domestic violence, including technology that better detects bruising across skin tones; and
•	assistance in paying fees charged by a government to obtain identification documents such as a birth certificate or State or Tribal identification card.
This section also requires prosecutors’ offices to certify as a condition of grant funding that they will use best practices to develop policies and protocols for alternative practices prior to obtaining victim-witness testimony in an investigation or prosecution related to domestic violence or sexual assault without employing material witness petitions and bench warrants. This section extends the existing authorization of appropriations through 2027.
Sec. 102 clarifies the uses of the existing grant program to improve the criminal justice response to domestic violence, including for grants that are intended to promote
 
offender accountability and homicide reduction, and for grants that strengthen the law enforcement response to instances of domestic violence or sexual assault against individuals who are 50 years of age or over and deaf individuals. This section also allows grant funding to be used to:
•	develop statewide databases containing information about where sexual assault nurse examiners are located; and
•	develop and implement alternative methods for reducing crime in communities by revising policies or programs that impose a penalty on a domestic violence victim that results from a law enforcement response to a request for assistance by the victim.
This section adjusts existing grant conditions to provide law enforcement with additional discretion in choosing how to manage arrests in domestic violence situations, promote the use of victim-centered policies and protocols by prosecutors, and require certification regarding whether state laws prohibit the prosecution of a minor with respect to prostitution. This section extends the existing authorization of appropriations through 2027.
Sec. 103 clarifies that grants made available for legal assistance to victims of domestic violence include legal assistance services provided by a licensed attorney, an accredited Board of Immigration Appeals representative, an accredited representative for Veterans’ Administration claims, an attorney or lay advocate in Tribal court, or a person with a demonstrated expertise in providing legal assistance to victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. This section authorizes appropriations of
$60 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 104 updates a grant program to support families involved in the civil and criminal justice system who have a history of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking within the family. It states that services provided by grant funds from this program should be provided in a culturally relevant manner. This section extends the existing authorization of appropriations through 2027.
Sec. 105 reauthorizes funding for grants that ensure outreach and services to victims in underserved populations. This section authorizes grants for culturally specific services regarding responses to and the prevention of female genital mutilation and cutting, and population-specific training for service providers on domestic violence in underserved populations. This section expands grant eligibility to include victim service providers that work in partnership with Native Hawaiian organizations. This section authorizes appropriations of $6 million per fiscal year through 2027.
 
Sec. 106 prohibits the internet publication of a protection or restraining order or associated information.
Sec. 107 reauthorizes an existing increase in formula grants available to states that permit a mother to terminate all custodial rights of the father if the child was conceived through rape and clear and convincing evidence of rape was demonstrated. This section extends the existing authorization of appropriations through 2027.
Sec. 108 reauthorizes grant funding to enhance culturally specific services for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, and dedicates a portion of those funds to address non-intimate partner sexual assault. This section authorizes additional appropriations of $25 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 109 establishes a pilot program on restorative practices. The pilot program provides funding for governments, victim service providers, nonprofit organizations, and institutions of higher education to develop and implement a program on restorative practices that seeks to prevent or address domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. This section defines a restorative practice as a community-based effort initiated by the victim to seek accountability from the person who committed the harm against them, based on a written action plan that is responsive to the needs of the victim. The section requires that, as a condition of participation, grantees deny eligibility to any individual who committed the harm where there is a currently pending prosecution or restraining order for an offense against the victim. Grantees are required to submit an annual report on the effectiveness of the restorative practices program.
This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027.
TITLE II – Improving Services for Victims
Sec. 201 reauthorizes grants awarded to rape crisis centers and organizations that assist victims of sexual assault. This section requires the Attorney General to provide technical assistance to potential grant recipients that incorporates the feedback of organizations focused on working with victims from culturally specific communities. This section authorizes appropriations of $100 million to remain available until expended for each fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 202 reauthorizes and strengthens existing grant programs to states, territories and Indian Tribes to carry out programs serving rural communities that address domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, and child abuse enforcement assistance. This section allows grant funds to be used to improve access to sexual assault forensic medical examinations in rural communities. This section authorizes appropriations of $100 million per fiscal year through 2027.
 
Sec. 203 reauthorizes existing grant programs to provide support and prevention efforts focused on supporting victims of domestic violence who have disabilities. This section extends the application of these programs to specifically include deaf people who are victims of domestic violence. This section authorizes appropriations of $15 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 204 reauthorizes and strengthens existing grant programs to improve training and services for victims of abuse in later life, including by requiring enhanced, coordinated community response teams and advanced services for older victims of abuse. This section requires that grantees work in partnership with other designated entities to improve services or training for victims of abuse who are 50 years of age or older. This section authorizes appropriations of $10 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 205 creates a grant program within the Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) to promote the use of trauma-informed victim-centered training for law enforcement that prevents re-traumatization of victims, improves communication between victims and law enforcement officers, and ensures the use of evidence-based practices in responding to cases of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking. This section clarifies that the training should be conducted through a partnership between a national, regional, or local victim services organization and a law enforcement agency. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 206 authorizes a grant to provide community-specific services for LGBT victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking. This section directs OWV to provide technical assistance and training to victim service providers and organizations that are seeking to work with LGBT victims. This section authorizes appropriations of $8 million per fiscal year through 2027.
TITLE III – Services, Protection, and Justice for Young Victims
Sec. 301 improves the Rape Prevention and Education Grant program, administered by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Injury Center. Grantees are permitted to use grant funds for other technologies that serve the same purpose as a hotline to help improve resources for victims. Grants are available to professionals, including “school-based professionals,” that can help refer students to victim services.
This section requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to ensure that grantees adequately represent under-served and culturally specific communities. This section requires HHS to submit a report to Congress about activities funded by the grants and best practices relating to rape prevention and education. This section authorizes appropriations of $100 million per fiscal year through 2027.
 
Sec. 302 clarifies that funding under the Creating Hope through Outreach, Options, Services, and Education (CHOOSE) program for children and youth is dedicated to the core areas of VAWA—domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking— and that services targeting youth should also include youth in underserved communities. The section allows grant funds to be used to clarify State or local mandatory reporting policies and practices regarding peer-to-peer dating violence, sexual assault, stalking, and sex trafficking. This section also allows grant funds to be used to develop and enhance programs to prevent and respond to exposure to domestic violence in the home by children, and to the prevention of teen dating violence. This section authorizes appropriations of $30 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 303 improves existing campus grant programs to support institutions of higher education in developing and disseminating comprehensive prevention education for all students. This section expands training for school-based personnel and campus health centers to meet the needs of young victims of violence, including by using a victim- centered, trauma-informed interview technique. This section authorizes appropriations of $15 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 304 requires the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to issue a report on State requirements and funding for forensic exams following a sexual assault in order to ensure individuals do not receive bills for such exams and ancillary costs. States are required to include information on medical expenses related to a sexual assault including coverage, cost, and any funding sources the State uses to pay for such expenses.
TITLE IV – Violence Reduction Practices
Sec. 401 reauthorizes a CDC grant program to entities that research sexual violence against adults and youth, and expands the study so it no longer focuses on violence only against women. This section extends the existing authorization of appropriations through 2027.
Sec. 402 reauthorizes the Saving Money and Reducing Tragedies Through Prevention (SMART Prevention) grant program, which helps provide a comprehensive approach to preventing domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking that focuses on youth and men as leaders and influencers of social norms. This section authorizes appropriations of $20 million per fiscal year through 2027.
TITLE V – Strengthening the Health Care System’s Response
Sec. 501 strengthens grant programs that allow the health care system to best respond to victims of sexual violence. This section authorizes appropriations of $15 million per fiscal year through 2027.
 
Sec. 502 directs the Secretary of HHS and the Director of the CDC, in collaboration with the Attorney General, the Director of the Indian Health Service, and stakeholders, to conduct a study on whether victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, dating violence, or stalking are at higher risk for maternal mortality or morbidity.
Sec. 503 authorizes a grant program for States and Indian Tribes to create and implement surveys that identify how medical forensic examinations are conducted, administered, and covered by the health care system. The survey is required to be released publicly and can be used to help increase public awareness and recruit trained medical forensic examiners. This section authorizes appropriations of $7 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 504 requires the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, in consultation with several other federal government agencies, to submit a report to the Secretary of HHS regarding existing Federal, Indian Tribe, and State practices related to medical forensic examinations. The Secretary is required to submit a report to Congress on how to improve sexual assault forensic examination competencies—including on providing medical care, conducting the examination for evidence collection, showing compassion and sensitivity, testifying in court, and any other competency deemed appropriate.
Sec. 505 requires the Secretary of HHS to establish a National Continuing and Clinical Education Pilot Program for sexual assault forensic examiners, sexual assault nurse examiners, and other individuals who perform medical forensic examinations. The pilot program applies to physicians, nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, physician assistants, certified nurse specialists, registered nurses, and community health aides with necessary certification and training. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2025.
Sec. 506 requires the Secretary of HHS to establish a grant program to promote the training of sexual assault forensic examiners. Eligible grantees include safety net clinics, nonprofit organizations that provide legal training, and Indian Tribes. This section authorizes appropriations of $10 million per fiscal year through 2027. This section requires that 15 percent of grant funds be reserved for entities affiliated with Indian Tribes or Tribal organizations.
Sec. 507 requires the Secretary of HHS to create a demonstration grant program for institutions of higher education for comprehensive forensic training to help train health care providers with the necessary skills to support forensic assessments in a trauma- informed approach. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027 for the grant program, and additional appropriations of $2 million per fiscal year through 2027 to provide technical assistance for health care providers.
 
TITLE VI – Safe Homes for Victims

Sec. 601 updates the definition of “covered housing program” for additional housing and homelessness programs.

Sec. 602 requires the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to establish a Gender-based Violence Prevention Office with a Violence Against Women Act Director and authorizes appropriations of such sums as may be necessary to carry out these duties. This section also requires appropriate agencies to establish a process to review compliance with VAWA requirements. This section also prohibits retaliation against persons exercising their rights or participating in processes related to VAWA housing protections.

Sec. 603 protects the right of landlords, homeowners, tenants, residents, occupants, guests, and applicants to report crimes and emergencies and prohibits covered governmental entities receiving federal community development grants from imposing penalties based on requests for assistance or based on criminal activity of which they are a victim or not at fault. This section requires covered governmental entities to report any laws or policies that involve prohibited penalties and certify compliance or describe compliance efforts as part of their HUD annual grant plans. The section also authorizes additional grant activities to support development and implementation of effective, alternative crime reduction methods to supplant punitive programs and policies for victims.
Sec. 604 reauthorizes funding for fiscal years 2023 through 2027 for transitional housing grants for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. It also makes such funds available to population-specific organizations and makes technical assistance funding consistent with other VAWA programs.

Sec. 605 amends the definition of homelessness under the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act to better address the needs of sexual assault survivors and permits additional VAWA-related activities under McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Grants. The bill reauthorizes funding for fiscal years 2023 through 2027 for collaborative grants to increase the long-term stability of victims who are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless and grants to combat violence against women in public and assisted housing. This section also authorizes such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2023 through 2027 for training and technical assistance to support implementation of this chapter.

Sec. 606 requires the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to conduct a study assessing the availability and accessibility of housing and services for individuals experiencing homelessness or housing instability who are survivors of trafficking or at risk of being trafficked.
 
TITLE VII – Economic Security for Victims
Sec. 701 provides findings related to the economic impact of sexual violence on victims.
Sec. 702 adds sexual harassment victims to the list of victims that can be supported by the National Resource Center on Workplace Responses. This section creates a
“Pathways to Opportunities” pilot program that provides trauma-informed programming to support domestic violence victims seeking employment. The pilot program needs to be centered around culturally specific organizations or organizations primarily serving traditionally marginalized populations in the workplace. This section authorizes appropriations of $2 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 703 adds new certification requirements related to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, pursuant to which states would be required to certify that they have established appropriate standards to ensure that potential applicants for assistance who are survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault are aware that TANF assistance may be available to them. This section ensures that caseworkers and other TANF agency personnel are adequately trained on how to best work with victims of sexual violence. This section authorizes appropriations of $3 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 704 requires the Secretary of HHS, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, to conduct a study related to the barriers that victims of sexual violence face in maintaining economic security. The report is required to include information related to geographic areas that best serve victims of sexual violence, geographic areas that lack resources to serve victims, particular barriers facing rural victims, and recommendations, best practices, and factors based on industries and workplace settings.
Sec. 705 requires the GAO to submit a report to Congress that examines the relationship between victims of sexual violence and their ability to repay student loans. The report is required to include information related to a victim’s ability to repay their Federal student loans, the various Federal student loan policies that are in place to help defer loan payments, institutional policies for retaining and transferring credits when a victim may have to end or suspend enrollment, the options made available to victims if an institution of higher education misrepresents information to students related to student loan payments, and other limitations to victims due to Federal student loan debt.
TITLE VIII – Safety for Indian Women
Sec. 801 provides findings and purposes related to violence against American Indian women—including the extraordinarily high rates of murder committed and violent crimes perpetrated against American Indian and Alaska Native women. This section
 
clarifies that Federal, State, Tribal, and local governments have a responsibility to respond to these cases of violence against American Indian women.
Sec. 802 requires the Attorney General to allow Tribal law enforcement to have access to national crime databases, such as the National Crime Information Center. This section creates the “Tribal Access Program” to enhance access, enter information to, and obtain information from Federal criminal information databases. Any information reported or obtained will be shared with each Indian tribe of jurisdiction. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is permitted to use funds appropriated for sharing identification records to states, to also extend to Tribal jurisdictions. This section authorizes appropriations of $6 million per fiscal year through 2027 to remain available until expended.
Sec. 803 converts into a non-pilot program an existing pilot program that requires the Bureau of Prisons (BOP) to accept any offender that is convicted in Tribal court. This program is limited to offenders who have committed violent crimes and have been sentenced to one or more years.
Sec. 804 expands the jurisdiction of Tribal authorities over non-Indian persons who commit a crime in Indian country, including the jurisdiction of tribes in the State of Maine. Under current law, Tribal authorities only have jurisdictional power over offenses involving domestic violence that are committed by an individual that resides or is employed in Indian country, or is the spouse, intimate partner, or dating partner of a member of a tribe or resident of Indian country. This section clarifies that a Tribe may exercise criminal jurisdiction for certain covered crimes including: assault of Tribal justice personnel, child violence, domestic violence, obstruction of justice, sexual violence, sex trafficking, stalking, and violations of protection orders. This also clarifies that an Indian Tribe may not exercise jurisdictional power if both the victim and defendant are non-Indian. This section requires the Attorney General to establish a grant program to assist Indian tribes in strengthening Tribal criminal justice systems that allow them to exercise jurisdiction over covered crimes established in this title. This section authorizes appropriations of $25 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec 811 provides findings and purposes related to violence against Alaska Native women. This section also provides that Indian Tribes should be empowered to combat these violent crimes against women.
Sec. 812 provides definitions related to the Alaska Tribal Public Safety Empowerment subtitle.
Sec. 813 reaffirms the inherent authority of Alaska tribes to exercise personal jurisdiction over all Indian persons present in a village and establishes a pilot program that permits up to 30 Alaska tribes to exercise Special Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction. This special jurisdiction extends to persons within a village who are not Indian (unless both the alleged defendant and the alleged victim are non-Indians, in which case a tribe
 
would not be authorized to exercise jurisdiction). This special jurisdiction is concurrent with any jurisdiction also possessed by the State of Alaska or the United States. The Attorney General is empowered, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, to select up to five Alaska tribes per year to participate in the pilot program. Preference in the selection is to be given to tribes where the population is predominantly Indian or where there is no permanent state law enforcement presence, and where the Attorney General has determined that the participating tribe has safeguards in place to protect defendants’ rights secured under the Indian Civil Rights Act. The section also creates an Alaska Tribal Public Safety Advisory Committee to focus on improving the justice systems, crime prevention, and victim services of Indian tribes and the State and increasing coordination and communication among Federal, Tribal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
TITLE IX – Office on Violence Against Women
Sec. 901 changes the name of the office responsible for administering VAWA to the “Office on Violence Against Women.”
Sec. 902 establishes the position of Senior Policy Advisor for Culturally Specific Communities within OVW. The Senior Policy Advisor is tasked to oversee, coordinate, and advise on programs and grants that help culturally specific communities.
TITLE X – Improving Conditions for Women in Federal Custody
Sec. 1001 establishes an office within the BOP that is responsible for determining the placement of prisoners. If an inmate has a child, BOP is required to consider the proximity to the child as a factor in determining the placement of the inmate. BOP is prohibited from placing a pregnant prisoner in post-partum recovery into a segregated housing unit, unless such a placement is deemed necessary for security reasons. This section requires BOP to assess the need for family-focused programs during intake and assessment and provides parenting classes to any prisoner who is a primary caretaker. Training is required for BOP personnel related to trauma screening of inmates, and for any BOP personnel who engage with prisoners’ families regarding how to interact with children in an age-appropriate manner. BOP is required to ensure that inmates are provided with adequate health care.
Sec. 1002 requires BOP to establish a pilot program to allow incarcerated women and their children who are born during incarceration to reside together. To participate in this pilot program, an inmate will be required to apply, demonstrate an interest in serving in an active role with their child, participate in education and counseling opportunities, and abide by court decisions related to custody.
Sec. 1003 requires the National Institutes of Justice, in consultation with the Bureau of Justice Statistics and BOP, to prepare a report on the status of women in Federal
 
incarceration. The report will include data on women held in Federal facilities, including demographic data and information about past exposure to sexual violence and domestic violence. The report will also include information regarding the Federal facilities where women are incarcerated, including the availability of trauma treatment, rates of mental illness, and a list of available vocational education programs provided to inmates.
Sec. 1004 requires the Attorney General, in coordination with the Director of the Office of Probation and Pretrial Services and the BOP Director, to create a model for reentry for incarcerated women that are transitioning out of the Federal prison system, including a national standard on preventing domestic and sexual violence. The model is required to include relevant services that can aid previously incarcerated women in reentering society, including housing, parenting classes, and support tailored to the needs of Indigenous women.
Sec. 1005 authorizes appropriations of $8 million per fiscal year through 2027 to carry out the programs established in this title.
TITLE XI – Law Enforcement Tools to Enhance Public Safety
Sec. 1101 incorporates the bipartisan “NICS Denial Notification Act,” which requires the Attorney General to issue a notice to State, local, or Tribal law enforcement and prosecutors if an individual has attempted to purchase a firearm and been denied pursuant to the national instant criminal background check system. Reports are required to be made to the relevant parities within 24 hours and must include the date and time of the notice, the location where the purchaser attempted to obtain the firearm, and the identity of the person. The Attorney General is required to notify the relevant parties if it is determined that the person was not prohibited from obtaining a firearm.
Sec. 1102 requires the Attorney General to provide an annual report to Congress regarding statistics related to the number of denials pursuant to this title and other related information.
Sec. 1103 requires the Attorney General to appoint prosecutors and attorneys within the federal government to serve as special assistant U.S. Attorneys who are tasked with helping prosecute individuals who violate the prohibition in 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(8) and (9).
Sec. 1104 requires the Attorney General to conduct a review of law enforcement and crime prevention programs that help combat criminal offenses against Native Hawaiians.
TITLE XII – Closing the Law Enforcement Consent Loophole
Sec. 1201 provides the short title for Title XII, which is “Closing the Law Enforcement Consent Loophole Act of 2021.”
 
Sec. 1202 establishes penalties for civil rights offenses involving sexual misconduct that are committed by any person under color of any law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or custom. This section establishes criminal penalties for any person who commits such a civil rights violation involving sexual misconduct.
Sec. 1203 establishes a grant program for states that enact a law that makes it a criminal offense for any person to engage in a sexual act with an individual who is under arrest, in detention, or otherwise in law enforcement custody, and that prohibits the use of consent as a defense to qualifying sexual misconduct. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1204 requires an annual report to Congress by the Attorney General on the number of federal law enforcement officers who engage in sexual misconduct in violation of this new prohibition, and the disposition of each case of sexual misconduct. The GAO is also required to submit an annual report on violations of 18 U.S.C. 2243(c). The Attorney General is also required to submit an annual report to Congress on the inconsistencies between State laws on marriage-age and State laws on age-based sex offenses.
Sec. 1205 defines “sexual act” in this title as it is defined in 18 U.S.C. 2246.
TITLE XIII – Other Matters
Sec. 1301 reauthorizes existing appropriations for program to improve processes for entering data related to stalking and domestic violence into State, local, and national crime information databases through 2027.
Sec. 1302 authorizes appropriations for United States Attorneys to appoint victim and witness coordinators for the prosecution of sex crimes and domestic violence crimes.
This section authorizes appropriations of $1 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1303 reauthorizes appropriations for programs to improve the judicial system’s handling of child abuse and neglect cases through training programs for judicial personnel and practitioners. This section authorizes appropriations of $2.3 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1304 reauthorizes appropriations for training programs to assist probation and parole officers with case management, supervision, and relapse prevention for released sex offenders. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1305 reauthorizes existing appropriations for grants to initiate and support state and local court-appointed special advocate programs that focus on supporting minors through 2027.
 
Sec. 1306 requires the Secretary of HHS to submit a report to Congress regarding the link between being a victim of sexual violence and the likelihood of having a substance use disorder.
Sec. 1307 requires the Attorney General to establish an interagency working group to study Federal efforts to collect data on sexual violence and make recommendations regarding the coordination of data collection efforts across agencies. The working group is required to have representatives from the CDC, the Department of Education, HHS, the Department of Justice, and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The working group is required to submit a report to Congress within two years of enactment.
Sec. 1308 requires that the National Resource Center on Workplace Response, which assists victims of domestic and sexual violence and is only available to public-sector entities, also provide support to businesses with fewer than 20 employees.
Sec. 1309 establishes a civil right of action for an individual who has an intimate visual depiction of themselves disclosed without their consent. If the individual is under 18 years of age, incompetent, incapacitated, or deceased, this section allows a legal guardian or representative for the individual to file a civil rights action on the individual’s behalf. An individual can recover damages of up to $150,000 and legal fees as damages if the civil action succeeds. Courts are authorized to provide other forms of appropriate legal relief, including a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction, or a permanent injunction. A civil action cannot be brought if the image was commercial pornographic content (unless that content was produced by force, fraud, misrepresentation, or coercion), if the disclosure was made in good faith to law enforcement or in a legal proceeding, if the disclosure involved a matter of public concern or interest, or if the disclosure was reasonably intended to assist the individual.
Sec. 1310 incorporates the “Choose Respect Act,” and designates October 1 as Choose Respect Day. This section directs OVW to fund and oversee a public service media campaign directed at young men that focuses on changing the broader culture around the mistreatment of women. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027 to remain available until expended.
Sec. 1311 makes a technical correction to the Victims of Crime Act.
Sec. 1312 eliminates the marriage defense as an exception to the existing law governing federal statutory rape.
Sec. 1313 establishes a new position within the Office of Justice Programs at the U.S. Department of Justice: the Deputy Assistant Attorney General on Culturally Specific Communities. This position is responsible for coordinating and advising on issues related to culturally specific programs established under VAWA, and ensuring that appropriate technical assistance and grants are made available for culturally specific communities.
 
Sec. 1314 requires the Secretary of Education, the Secretary of HHS, and the Attorney General to establish an interagency task force to provide information, recommendations, solicit information from relevant stakeholders, and create a plan to address sexual violence in education. The interagency task force is required to issue a report to Congress on recommendations to recruit, retain, and train Department of Education employees that carry out title IX investigations. The task force is also required to submit an annual report to Congress on complaints regarding sexual violence at education institutions and information on those investigations.
Sec. 1315 provides the short title of this section, which is “Bree’s Law”. The Secretary of HHS can make grants to carry out demonstration projects to improve adolescent health, including by reducing teen dating violence. The Departments of HHS, Education, and Justice are required to create an interagency working group to address teen dating violence, in collaboration with family members of teens who were killed by a dating partner. The working group is required to submit an annual report to the Secretary of HHS with recommendations to reduce and prevent teen dating violence. This section authorizes appropriations of $8 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1316 provides the short title of this section, which is the “Fairness for Rape Kit Backlog Survivors Act of 2022”. Amends the Victim of Crime Act of 1984 to provide a waiver for any application filing deadline imposed by the program for a crime victim if the victim is otherwise eligible for compensation and the delay in filing was a result of a delay in the testing of, or a delay in the DNA profile matching from, a sexual assault forensic examination kit or biological material collected as evidence related to a sexual offense.
Sec. 1317 requires the Secretary of Education to publish the findings of its study reviewing the aiding and abetting of sexual misconduct in schools.
Sec. 1318 provides the short title of this section, which is the “Supporting Access to Nurse Exams (SANE) Act”. Creates a grant program to establish regional (SANE) training programs to provide clinical education, hiring support for those specializing in pediatrics and working in a multidisciplinary teams, and access to simulation laboratories with a preference for establishment of programs in localities with a high volume of forensic trauma cases and underserved populations. The Attorney General is required to establish a public website on the access to forensic nurse examiners within 2 years of enactment and submit a report to Congress regarding the availability of, access to, and activities and financing of SANEs within 4 years of enactment. This section authorizes appropriations of $30 million per fiscal year through 2027.
 
TITLE XIV – Cybercrime Enforcement
Sec. 1401 creates a grant program for State, Tribal, and local governments to help with the prevention, enforcement, and prosecution of cybercrimes committed against individuals. These funds can be used to train and assist state or local law enforcement, prosecutors, judges, and emergency responders to prevent and respond to victims of cybercrimes. A cybercrime is defined as the use of a computer to cause personal harm to an individual by another individual, including through harassment, threats, stalking, extortion, coercion, causing fear, intimidation, distributing intimate images without consent, or violating the privacy of an individual. Grantees are required to submit an annual report to the Attorney General regarding activities carried out pursuant to the grant and an evaluation of the results of the activities. This section authorizes appropriations of $10 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1402 authorizes a grant to establish a National Resource Center on Cybercrimes Against Individuals. This National Resource Center will provide information, resources, training, and technical assistance to help prevent, enforce, and prosecute cybercrimes against individuals. Grant recipients must submit an annual report to the Attorney General regarding activities carried out pursuant to the grant and an evaluation of the results of the activities. This section authorizes appropriations of $4 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1403 requires the Attorney General to develop a national strategy to reduce cybercrimes, improve investigation coordination, and develop an evaluation process that measures rates of cybercrime victimization and prosecutorial rates. The FBI is required to establish a framework for classifying cybercrimes.
TITLE XV – Keeping Children Safe from Family Violence
Sec. 1501 provides the short title of Title XV, which is the “Keeping Children Safe from Family Violence Act” or “Kayden’s Law.”
Sec. 1502 provides Congressional findings related to child abuse and the impacts on children who are exposed to sexual violence.
Sec. 1503 provides that the purposes of this title are to prioritize child safety in private custody proceedings in State court, to strengthen the ability of courts to recognize and adjudicate domestic violence and child abuse, and to ensure that court personnel are appropriately trained in the dynamics, signs, and impact of domestic violence, using a trauma-informed approach.
Sec. 1504 allows for increased STOP grant funding for State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments that pass or have laws to help create uniformed standards for child custody hearings that involve child abuse, and require judges to undergo 20 hours of initial training and 15 hours of ongoing training every five years focused on domestic
 
and sexual violence and child abuse. This section authorizes appropriations of $5 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1505 extends a sexual assault survivor’s rights to include the right to be informed of the status and location of any evidence collection kit related to the sexual assault they experienced.
Sec. 1506 establishes a new grant program for State and Tribal courts that are part of a multidisciplinary partnership with law enforcement and victim service providers to create a pilot program on how to best service protection orders through electronic communication methods. This section authorizes appropriations of $10 million per fiscal year through 2027.
Sec. 1507 requires that the Secretary of Education, in consultation with other federal government officials and experts in combatting sexual violence, develop and implement a survey tool to track the experiences of sexual violence among postsecondary students.
Sec. 1508 requires the Attorney General to conduct a study to review state laws, regulations, and practices on how child neglect and custody situations are handled in domestic violence situations, and provide recommendations on how to improve state laws and regulations to better protect victims of domestic violence and their children.
