BOOK ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CRIMINAL LAW

TITLE 1
CONDITIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF CRIMINAL LAW CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Article 1:	Implementation Boundary of Penal Code
The penal code specifies the offences, points out the persons who could be declared as responsible for the offences and determine the penalties as well as the modalities of their application.
Article 2:	Definition and Classification of Offences
The law provides that certain acts of natural persons or legal entities which create social disturbance are offences. Offences are classified, according to their severity, as felonies, misdemeanours and petty crimes.

In necessary cases, legal instruments issued by executive body may state petty crimes which are penalized by monetary fine only.

Article 3:	Principles of Legality
Only the act constituting an offence that is provided in the criminal provisions in force gives rise to criminal punishment.

Only penalty that is provided in the criminal provisions in force when an offence is committed may be imposed.

Article 4:	Principles of Individual Criminal Responsibility
Each person is responsible for his/her act only.

Article 4:	Intention to Commit an Offence
There is no offence if there is no intention to commit.

However, in case that a law is provided in advance, an offence may arise from carelessness, inattentiveness, negligence or failure to respect certain obligations.



Article 5:	Interpretation of Criminal Law
In a criminal case, the law is strictly interpreted. The judge can neither broaden his/her sphere of application nor proceed doing so by means of an analogy.
 
Article 6:	Pronouncement of Sentence
No sentence can be executed if it has not been pronounced by a court.

Article 7:	Conditions for Application of Cambodian Laws
In criminal cases, the field of application of Cambodian law in space is determined by the provisions of this code, except otherwise stated in the international treaties.

Article 8:	Absence of Impunity in Serious Offences in relation to International Humanitarian Law
The provisions of this Code may not constitute a condition for denial of justice for the victims of serious offences provided in a separate law in relation to violation of international humanitarian law, international practices, or international conventions recognized by the Kingdom of Cambodia.

CHAPTER 2
APPLICATION OF PENAL LAW AT A TIME

Article 9:	Application of Less Severe Law
The new provisions which abolish an offence are immediately applicable. The acts committed before their effective date can no longer be prosecuted. The legal proceedings in progress must be terminated.

If a final sentence has been imposed, the penalties resulting from this sentencing must not be carried out or cease to be executed.

Article 10:	Application of Less or More Severe Law
The new provisions which provide for less severe sentences are immediately applicable. However, the final sentences are carried out regardless of the severity of the imposed sentences.

The new provisions which provide for more severe sentences can be applicable only to the acts committed after the effective date of these provisions.

Article 11:	Validity of Proceedings
Immediate application of the new provisions has no effect on the validity on the proceeding performed according to the former provisions.






CHAPTER 3
APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW IN SPACE
 
Section 1
Offences Committed or Deemed to be Committed within the Territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia

Article 12:	Territorial Principles of the Application of Criminal Law
As far as criminal acts are concerned, the Cambodian Penal Law is applicable to offences committed in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

The territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia includes the airspace and the sea water territory which are bound to the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

Article 13:	Location of Offence
An offence is deemed to having committed in the territory of Kingdom of Cambodia from the moment that one of these constituent acts has taken place within this territory.

Article 14:	Offences Committed Aboard Cambodian Ships
As far as criminal acts are concerned, the Cambodian Law is applicable to offences committed aboard the ships carrying Cambodian flag no matter where they are located.

Article 15:	Offences Committed Aboard Foreign Ships
As far as criminal acts are concerned, the Cambodian Law is applicable to offences committed aboard a foreign ship on which the Cambodian authorities are allowed to inspect or arrest by means of an international agreement.

Article 16:	Offences Committed Aboard Cambodian Aircraft
As far as criminal acts are concerned, the Cambodian Law is applicable to offences committed aboard an aircraft registered in the Kingdom of Cambodia no matter where they are located.

Article 17:	Application	of	Cambodian	Criminal	Law	with	Regards	to	the Commission of Acts which Started in Cambodia
As far as criminal acts are concerned, the Cambodian Law is applicable to every person who is an instigator or an accomplice in the Cambodian territory of a felony or a misdemeanour committed abroad, if the following two conditions are fulfilled:
1.	The offence is punished by the Cambodian law and by the foreign law;
2.	The existence of offence has been verified by a final decision of the foreign court.

Article 18:	Definition of Offences Committed by Legal Entity
Defining an offence committed by a legal entity as felony, misdemeanour or petty crime is determined by penalty imposed on natural person.


Section 2
Offences Committed Outside the Cambodian Territory
 
Article 19:	Felony or Misdemeanour Committed by a Cambodian Citizen
In criminal case, the Cambodian Law is applicable to any felony committed by a Cambodian citizen outside the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

The Cambodian Law is applicable to misdemeanours committed by the Cambodian citizens in a foreign country if the acts are shared to be punishable by the law of such foreign country.

These provisions are also applicable even though the accused has obtained Cambodian nationality subsequently to the acts which had been charged.

Article 20:	Victims Who are Cambodian Citizens
In criminal case, the Cambodian Law is applicable to any felony committed outside the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia by a Cambodian citizen or by a foreigner when the victim is of Cambodian nationality right at the time of the offence committed.

Article 21:	Filing Charge
In the cases specified in Article 19 (Felony or Misdemeanour Committed by a Cambodian Citizen) and Article 20 (Victims Who are Cambodian Citizens), a charge can only be brought at the request of a prosecution department. The charge must be preceded by the victim's complaint or that of his/her assignee or an official denunciation by the authorities of the country where the acts were committed.

Article 22:	Separate Jurisdiction for Separate Crimes
In criminal case, the Cambodian Law is applicable to any offence committed outside the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia and if it is qualified as:
1.	infringement against the safety of the Kingdom of Cambodia;
2.	counterfeiting the seal of the Kingdom of Cambodia;
3.	counterfeiting national bank notes having legal tender in the Kingdom of Cambodia;
4.	offence against diplomatic or consular agents of the Kingdom of Cambodia
5.	offence against diplomatic or consular premises of the Kingdom of Cambodia.
Article 23:	Non-Cumulative Charge and Punishment
No prosecution can be carried out against a person who has definitively been tried abroad for the same acts and who, in case of a conviction, justified that he/she has served his/her sentencing or that the penalty was extinguished by an expiration of prescription.





TITLE 2 CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
 
CHAPTER 1
PERPETRATOR, INSTIGATOR AND ACCOMPLICE

Article 24: Principles of Individual Criminal Responsibility
Each person is responsible for his/her act only

Article 25: Definition of Perpetrator
Described as a perpetrator is a person who has committed the incriminated acts.

Described also as a perpetrator is a person who has attempted to commit a felony or, in the cases provided for by law, a misdemeanour.

Article 26:	Definition of co-Perpetrators
Described as co-perpetrators when several persons have agreed to commit an offence together directly.

Described also as co-perpetrators when several persons have agreed to attempt to commit a felony or, in the cases provided for by law, a misdemeanour directly.

Article 27:	Definition of Attempt
The attempt to commit a felony or, in the cases provided for by law, a misdemeanour is punishable when the following conditions are fulfilled:
1.	the perpetrator has started the initial steps in the commission of the offence which means that the perpetrator has carried out his/her intention directly to commit the offence;
2.	the perpetrator has not stopped his/her act voluntarily but it was disrupted or interrupted by the effect of the circumstances outside his/her will.

Act of preparation without own intention to commit an offence does not constitute the initial steps.

The attempt in petty crime carries no punishment.

Article 28:	Definition of Instigator

Described as an instigator is the person who:
1.		encourages the commission of a felony or a misdemeanour by giving an instruction or order;
2.	instigates to commit a felony or a misdemeanour by means of a gift, a promise or a threat, incitement, lure or by abuse of his/her authority or his/her power.

The instigator is punishable only if the felony or the misdemeanour is carried out or was attempted.

The instigator of a felony or a misdemeanour receives the same punishments as the
 
perpetrator.

Article 29:	Definition of an Accomplice
Described as an accomplice is the person who intentionally facilitates the attempt or the realization of a felony or a misdemeanour by providing his/her help or assistance.
The accomplice shall be punished unless the crime or demeanour offend get success or attempted.
The accomplice of a felony or a misdemeanour receives the same punishments as the perpetrator.

Article 30:	Definition of Public Officials, Citizens Entrusted with Public Mandate through Elections
1.	Public officials mean:
a.	persons who work in legislative, executive or judicial institutions who are appointed by legal instruments either permanently or temporarily with or without remuneration regardless of their status or age;
b.	other persons who work in public functions, including public agencies or public enterprises and other public institutions that are stated in the laws of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

2.	Citizens who are entrusted with public mandate through elections ie senators, members of National Assembly, commune/Sangkat councillors and citizens who are entrusted with public mandate through elections to perform other public functions.


CHAPTER 2
CAUSES OF CRIMINAL IRRESPONSIBILITY OR LESSENING RESPONSIBILITY

Article 31:	Cause of Irresponsibility due to Mental Disorder
When a person commits an offence right at the time when he/she is suffered from mental disorder which suppresses his/her discernment, he/she is not criminally responsible.

When a person commits an offence right at the time where he/she is suffered from mental disorder which reduces his/her discernment, he/she still remains criminally responsible. However, the court must take into account that circumstance when it determines the penalty.

When a person commits an offence right at the time where he/she suffered from mental disorder dues as a result of using alcohols, addicted drugs or substances prohibited by laws cannot be exempted from criminal responsibility.

Article 32:	Authorization by laws or Authorities
A person who performed an act prescribed or authorized by the law, he/she does not commit an offence.
 
A person who performed an act compelled by legitimate authority, he/she does not commit an offence, except for the fact that this act is obviously illegal.

However, the perpetrator, the instigator or the accomplice of genocide, of a crime against humanity or war crime cannot be exempted from his/her criminal responsibility even with reasons as mentioned below:
1.	he/she has performed an act prescribed, authorized or prohibited by the law in force;
2.	he/she has so acted under the order of the legitimate authority.

Article 33:	Legitimate Defence
A person who committed an offence under a legitimate defence is not criminally responsible.

Legitimate defence must fulfil the following conditions:
1.	The offence is justified by the necessity to engage in defence against an unjustified aggression;
2.	The offence and the aggression must happen at the same time;
3.	There is no disproportion between the means of defence used and the severity of the aggression.

Article 34:	Presumption of Legitimate Defence
The legitimate defence is presumed in the following cases:
1.	the offence is committed in order to repulse from a residing place an entering at night by means of breaking-in & entering by violence or by trickery;
2.	the offence is committed for self-defence against larcenies or of robberies carried out with violence.

The presumption of legitimate defence is not absolute. This presumption may be waived by contrary evidence.

Article 35:	Virtue of Necessity
A person who is in a virtue of necessity of committing an offence is not criminally responsible.
The state of a virtue of necessity must fulfil the following conditions:
1.	the offence is justified by the virtue of necessity for protection of one-self, to protect another person or to protect a property against real or impending danger;
2.	there is proportion between the means of defence used and the severity of the danger.

Article 36:	Impact of Force or Constraint
A person who committed an offence under the impact of a force or of a constraint to which he/she cannot resist is not criminally responsible.
 
The force or the constraint can only be the result of the event independent of human will. The force or constraint must be unforeseeable and inevitable.

Article 37:	Criminal Irresponsibility
A person who is not criminally responsible is not subject to any punishment.

CHAPTER 3
CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE MINORS

Article 38:	Legal Age of Criminal Responsibility
The criminal legal age is set at 18 (eighteen) years of age.

Article 39:	Measures to Apply against Minors
The minors who committed an offence are subject to the measures of surveillance, education, protection and assistance.

However, the court may pronounce a criminal conviction against a minor of 14 (fourteen) years of age or more, if the circumstances of the offence or the personality of the minor justify in doing so.

Article 40:	Types of Measures
The educational measures, the surveillance measures, the protection measures and the assistance measures are the following:
1.	handing-over of the minor to his/her parents; his/her guardian; to a person who has guardianship role or to another person who is trustworthy.
2.	handing-over of the minor to a social service agency charged with handling of minors;
3.	handing-over of the minor to a private organization who has the qualification to receive them;
4.	handing-over of the minor to a specialized hospital or institution;
5.	placement of the minor under the judicial protection.

Article 41:	Placement under Judicial Protection
In case of placement under judicial protection, the court designates a person to be in charge of surveillance of the minor. This person submits regularly to the prosecutor a report on the conduct of the minor. This person informs the prosecutor of all relevant events that would entail a modification of this measure.

CHAPTER 4
CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF A LEGAL ENTITY

Article 42:	Criminal Responsibility of a Legal Entity
In case it is precisely provided for by a law and legal instruments, the legal entities, to the exclusion of the State, may be declared as being criminally responsible for the offences committed, for their interests, by their organs or their representatives.
 
The criminal responsibility of the legal entity does not exclude the criminal responsibility of the natural person for the same acts.

TITLE 3
DEFINITIONS OF CERTAIN AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

SINGLE CHAPTER
PARTICULAR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

Article 43:	Organized Band
Any organized band constitutes a grouping or an illegal knock-out agreement that is set up in order to prepare or to carry out one or several offences.

Article 44:	Premeditation
The premeditation is a plan set in motion before taking the action to commit an offence.

Article 45:	Breaking and Entering
The breaking and entering is the act of forcing, degrading or destroying a locking device or a fence of whatsoever the nature.

The followings are considered to be breaking and entering:
1.	the utilization of forged key;
2.	the utilization of an illegally obtained key;
3.	the utilization of any instrument designed to open the a locking device without forcing it, degrading it or destroying it.

Article 46:	Jumping Over
The jumping over is an act of entering into a any place, either by crossing a fence, or by passing through an opening not designed for entry.

Article 47:	Weapon and Objects Considered as Weapon

A weapon is any object designed to kill or to wound.
All any other object being susceptible to present a danger for the persons in the following cases is considered as a weapon:
1.	the object is used to kill, to wound or threaten;
2.	the object is designed to kill, to wound or to threaten.

The use of animal for the purpose of killing, wounding, or threatening is considered the same as the use of weapon.

Article 48:	Ambush
An ambush is any act of waiting for the victim in any place with an intention to surprise him/her to commit offence.
 
TITLE 3
PENALTIES

CHAPTER 1 CATEGORIES OF PENALTIES
SECTION 1 PRINCIPAL PENALTIES


Article 43:	Principal Penalties
The principal penalties are of a prison term and a fine. The fine is expressed and paid in Riel.
Article 44:	The Minimum and Maximum of Prison Terms
When an offence is penalized for a prison term, the law sets a minimum and a maximum of jail term imposed.

When an offence is penalized by a fine, the law sets a minimum and a maximum amount of fine imposed.

Article 45:	Increase and Decrease of Penalties
The minimum and maximum of prison term and of the fine may be increased or decreased, according to the conditions described by the present code.

Article 46:	Definition of a Felony
An offence considered as a felony in the case where the maximum of the penalty for prison term imposed is:
1.	a life imprisonment;
2.	an imprisonment for a period of more than 5 (five) years and less than or equal to 30 (thirty) years.

The prison term may be accompanied by a fine.

Article 47:	Definition of Misdemeanour
An offence considered as a misdemeanour is in the case where the maximum of the punishment for a prison term imposed upon is more than 6 (six) days and less than or equal to 5 (five) years.

The punishment for a prison term may be accompanied by a fine.
Article 48:	Definition of Petty Crime
Offence is a petty crime in case:
1-	An offence considered as a petty crime is in the case where the maximum of the punishment for a prison term imposed upon is less than or equal to 6 (six) days. The
 
prison term may be accompanied by a fine. 2- An offence shall be punished only fine.

Article 49:	Calculation of Duration for Prison Term
A punishment for a one-day jail term is calculated as 24 (twenty four) hours. A punishment for a one-month jail term is calculated as 30 (thirty) days.
A punishment for more than one (1) month jail term shall take into account the actual number of days of the month.

A punishment for a one (1) year jail term is calculated as 12 (twelve) months.

Article 50:	Separate Conditions for Terminating Punishment
In principle, the convicted person whose punishment ends on Sunday or on public holiday shall be released on preceding day thereof.

Article 51:	Inclusion of Duration of Pre-trial Detention
The duration of pre-trial detention is fully included in the duration of the punishment for a prison term to be served.

Article 52:	Incomes from Fine
Incomes from fine are paid to the state budget.

SECTION 2 ADDITIONAL PUNISHMENTS

Article 53:	Categories of Additional Punishment
The additional punishments are:
1.	deprivation of some civil rights;
2.	prohibition from pursuing a profession when the offence was committed while carrying out this professional task;
3.	prohibition from the driving of all kinds of motor vehicle;
4.	confiscation of the driver's license;
5.	prohibition from taking a residency;
6.	prohibition from leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia;
7.	for a convicted foreigner, the prohibition from entering and residing in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia;
8.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or objects which are used to commit the offence or are intended to commit the offence;
9.	seizure of the objects or funds which are intended to commit the offence;
10.	seizure of incomes or properties earned as a result from the offence;
11.	seizure of the utensils, materials and movable properties garnishing a premise in which the offence was committed;
12.	seizure of vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
13.	prohibition from having in possession of or carrying a weapon and
 
ammunition;
14.	expelling from the public transactions or agreements;
15.	closure down of an establishment having served to prepare or to commit the offence;
16.	prohibition from the operation a business that is open to the public or used by the public;
17.	posting the decision of the sentence;
18.	publication in the newspapers of the decision of the sentence;
19.	broadcasting of the decision of the sentence by all means of audio-visual communications.

The separate provisions may constitute additional penalties.

Article 54:	Conditions for Pronouncing Additional Penalties
The additional penalties may only be pronounced if they are specifically provided for the felony, the misdemeanour or the petty crime imposed upon.

The pronouncement of additional penalties may be optional. It may be mandatory if the law provides for expressively.

Article 55:	Civil Rights that May be Deprived
The civil rights that may be deprived as provided for in point 1 of Article 59 (Categories of Additional Penalties) includes:
1.	rights to vote;
2.	rights to stand for election;
3.	rights to work in public function;
4.	rights to be designated as an expert, arbitrator and proxy in court;
5.	rights to receive all official decorations;
6.	rights to serve as a witness under oath at court;

This penalty may either be definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (five) years at the most.

Article 56:	Prohibition from Pursuing a Profession
The prohibition from pursuing a profession is not applicable to the exercising of an elective public mandate or trade union responsibilities. It is not applicable for the infraction to the law on press.

This penalty may either be definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (five) years at the most.

The court must specify the profession the pursuing of which is prohibited.

Article 57:	Prohibition from Driving all kinds of Motor Vehicle
The prohibition from driving all kinds motor vehicles may not exceed 5 (five) years.
 
Article 58:	Suspension of Driving License
The penalty of suspension of a driver's license shall not exceed 5 (Five) years. The convicted person must hand over his/her driver's license to the court clerk of the court. The driver's license is kept according to the conditions specified by the Prakas of the Minister of Justice.

Article 59:	Prohibition from taking Residency at Certain Places in Cambodia
The penalty of prohibition from taking residency is a prohibition imposed upon the convicted person from appearing in certain places in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia. This penalty may not exceed 10 (Ten) years for a felony and 5 (Five) years for a misdemeanour.
The court determines the list of prohibited places and the duration of the prohibition. The prohibition from taking residency consists of measures of surveillance.
The convicted person must:
1.	Appear as summoned by the judicial authority or an administrative authority designated by the court;
2.	Appear periodically at the office of the police or royal gendarmerie designated by the court;
The court must determine the modalities of measures for surveillance.

The decision made by the court must notify by the prosecutor to the Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of National Defence.
Article 60:	Prohibition from Leaving the Territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia
The prohibition from leaving the territory of Cambodia must not exceed 5 (Five) years.
The convicted person must hand over his/her passport to the court clerk of the court. The passport is kept according to the conditions specified by Prakas of the Minister of Justice.
The convicted person cannot, during the period of the penalty, apply for a passport.

Article 61:	Prohibition from Entering and Taking Residency in the Territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a Convicted Foreigner
The prohibition, for a convicted foreigner, from entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia is either definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (Five) years at the most. It entails a lawful expulsion of the convicted person at the end of the jail term.
Article 62:	Confiscation
Confiscation may be taken against the following objects:
1.	any instruments, materials or objects which are used to commit the offence or
 
are intended to commit the offence;
2.	the objects or funds with which is the subject of the offence;
3.	the incomes or properties earned as a result of the offence;
4.	The utensils, materials and the movable properties garnishing a premise in which the offence was committed;

However, the confiscation cannot be pronounced if it affects the rights of the third parties.
Article 63:	Management of Confiscated Properties
At the time when the confiscation became definitive, the confiscated material things become property of the State unless the specific provisions designate different allocation.

The State can proceed on selling or destroying the confiscated material things according to prescribed procedures for the selling of the property of the State.

Article 64:	Prohibition from having in Possession of or Carrying all kinds of Weapon, Explosive and Ammunitions
Prohibition from having in possessing of or carrying a weapon, explosive and ammunition may be either definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (Five) years at the most. It applies to weapons, explosive and ammunitions of all kinds in the Kingdom of Cambodia.

Article 65:	Expulsion from Public Transactions
Exclusion from public transactions entails banning from direct or indirect participating in all transactions or agreements proposed by:
1.	State;
2.	A territorial decentralized community;
3.	A public establishment;
4.	A State controlled or concession enterprise or enterprise controlled by a territorial decentralized community.

The penalty of exclusion may be either definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (five) years at the most.
Article 66:	Closure of Establishments
The penalty of closing down an establishment entails the prohibition from carrying out in this establishment the activity during which the offence has been committed.

The penalty of closing down may be either definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (five) years at the most.

Article 67:	Prohibition from Operating Businesses in an Establishment
The prohibition from operating businesses in an establishment opened to the public or used by the public may be either definitive or temporary for a duration of 5 (five) years at the most.
 
Article 68:	Posting of Decision
The penalty of posting the decision is carried out in the places designated by and for a duration determined by the court. The posting may not exceed 2 (two) months. The posting may be in full, by means of excerpt or simply by making references thereof. The fees for the posting are the burdens of the convicted person.

In case of removal, concealment or ripping up of the affixed posting, the posting must be conducted again. The re-posting must be paid by the person who had carried out an act of removal, concealment or ripping up of the affixed posting.

Article 69:	The Publication in the Newspapers of the Decision of the Sentence The penalty of disseminating the court decision must be published in newspapers according to the modalities and duration set out by the court.

The publication fee is the burden of the convicted person. In case of resistance, forced physical imprisonment may be imposed upon the convicted person.

If the court orders the publication of the decision, the newspaper cannot refuse the publication.

Article 70:	Broadcasting of the Sentence Decision by Means of Audio-visual Communications
The penalty of public broadcasting of the decision by all means of audio-visual communications is carried out according to the modalities set out by the court. The broadcasting may not exceed 8 (eight) days. The broadcasting may be in full, by means of excerpt or simply by making references thereof. The fees for the broadcasting are the burdens of the convicted person.

Article 71:	Duration of Application of Additional Penalties
Except otherwise stated contrary in the decision of the court, the additional penalties mentioned in sub-para 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the Article 53 (Categories of Additional Punishment) are carried out at the end of jail term.

SECTION 3 SUBSTITUTE PENALTY

Sub section 1 Community Work

Article 72:	Definition of Community Work
When the accused receives a jail sentence the maximum of which is less than or equal to 3 (three) years, the court can pronounce the penalty of community work.

The community work is an obligation to be accomplished during a period made up of between 30 (thirty) and 200 (two hundred) hours, the unpaid works for the State's
 
benefit, of the territorial community, of the legal entity subjected to public laws, of an association or a non-governmental organization.

Article 73:	Person who does not Benefits from Community Work
The community work may not, under no circumstances, be carried out for the profit of a natural person.

Article 74:	Legitimacy of the Community Work
The community work is subject to the provisions of the labour code, in particular, in relation to night shift, hygiene, security as well as the works for women.

The community work may be held concurrently with a professional activity.

Article 75:	Principles for Compensation of Damage
The State must compensate the damage caused to other individuals by the convicted person during his/her performance of the community work. The State is lawfully subrogated in the rights of the victims.

Sub-Section 2 Reprimand

Article 76:	Legitimacy of Reprimand
When the accused receives a jail sentence the maximum of which is less than or equal to 3 (three) years, the court can pronounce the reprimand if the following three conditions are met:
1.	disturb to the public order resulting from the offence has come to an end;
2.	damage was repaired;
3.	the offender shows his/her willingness for social reintegration.

CHAPTER 2
CIRCUMSTANCES FOR AGGRAVATION AND MITIGATION OF PENALTIES SECTION 1
AGGRAVATION SUB-SECTION 1
DEFINITION OF SOME AGGRAVATIONS
Article 77 to Article 82: New visions

SUB-SECTION 2 RECIDIVISM

Article 83:	Impact of Recidivism
The recidivism results in aggravating the maximum of the penalty imposed for imprisonment for a felony or for a misdemeanour, under the conditions provided for by this chapter.

Article 84:	Conditions of Recidivism
 
The recidivism was constituted in the following cases:
1.	When a person is already definitively convicted for a felony, he/she committed a felony again within a period of 10 (ten) years;
2.	When a person is already definitively convicted for a felony, he/she committed a misdemeanour within a period of 5 (five) years;
3.	When a person is already definitively convicted for a misdemeanour to a penalty of imprisonment equal to or more than 3 (three) years, he/she committed a felony within a period of 5 (five) years;
4.	When a person is already definitively convicted for a misdemeanour, he/she committed the same misdemeanour within a period of 5 (five) years;

The time limits of 10 (ten) and 5 (five) years is counted from day when the decision on punishment of the first offence comes into effect.

Article 85:	Recidivism in a Felony
When a person is already definitively convicted for a felony, he/she committed a new felony within a period of 10 (ten) years, the maximum of an imprisonment imposed upon the new felony is increased according to the following scale:
1.	If the new penalty for imprisonment imposed upon for new felony does not exceed 20 (twenty) years, this maximum is doubled;
2.	If the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon the new felony is 30 (thirty) years, the maximum becomes life imprisonment.

Article 86:	Recidivism in Misdemeanour after a Felony Penalty
When a person is already definitively convicted for a felony, he/she committed a misdemeanour within a period of 5 (five) years, the maximum of an imprisonment imposed upon the misdemeanour is doubled.

In the case where, as a result of the recidivism, the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon exceeds 5 (five) years, the offence remains a misdemeanour despite the increase of the penalty.

Article 87:	Recidivism in a Felony after a Misdemeanour Penalty
When a person is already definitively convicted for a misdemeanour with a penalty for imprisonment equal to or more than 3 (three) years, he/she committed a felony within a period of 5 (five) years, the penalty imposed upon for the felony is increased according to the following scale:
1.	If the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon for the felony does not exceed 20 (twenty) years, this maximum is doubled;
2.	If the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon for the felony is 30 (thirty) years, the maximum punishment becomes life imprisonment.

Article 88:	Recidivism in Misdemeanour after a Misdemeanour Penalty
When a person is already definitively convicted for a misdemeanour, he/she committed the same misdemeanour within a period of 5 (five) years, the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon the new misdemeanour is doubled.
 
In the event where, as a result of the recidivism, the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon exceeds 5 (five) years, the offence remains a misdemeanour despite the increase of the penalty.

Article 89:	Comparative Offence in order to Create Recidivism
With respect to the application of the provisions on the recidivism, the offences of theft, of breach of trust and fraud are considered as the same offences.
The offence in connection with the receiving of stolen goods is classified as the offence from which the stolen goods are derived.

The offence in connection with money-laundering is classified as the offence relating to the opportunity during which the money-laundering was carried out.

Article 90:	Recidivism and Prosecution
The state of the recidivism may be retained by the judgement of the court and constitutes a cause of increasing of the penalty for imprisonment if it is expressly provided in the letter of charge.

Article 91:	Recidivism and Definitive Decision
A decision is considered as definitive when it is no longer subjected to the appeal.

For the application of the provisions on recidivism, only the final sentence shall be taken into account in terms of public actions.

Article 92:	Separate Provisions
Recidivism may be retained even the penalty arisen from sentencing already expired the statute of limitation.

Recidivism may not be retained when the penalty arisen from definitive sentence is granted amnesty according to Paragraph 4 of Article 4 90 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

SECTION 2 MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES

Article 93:	Definition of Mitigating Circumstances
When the nature of the offences or the personality of the perpetrator justifies, the court may provide the accused the benefit of mitigating circumstances.

The mitigating circumstances may also be granted to the convicted person even he/she is declared as an individual who is in recidivism.

Article 94:	Impact of Mitigating Circumstances
When the court grants the accused the mitigating circumstances, the minimum of the principal penalties imposed upon for a felony or a misdemeanour is reduced according
 
to the following scale:
1.	If the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon is equal to or more than 10 (ten) years, it is reduced to 2 (two) years;
2.	If the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon is equal to or more than 5 (five) years and less than 10 (ten) years, it is reduced to 1 (one) year;
3.	If the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon is equal to or more than 2 (two) years and less than 5 (five) years, it is reduced to 6 (six) months;
4.	If the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed upon is equal to or more than 6 (six) days, and less than 2 (two) years, it is reduced to 1 (one) day;
5.	The minimum of the fine imposed upon is reduced to a half.

Article 95:	Penalty of Life Imprisonment and Mitigating Circumstances
When an offence is sentenced to a life imprisonment, the judge who grants mitigating circumstances may pronounce the penalty of imprisonment of between 15 (fifteen) years and 30 (thirty) years.

CHAPTER 3 REGIME OF SENTENCING
SECTION 1 GENERAL REGIME

Article 96:	Individual Principles of Penalty
The court pronounces penalties based on seriousness of the penalty and circumstances of the offence, of personality of the accused, of his/her mental state of mind, resources and burdens, motives as well as his/her conduct after committing the offence, in particular towards the victim.

Article 97:	Pronouncement of Principal Penalty
In all cases where an offence punished concurrently for a prison term and a fine, the court may pronounce a ruling:
1.	either a prison term and a fine concurrently;
2.	a penalty for a prison term only; or
3.	a fine only.

Article 98:	Pronouncement of Sentence Substitution
The penalty for community service replaces the principal penalties. The court which pronounces the penalty for community service may not pronounce imprisonment nor fine.
 
The penalty of reprimand replaces principal penalty. The court which pronounces the penalty of reprimand may not pronounce imprisonment nor fine.
Article 99:	Pronouncement of Supplementary Penalty in addition to Principal Penalty
When an offence was punished with one or several penalties, they are added to the principal penalties except for the provisions as set forth in article 100 (Substitution of Principal Penalty by Supplementary Penalty).

Article 100: Substitution of Principal Penalty by Supplementary Penalty
The court may decide to add one or several supplementary penalties to the principal penalties under the following conditions:
1.	when the accused is imposed with a fine as a single principal penalty;
2.	when the accused is imposed with a prison term whose maximum is equal to or is less than three (3) years.

When the court decides to replace the principal penalties by one or several supplementary penalties, such court may not pronounce a prison term nor a fine.

Article 101: Exclusive Rules for the Pronouncement of Community Service Sentence
The penalty for community service may be pronounced provided that the accused is present at the hearing and accepts to perform the service. The court, prior to announcing the judgment shall notify the accused that he/she has the right of refusal to perform the service. The response of the accused shall be noted in the judgment.

Article 102: Duration and Timeline of Community Service
The court which pronounces the penalty for community service shall determine the timeline and duration for which the work shall be performed. This period shall not exceed one (1) year.

Article 103: Procedures for the Execution of Penalty for Community Service
The procedures for the execution of penalty for community service shall be set by the prosecutor.

The prosecutor designates the legal entity that receives the benefits from the carrying out of the community service.
 
This punishment shall be executed under the supervision of the prosecutor.







SECTION 2
SIMPLE SUSPENDED SENTENCES

Sub-Section 1 Common Provisions

Article 104: Announcement of Suspended Sentence
According to the conditions prescribed by this Chapter, the court may order that the execution of the principal penalties be suspended.
Article 105: Regime of Suspended Sentence
In the execution of provisions on suspension, only definitive penalty of public actions will be taken into account.

Sub-Section 2
Prosecution for Felony or Misdemeanour

Article 106: Conditions Related to Previous Sentences
In case of prosecution for a felony or a misdemeanour, a simple suspended sentence may be granted if the accused has not yet been definitively sentenced to the term of imprisonment, during 5 (five) years before these offences..

Article 107: Penalties that may Cause Suspension
The simple suspended sentence is applicable to the following penalties:
1.	a prison term when the imposed penalty is less than or equal to 5 (five ) years;
2.	a fine.

Article 108: Suspension of Partial Penalty
The court may decide that the simple suspended sentence would apply to one part of the prison term that it has set the time limit, or to one part of the fine that it has set the amount.

Article 109: Revocation of Suspended Sentence
If, during the period of 5 (five) years that follows the definitive sentencing for a felony or a misdemeanour accompanied by a simple suspended sentence, then a new definitive sentencing for a felony or misdemeanour occurred, the simple suspended sentence is lawfully revoked.
 
The first penalty is carried out without being merged with the second one.


Article 110: Non-Revocation
In variance to provisions of Article 109 (Revocation of Suspended Sentence), the court can decide that the new sentencing does not entail the revocation of the previously granted simple suspended sentence. The court's decision shall be indicated the special motives.

Article 111: Annulment of Sentence
If, during the period of 5 (five) years that follows the definitive sentencing for a felony or a misdemeanour accompanied by a simple suspended sentence, and a new definitive sentencing for a felony or misdemeanour does not occur, the sentencing with a simple suspended sentence is considered as null and void.

If the suspended sentence is pronounced with only one part of the penalty, the sentence will be considered as null and void completely.

Section 3 Prosecution for Petty Crimes

Article 112: Conditions Related to Previous Sentences
In the case of the prosecution for a petty crime, the simple suspended sentence may be granted if the accused has not yet been definitively sentenced for the prison term, within 1 (one) year before this offence.

Article 113: Penalties that May Cause Suspension
In the case of the prosecution for a petty crime, the simple suspended sentence may be applied to the following penalties:
1.	imprisonment;
2.	fine.

Article 114: Revocation of Suspended Sentence
If, during the period of 1 (one) year that follows the definitive sentencing for a petty crime accompanied by a simple suspended sentence, a new definitive sentencing for a felony, a misdemeanour or a petty crime occurs, the simple suspended sentence for the felony, misdemeanour or petty crime is lawfully revoked.  The first penalty is carried out without being merged with the second one.

Article 115: Non-Revocation
In variance to provisions of Article 114 (Revocation of Suspended Sentence), the court may decide that the new sentencing does not entail the revocation of the previously granted simple suspended sentence. Its decision must indicate the special motives.
 
Article 116: Annulment of Sentences
If, during the period of 1 (on) year that follows the definitive sentencing for a petty crime accompanied by a simple suspended sentence, a new definitive sentencing for a felony a misdemeanour or a petty crime does not occur, the sentencing with a simple suspended sentence is considered as null and void. The penalty may no longer be carried out.


SECTION 3 PROBATIONARY SUSPENDED SENTENCE

Article 117: Definition and Conditions for Probationary Suspended Sentence
The court may decide to impose a probationary suspended sentence for a prison term of a duration ranging from between 6 (six) months and 5 (five) years.

The probationary suspended sentence has a power to place the convicted person to measures of control and respect of one or several specific obligations during the probationary period.

Article 118: Probationary Period
The court sets the probationary period. The period can be neither less than 1 (one) year nor more than 3 (three) years.

Article 119: Control Measures
The measures of control imposed upon the convicted person are the following:
1.	the convicted person should respect the summons of the prosecutor or of any person assigned by him/her;
2.	the convicted person welcomes the visits of any person assigned by the prosecutor;
3.	the convicted person provides the prosecutor or any person assigned by him/her with all documents for verification of his/her social-reintegration;
4.	the convicted person keeps the prosecutor informed of the changing of his/her address;
5.	the convicted person keeps the prosecutor informed of the changing of his/her occupation;
6.	the convicted person shall receive authorization from the prosecutor prior to his/her travelling abroad;

Article 120: Specific Obligation that May be Imposed upon the Convicted Person
Specific obligations that may be imposed upon the convicted person are the following:
1.	pursue a professional activity;
2.	accept a schooling or a professional training;
3.	reside in a designated area;
4.	submit him/herself to medical check-up or medical treatment;
5.	prove that he/she has contributed to taking care his/her family;
6.	indemnify in function of his/her resources the damage caused by the offence;
 
7.	justify that he/she has paid in function of his/her resources the amounts due to the State following his/her sentencing;
8.	not to pursue the professional or social activity which has permitted or facilitated the commission of the offence. In this case, the court must specify the prohibited activities.
9.	abstain from appearing in certain areas. In the case, the court must specify the prohibited areas.
10.	abstain from gambling;
11.	abstain from drinking alcohol;
12.	abstain from associating with certain persons, in particular, the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, the accomplices or the victims of the offence. In this case, the court must specify the persons with whom association is prohibited.
13.	abstain from neither possessing nor carrying a weapon.

In its decision, the court must indicate a specific obligation(s) imposed upon the convicted person.

Article 121: Modification of Specific Obligations by the Court
The court can at all times modify the specific obligations imposed upon the convicted person.

The court shall receive complaint according to the conditions set out by the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Article 122: Revocation of Probationary Suspended Sentence
The probationary suspended sentence may be revoked by the court in the following cases:
1.	if, during the probationary period, the convicted person does not comply with the measures of control or the specific obligations;
2.	if, during the probationary period, the convicted person is sentenced for a new felony or misdemeanour;

The court may order a whole or a partial revocation of the probationary suspended sentence. In this regard, the penalty is carried out in whole or in part.
The court shall receive complaint according to the conditions set out by the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Article 123: Sentences Considered as Null and Void
The sentence is considered as null and void if before the expiration of the probationary period there is no request for revocation for which a decision was made.

SECTION 4
SUSPENSION OF THE PRONOUNCEMENT OF PENALTY

Article 124: Conditions for the Suspension of the Penalty Pronouncement
 
In the case of prosecution for a misdemeanour, the court may, after having declared that the accused is guilty, postpone the pronouncement of the penalty if the following conditions are fulfilled:
1.	the disturb to the public order resulting from the offence has come to an end;
2.	the convicted is guaranteed for social re-integration;
3.	the convicted requests the delay for indemnifying the damage.


Article 125: Decision on Suspension
The suspension may be ordered only if the accused is present at the hearing.

The court sets, in its judgement or its order, the date on which the penalty is adjudicated.

The decision on the penalty must be made not later than 1 (one) year following the decision of suspension.

Article 126: Hearing to Review the Stay of the Case
At the hearing to review the stay of the case, the court makes decision on a penalty.

SECTION 5 SEMI-LIBERTY

Article 127: Conditions for the Semi-Liberty Regime
When the court pronounces a penalty for imprisonment less than or equal to 6 (six) months, it can decide that the penalty shall be carried out under the regime of semi-liberty in order to allow the convicted person to pursue a professional activity, to take schooling or training, to receive medical treatment or to support the needs of his/her family.

Article 128: Modalities of Semi-Liberty Regime
The convicted person placed under the regime of semi-liberty shall be allowed to leave the prison within the prescribed time periods.
The court sets in its decision the days and the times during which the convicted person is allowed to leave of absence from prison.

Article 129: Inclusion of the Duration of Semi-Liberty Regime of Penalty
The time period of the semi-liberty shall be imputed in the duration of the penalty under current execution.

Article 130: Setting and Abolishment of the Semi-Liberty Regime
The court may at all times, at the request of the prosecutor, set the time periods of the semi-liberty or abolish the regime of semi-liberty.

The court shall receive the notice according to the conditions set out by the Code of Criminal Procedure.
 
Article 131: Arrest and Detention of the Convicted Person
The prosecutor may issue the order of arrest and detention of the convicted person who does not return to the prison at the expiration of the time period of the semi-liberty.




SECTION 6 SPLIT OF PENALTY

Article 132: Conditions for the Split of Penalty
When the court pronounces a prison term less than or equal to 1 (one) year.

The court may decide, for a serious ground of family, medical, professional or social reason, that the penalty should be carried out by splits.

Article 133: Modalities for Splitting Penalty
Each split is not less than 1 (one) month. The total duration of execution of the penalty, taking into accounts the interruptions, may not exceed 2 (two) years.

The court sets in its decision the modalities of the split.

Article 134: Modification to the Splitting Regime
The court may at all times, at the request of the prosecutor, set the modalities of the split or remove the splitting regime.

The court receives the complaint according to the conditions specified in the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Article 135: Conditions for the Split of Penalty
The prosecutor may issue the order of arrest and detention of the convicted person who does not return to the prison at the expiration of the time period of the interruptions of the penalty.

CHAPTER 4
RULES APPLICABLE IN CASE OF CONCURRENT OFFENCES

SECTION 1 GENERAL RULES

Article 136: Concurrent Offences
Concurrent offences take place when an offence was committed by a person before he/she has been definitively sentenced for another offence.

Article 137: Unique Prosecution
 
During the course of a single prosecution, when the accused is found guilty of several concurrent offences, each penalty may be pronounced. However, when several penalties of the same nature are imposed, the court shall pronounce only one offence of this nature to a certain extent of the legally allowed highest maximum.

Each penalty is considered as joint penalty with the concurrent offences to a certain extent of the legally allowed highest maximum applicable to each among the penalties themselves.
Article 138: Separate Prosecution
During the course of a separate prosecution, when the accused is found guilty of several concurrent offences, the offences pronounced are carried out concurrently to a certain extent of the legally allowed highest maximum.

However, the total or partial merger of the penalties of the same nature may be ordered by the last court which adjudicates the case.

For the enforcement of this Article, in the event of the convicted person is imposed to a life imprisonment, the legally allowed highest maximum is fixed at 30 (thirty) years of imprisonment, if the accused has never been sentenced to life imprisonment.

The suspension of penalties in whole or in part of the pronounced penalties for the concurrent offences does not hinder the execution of the penalties of the same nature whose suspension is not granted.

SECTION 2 SEPARATE RULE

Article 139: Cause of Amnesty and Reduction of Penalties on the Merger
When a penalty is subjected to a measure of amnesty and reduction of penalties as prescribed in Article 27 of the Constitution, for the enforcement of the rules on merger, the penalty resulting from the amnesty and reduction should be taken into accounts.

The duration of the reduction of the penalties includes the duration of the penalty to come, if any, after the merger.

Article 140: Merger of Fines
In variance to the preceding provisions, the fines pronounced for several petty crimes accumulate themselves and with the fines pronounced for the felonies or misdemeanours.

Article 141: Non-Merger of Penalties Pronounced for Prison Escape
In case of conviction for escape, the penalties pronounced for escape accumulate themselves, without having the possibility for merger, with those pronounced for the offence whose reason has caused the escaped prisoner to be detained.

CHAPTER 5
 
GENERAL REASONS WHICH AFFECT THE ENFORCEMENT OF PENALTIES

SECTION 1 PRESCRIPTION OF THE PENALTIES

Article 142: Power of Prescription
At the expiration of prescription, the penalty can no longer be executed.

Article 143: Non-Extinguishment of Prescription for Certain Crimes
The penalties pronounced for genocide and for crimes against humanity and war crimes are inextinguishable.

In addition to the crimes as mentioned above, specific laws may determine the non-extinguishability of prescription for other crimes.

Article 144: Prescription Duration of Felony, Misdemeanour, Petty Crime
The penalties pronounced for a felony are prescribed for 20 (twenty) years.

The penalties pronounced for a misdemeanour are prescribed for 5 (five) years. The penalties pronounced for a petty crime are prescribed for 1 (one) year.
Article 145: Starting of Time Limit
The time-limit of 20 (twenty) years, 5 (five) years and 1 (one) year mentioned in Article 144 (Prescription Duration of Felony, Misdemeanour, Petty Crime) starts from the date on which the decision for the sentence became definitive.

In addition to the crimes as mentioned above, specific laws may determine the non-extinguishability of prescription for other crimes.

Article 146: Prescription of Civil Obligation Resulting from Criminal Decision
The obligations of a civil nature resulting from a final criminal decision are extinguished in accordance with the rules of the civil code.

SECTION 2 GRACE

Article 147: Definition and Power of Grace
The grace as defined in Article 27 of the Constitution, waives the convicted person from carrying out the penalty.

Article 148: Compensation of Damage to Victim in Case of Grace
Except for the provision contrary to the Royal Decree, the grace does not hinder the right for the victim to obtain the compensation for his/her damage.

SECTION 3
 
GENERAL AMNESTY

Article 149: Definition and Power of Amnesty
The general amnesty, as defined in paragraph 4 of Article 90 of the Constitution, waives all sentences related to the amnesty law.

Penalties cannot carry out.

Penalties which are being executed are eventually terminated.

However, fines and court fees which are already paid cannot be refunded from the State.

Article 150: Amnesty and Revocation of Suspended Sentence
When the suspended sentence was revoked by means of subsequent conviction, the general amnesty of this conviction restores the previous suspended sentence.

Article 151: Compensation of Damage to Victims in case of Amnesty
Except it is provided otherwise in the law, the general amnesty does not hinder the right for the victim to obtain the compensation for his/her damage.

Section 4
Arrangement and Revocation of Certain Additional Convictions

Article 152: Conditions for Modification of Certain Additional Convictions
In case of sentences for additional penalties specified in points 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 14,15, and 16 of Article 53, (Categories of Additional Punishments), the court may order either an arrangement for modification or revocation of one or several penalties if the following conditions are fulfilled:
1.	the disturb to the public order resulting from the offence has come to an end;
2.	damage was repaired;
3.	the decision for an arrangement for modification or revocation is of a nature that promotes the social re-integration of the offender.

The court receives request from the prosecutor upon his/her own initiatives or at the request of the convicted person. The court makes decision at the public hearing after listening to comments of the representative of the prosecutor, the convicted person and eventually his/her lawyer.

Article 153: Re-establishment in Part or in Whole of Civil Rights
In case of deprivation of civil rights, the court may re-establish the entirety of civil rights as described in Article 55 (Civil Rights that May be Deprived) or some of them.

Article 154: Arrangement for Modification or Revocation of Prohibition
The court may arrange for modification or revocation of:
1.	prohibition from pursuing a professional or social activity;
 
2.	prohibition from driving a motor vehicle.

Article 155: Restitution of Driver's Licence
In case of suspension of the driver's license, the court may order the restitution of the driver's license.



Article 156: Modification to the Rule on Prohibition against Taking Residency
In case of the conviction which prohibits against taking residency, the court may modify the modalities of surveillance measures.

In case of emergency, the prosecutor may authorize a temporary residency which does not exceed 8 (eight) days in the prohibited areas. The prosecutor informs the court of this action.

The Ministry of Interior and Ministry of National Defence are notified of the court and the prosecutor decisions.

Article 157: Modification to Prohibition against Leaving the Territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia
The court may lift the prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia. The court may, if it deems necessary, maintains certain conditions.

Article 158: Modification to Prohibition against Entering the Territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia
The court may lift the prohibition against taking residency and entering the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia by a convicted foreigner.

However, the prosecutor must first seek advice from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation in advance and submit it to the court.

The court is not bound by this advice.
Article 159: Modification to Expulsion, Closure and Prohibition against Operating Businesses
The court may arrange the modification or termination of the following penalties:
1.	expulsion from the public market places;
2.	closure of an establishment;
3.	prohibition against operating an establishment opened to the public or utilized by the public.


CHAPTER 6
PENALTIES APPLICABLE TO MINORS
 
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 160: Principal Penalties Applicable to Minors aged more than 14 (fourteen) Years Old
When the court decides to pronounce the criminal sentence against a minor aged from 14 (fourteen) years old, the principal penalties imposed for the offence prosecuted are reduced according to the following conditions:
1.	the maximum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed is reduced into a half;
2.	if the maximum of the penalty imposed is a life imprisonment, it is reduced to 20 (twenty) years of imprisonment;
3.	the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment is reduced into a half if the minimum is more than 1 (one) day;
4.	the minimum and the maximum of the fine are reduced to a half.

In case of prosecution for a felony, if the provisions of this Article result in reducing the maximum of the penalty of imprisonment imposed for a duration equal to or less than 5 (five) years, the offence imposed remains a felony.

Article 161: Additional Penalties
Only the following additional penalties are applicable to the minors:
1.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or objects which have been used to commit the offence or have been intended to commit the offence;
2.	the confiscation of the objects or funds with which the offence was carried out;
3.	the confiscation of the incomes or the properties earned by the offence;
4.	the confiscation of the utensils, materials and moveable objects at the place where offence was committed;
5.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon.

Article 162: Penalties for Community Work
The penalty for the community work is applicable to the minors of less than 16 (sixteen) years of age. However, the duration of the community work may not exceed 100 (one hundred) hours.

The community work must be adapted to the minors, presenting a rehabilitating character and facilitating social reintegration.

Article 163: Non Applicability of Recidivism with Minors
The provisions on recidivism are not applicable to the minors.

Article 164: Benefits from Mitigating Circumstances
The mitigating circumstances are applicable to the minors.

When the court decides on mitigating circumstances, the minimum of principal penalties imposed on a minor for a felony or of a misdemeanour is reduced according to the
 
following specific scales:
1.	if the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed is equal to or more than 10 (ten) years, it is reduced to 1 (one) year;
2.	if the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed is equal to or more than 5 (five) years and less than 10 (ten) years, it is reduced to 6 (six) months;
3.	if the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed is equal to or more than 2 (two) years and less than 5 (five) years, it is reduced to 3 (three) months
4.	if the minimum of the penalty for imprisonment imposed is equal to or more than 6 (six) days and less than 2 (two) years, it is reduced to 1 (one) day;
5.	the minimum of fine imposed is reduced to a half.

Article 165: Separate Obligations in Probationary Suspended Sentence
In case of a probationary suspended sentence, only the following specific obligations are applicable to the minors:
1.	attending schooling or a professional training;
2.	residing in a designated area;
3.	submitting to medical check-ups or medical treatment;
4.	repairing, in function of his/her resources, the damages caused by the offence;
5.	establishing proof that he/she has paid, in function of his/her resources, the amounts due to the State following his/her sentencing;
6.	Not to appear in certain areas;
7.	Not to appear at alcohol shops;
8.	Not to associate with certain persons, in particular the perpetrator, the co-perpetrators, the accomplices or the victims of the offence;
9.	Not to possess or carry a weapon.

SECTION 2 SEPARATE PROVISIONS
Article 166: Conditions for Detaining Minors in a Prison
The jailed minors are detained in the special quarters, separated from the adults. They are subjected to a special and individualized regime that canvasses a place for education and professional training.

The regime of detention is set out by a Prakas of the the Minister of Justice and relevant ministers.

CHAPTER 7
PENALTIES APPLICABLE TO LEGAL ENTITIES

CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Article 167: Penalties Imposed on Legal Entities
The specific penalties imposed on a legal entity are:
1.	fines, as the principal penalty;
2.	additional penalties set out in Article 168 (additional penalties applicable to legal entities).



SECTION 2 ADDITIONAL PENALTIES
Article 168: Additional Penalties Applicable to Legal Entities
The additional penalties applicable to legal entities are the following:
1.	dissolution;
2.	placement under the judicial surveillance;
3.	banning from pursuing one or several activities;
4.	expulsion from public market places;
5.	prohibition against a public campaign for saving funds;
6.	prohibition against issuing exchangeable instruments other than the exchangeable instruments certified by a bank;
7.	prohibition against using payable cards;
8.	closure of an establishment having served to prepare or to commit the offence;
9.	prohibition against operating an establishment opened to the public or utilized by the public;
10.	confiscation of instruments, materials or any objects which are used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
11.	confiscation of objects or funds with which the offence was carried out;
12.	confiscation of incomes or the properties earned by the offence;
13.	confiscation of utensils, materials and the moveable objects at the place where the offence was committed;
14.	publication of the decisions on the conviction in the newspapers or the broadcasting by all means of audio-visual communications.
The specific provisions may lay down additional penalties.

Article 169: Conditions for Making Decisions on Additional Penalties
The additional penalties may be pronounced by the court, if they have been specifically provided for charged offences.

Article 170: Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities
The decision that orders the dissolution of a legal entity brings the legal entity to appear before the competent court for liquidation.

Article 171: Placement under the Court Surveillance
 
The placement under the court surveillance may not exceed 5 (five) years. The decision of placement under the court surveillance entails the designation of a legally authorized agent for whom the court specifies the mission. At least every 6 (six) months, the legally authorized agent informs the prosecutor of the conduct of his/her mission.

After having seen the reports of the legally authorized agent, the prosecutor may refer the matter to the court which has pronounced the placement under judicial surveillance. The court may then pronounce a new penalty.
The court makes decision during public hearing after listening to comments of the prosecutor representative, legally authorized agent and eventually the lawyer of the legal entity.

Article 172: Prohibition against Pursuing Activities
The prohibition against pursuing an activity may be either definitive or temporary for a period of 5 (five) years at the most.

The court specifies the prohibited activities.

Article 173: Expulsion from Public Market Places
The penalty of expulsion from the public market places entails the banning from direct or indirect participating in all public transactions proposed by:
1.	the State;
2.	a territorial decentralized collectivity;
3.	a public establishment;
4.	an enterprise franchised or controlled by the State or by a territorial decentralized collectivity.

The penalty of expulsion may be either definitive or temporary for period of not more than 5 (five) years.

Article 174: Prohibition against a Public Campaign for Saving Funds
The prohibition from a public campaign for saving funds may be either definitive or temporary for a period of not more than 5 (five) years.
The prohibition entails the banning for a legal entity from carrying out a campaign to place its exchangeable instruments at credit, financial institutions or stock exchange companies.

It entails also the banning from any publicity.

Article 175: Prohibition against Issuing Cheques
The prohibition against issuing exchangeable instruments may be either definitive or temporary for a period of not more than 5 (five) years.

The same provision is applied to the issuance of cheques.
 
Article 176: Closure of an Establishment
The penalty of closing down of an establishment entails the prohibition against operating in this premise the activity during which offence was committed.

The penalty may be either definitive or temporary for a period of not more than 5 (five) years.


Article 177: Prohibition against Operating an Establishment
Prohibition against operating an establishment opened to the public or utilized by the public may be either definitive or temporary for a period of not more than 5 (five) years.

Article 178: Confiscation of Ownership, Selling and Destroying Confiscated Objects
At the time when the confiscation is definitive, the confiscated objects became the property of the State unless the specific provisions provide for different allocation.

The State can proceed on selling or destroying the confiscated objects according to prescribed terms and conditions of selling of the property of the State.
The law can also provide for the destruction of certain objects.

When the confiscated objects was not seized and thereby cannot be handed over, the convicted person must pay the value of that object. This value is determined by the court. For collection measure, it is carried out in the same manner as the physical imprisonment.


Article 179: Confiscation and the Rights of the Third Party
Confiscation can be taken on the following objects:
1.	any instruments, materials or objects which have been used to commit the offence or have been intended to commit the offence;
2.	objects or funds with which the offence was carried out;
3.	incomes or the properties earned by the offence;
4.	utensils, materials and the moveable objects at the place where offence was committed.
However, the confiscation cannot be declared if such confiscation affects the right of third party.

Article 180: Posting the Decisions
The penalty of posting the decision is carried out in the designated areas by the court for a period of time set by the court. The posting may not exceed 2 (two) months. The posting may be in full, by means of excerpt or simply by making references thereof. The fees for the posting are the burdens of the convicted legal entity.

In case of removal, concealment or ripping up of the affixed posting, a new posting is conducted. The cost of re-posting is paid by the person who had carried out an act of
 
removal, concealment or ripping up of the affixed posting.

Article 181: Broadcasting of Decision by means of Audio-Visual Communications The penalty of broadcasting the decision by all means of audio-visual communications is carried out according to the modalities set out by the court. The broadcasting may not exceed 8 (eight) days. The broadcasting may be in full, by means of excerpt or simply by making references thereof. The fees for the broadcasting are the burdens of the convicted legal entity.
Article 182: Application of Provisions Relating to Natural Persons and Legal Entity
The provisions of title 1, title 2 and title 3 of book 1 of this Code relating to the natural persons are applicable to the legal entities to the extent that the provisions are compatible with the provisions of this Title.


Book 2
CRIME AGAINST PERSONS
TITLE 1

CRIMES OF GENOCIDE, CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY, WAR CRIMES


CHAPTER 1 CRIMES OF GENOCIDE

Article 183: Acts of Genocide
Constitutes as crimes of genocide, each of the acts when committed with an intention of destroying, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group described as follows:
1.	murder the members of the group;
2.	aggressive attack against physical or psychological integrity of the members of the group;
3.	submitting the members of the group to conditions that entail total or partial destruction of the group;
4.	setting up measures to impede the births within the group;
5.	forced transfer of the children of the group to another group.
Article 184: Applicable Penalties
The crime of genocide is punished with a penalty of a life imprisonment.
Article 185: Acts of Preparation for Genocide
The participation in an organized group or a well devised knock-out agreement in order to prepare a genocide is punished with a penalty set forth between 20 (twenty) and 30 (thirty) years imprisonment.
 
The preparation must be characterized by one or several tangible facts.

Article 186: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
With respect to the crimes described in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	prohibition from leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition from entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years.
8	posting of the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting of the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 187: Criminal Responsibilities of the Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 183 (Acts/Elements of Genocide) and Article 183 (Acts of Preparation for Genocide).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels to 500,000,000 (five hundred million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.		prohibition from operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public transactions according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from Public Transactions);
5.	prohibition from public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Saving);
 
6.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting of Decisions);
7.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting by all means of audio visual according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting the Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual).


CHAPTER 2 CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 188: Crime Against Humanity
Each of the acts prescribed below when committed within the framework of a generalized or systematic attack carried out against civilian population, constitutes a crime against the humanity:
1.	murder;
2.	extermination;
3.	induction into slavery;
4.	forced deportation or transfer of the population;
5.	imprisonment or any other form of serious deprivation of freedom in violation of the fundamental provisions of the international laws;
6.	torture;
7.	rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization and all other form of sexual violence of the same seriousness;
8.	prosecution of a group or a community under the political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural , religious or sexual motives.
9.	forced disappearance;
10.	apartheid;
11.	All other inhuman acts which causes great sufferings or serious attack on physical integrity.

Article 189: Punishment
The crime against humanity is punished to a life imprisonment.

Article 190: Acts of Preparation for Crime Against Humanity
The participation in an organized group or a well devised knock-out agreement in order to prepare a crime against humanity is punished with a penalty set forth between 20 (twenty) and 30 (thirty) years imprisonment.

The preparation must be characterized by one or several tangible facts.

Article 191: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
With respect to the crimes described in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of some of the civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition from pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the
 
course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition from taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	prohibition from leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition from entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	prohibition from possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years.
8.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 192: Criminal Responsibilities of the Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 188 (Elements of Crime Against Humanity) and Article 190 (Acts of Preparation for Crime Against Humanity).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels to 500,000,000 (five hundred million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition from operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from Public Transactions);
5.	prohibition from public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition from Public Campaign for Saving);
6.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting of Decisions);
7.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting of Decisions by all Means of Audi-Visual Communication).
 




CHAPTER 3 WAR CRIMES

Article 193: War Crimes
Each of the acts prescribed below when committed against persons or properties protected by Geneva Convention of 12 August 1948 constitutes a war crime:
1.	killing;
2.	tortures or all kinds of inhumane acts including biological experiments;
3.	intentional infliction of great suffering or serious injuries to integrity of individual or health;
4.	extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and arbitrarily;
5.	compelling a prisoner of war or a civilian to serve in the armed force of the hostile state;
6.	deprivation of rights of a prisoner of war or a civilian to a fair and unbiased trial;
7.	unlawful deportation, transfer or detention;
8.	taking of hostage.

Article 194: Other War Crimes
Any of the following acts are also war crimes when they are committed during international or non-international armed conflicts.
1.	use of poisoned weapons or weapons designed to inflict unnecessary sufferings;
2.	intentional attack or bombardment by whatever means against towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives;
3.	intentional attack against human being or materials used for humanitarian missions according to the Charter of the United Nations;
4.	intentional infliction of starvation of civilians by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival;
5.	utilizing the presence of civilians to avoid from military operations, to render certain buildings, some areas of the territory or some armed forces;
6.	intentional destruction or damage to buildings dedicated to religious, charitable, education, art and science purposes, historic monuments, artistic works or scientific works;
7.	widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;
8.	looting of public or personal properties.
 
Article 195: Applicable Penalties
War crimes are punished to life imprisonment.
Article 196: Acts of Preparation for War Crime
The participation in an organized group or a well devised knock-out agreement in order to prepare war crimes is punishable by an imprisonment of between 20 (twenty) and 30 (thirty) years.

The preparation must be characterized by one or several tangible facts.

Article 197: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
With respect to the crimes described in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years.
8.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
Article 198: Criminal Responsibilities of the Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 193 (Elements of War Crimes), Article 193 (Other War Crimes) and Article 196 (Acts of Preparation for War Crimes).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels to 500,000,000 (five hundred million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by
 
Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Saving);
6.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting the Decisions);
7.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting by all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

TITLE 2
INFRINGEMENTS ON THE LIFE OF HUMAN BEING

CHAPTER 1
INFRINGEMENTS ON THE LIFE OF HUMAN BEING

SECTION 1
INTENTIONAL INFRINGEMENTS ON THE LIFE OF HUMAN BEING

Article 199: Murder
Intentional killing of human being with or without a weapon under no aggravating circumstance as prescribed in Article 200 (Premeditated Murder) to Article 205 (Murder with Torture, Cruel Act or Rape) is a murder.

The murder is punished by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 200: Premeditated Murder
The murder committed with premeditation is an assassination or an ambush. Premeditation is a plot prepared before an aggression against a victim takes place.
Ambush is an act of waiting for a person within a period of time in order to commit violent acts against him/her.

Premeditated murder is punished by a life imprisonment.

Article 201: Murder Committed with Utilization of Poison
The murder committed with utilization of a poison is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 202: Murder with Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Victims
The murder is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) to 30 (thirty) years when
 
it is committed:
1.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her age;
2.	on a woman with pregnancy where this pregnancy is apparent or known to the offender.
3.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her sickness or disability while his/her conditions are apparent or known to the offender;
4.	a government official, as civilian or military, during his/her official functions or during the performance of his/her functions.

Article 203: Murder with Aggravating Circumstances Depending on Targets
The murder is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) to 30 (thirty) years when it is committed:
1.	on a victim or a civil party in order to prevent the latter from denouncing the offence or demanding the reparation of the damage;
2.	on a witness in order to prevent the latter from becoming a witness during an inquiry, an investigation or a court proceeding;
3.	on a victim or a civil party because he/she has denounced an offence or has demanded the reparation of his/her damage;
4.	on a witness due to his/her testimony given during an inquiry, an investigation or a court proceeding.

Article 204: Murder Committed by Civil Servants
The murder is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) to 30 (thirty) years when it is committed by a government official, as civilian or military, during his/her functions or during the performance of his/her functions.

Article 205: Murder with Torture, Cruel Act or Rape
The murder preceded or followed by a torture, cruel act or a rape is punishable by a penalty of a life imprisonment.

Article 206: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies laid out in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period
 
of not more than 5 (five) years;
7.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
8.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
9.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2 UNINTENTIONAL INFRINGEMENT ON A LIFE

Article 207: Unintentional Homicide
The act causing death to another person that constitutes an unintentional homicide is as follows:
1.	an imprudence, a carelessness or a negligence;
2.	violation of an obligation of safety or of prudence/carefulness imposed by law.

The unintentional homicide is punishable by an imprisonment from between 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and by a fine from between 2,000,000 Riels to 6,000,000 Riels.

Article 208: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
The following additional penalties may be pronounced for the unintentional homicide:
1.	prohibition against pursuing a profession when the offence was committed while carrying out this professional task or on the occasion of carrying out of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against driving a motor vehicle of whatsoever type for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	suspension of the driver's license for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	posting the decision of the sentencing for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
6.	publishing in the newspapers the decision of the sentencing;
7.	broadcasting the decision of the sentencing by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 209: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 207 (Elements of Unintentional Homicide).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
 
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment)
5.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public according to modalities determined by Article 177 (Prohibition against Operating the Establishment)
6.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
7.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

CHAPTER 2
INFRINGEMENT ON INTEGRITY OF INDIVIDUAL SECTION 1
TORTURES AND BARBAROUS ACTS

Article 210: Tortures and Barbarous Acts
Tortures or barbarous acts against any individual is punishable for an imprisonment for between 7 (seven) and 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 211: Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Victims
The crime described in Article 210 (Tortures and Barbarous Acts) is punishable by an imprisonment from between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years when it is committed:
1.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her age;
2.	on a woman with pregnancy where this pregnancy is apparent or known to the offender.
3.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her sickness or disability while his/her conditions are apparent or known to the perpetrator;

Article 212: Aggravating Circumstances Depending on Targets
The crime described in 210 (Tortures and Barbarous Acts) is punishable by an imprisonment from between 10 (ten) to 20 (twenty) years when it is committed:
1.	on a victim or a civil party in order to prevent the latter from denouncing the offence or demanding the reparation of the damage;
2.	on the witness in order to prevent the latter from becoming a witness during an inquiry, an investigation or a court proceeding;
3.	on a victim or a civil party because he/she has denounced an offence or has demanded the reparation of his/her damage;
4.	on a witness due to his/her testimony given during an inquiry, an investigation or a court proceeding.

Article 213: Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Perpetrator
The crime described in Article 210 (Tortures and Barbarous Acts) is punishable by an
 
imprisonment from between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years when it is committed by a government official, as civilian or military, in carrying out his/her functions or during the performance of his/her functions.

Article 214: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Maiming and Disability The crime described in Article 210 (Tortures and Barbarous Acts) is punishable by an imprisonment from between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years when it entails a maiming or a permanent disability of the victim.

Article 215: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Death of Victim
The crime described in Article 210 (Tortures and Barbarous Acts) is punishable by an imprisonment from between 15 (fifteen) and 30 (thirty) years when it results in the death of the victim without any intention of so doing or results in the suicide of the victim.

Article 216: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in this chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
7.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
8.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
9.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
SECTION 2 VIOLENCE

Article 217: Intentional Violence
The acts of violence committing on another person is punishable by an imprisonment from between 1(one) and 3 (three) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) Riels and 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 218: Aggravating Circumstances
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment between 2 (two) and 5 (five)
 
years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed:
1.	with premeditation;
2.	with utilization of or threatening with a weapon;
3.	by many persons acting their capacity as perpetrator, instigator or accomplice.

Article 219: Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Victims
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed:
1.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her age;
2.	on a woman with pregnancy where this pregnancy is apparent or known to the offender.
3.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her sickness or disability while his/her conditions are apparent or known to the perpetrator;

Article 220: Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Targets
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed:
1.	on a victim or a civil party in order to prevent the latter from denouncing the offence or demanding the reparation of the damage;
2.	on a witness in order to prevent the latter from becoming a witness during an inquiry, an investigation or a court proceeding;
3.	on a victim or a civil party because he/she has denounced an offence or has demanded the reparation of his/her damage;
4.	on a witness due to his/her testimony given during an inquiry, an investigation and a court proceeding.

Article 221: Aggravating Circumstances in relation to Perpetrators
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed by a government official, as civilian or military, in carrying out his/her functions or during the performance of his/her functions.
Article 222: Violence Committed by Spouse or Concubine
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed by spouse or by concubine of the victim.

Article 223: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Maiming and Disability The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years when it entails maiming or a permanent disability of the victim.

Article 224: Aggravating Circumstances Caused by the Death of the Victim
 
The intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 7 (seven) and 15 (fifteen) years when it results in the death of the victim without any intention of so doing.

Article 225: Treating Poisonous Substances as Intentional Violence
The act of giving others drink, swallow or take into their bodies by whatsoever means the substances, on purpose which are harmful to their health is considered as intentional violence.

Article 226: Treating Provision of Poisonous Food as Intentional Violence
The act of selling, granting or giving away the foods or drinks while knowing that these foods or drinks are harming to the health is considered as intentional violence.
Article 227: Treating the Introduction of Poisonous Substances in Drinking Water as Intentional Violence
The act, committed intentionally, of introducing the substances that are harmful to the health into the public drinking water is considered as intentional violence.

Article 228: Less Severe Violence
The act of committing on other persons less severe violence that did not result in any wound is punishable by a fine of between 5,000 (five thousand) Riel and 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 229: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
7.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
8.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
9.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 230: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article
 
226 (Treating Provision of Poisonous Food as Intentional Violence) and Article 227 (Treating the Introduction of Poisonous Substances in Drinking Water as Intentional Violence).
Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from market places according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from public markets places)
5.	prohibition against a public campaign for saving funds according to formalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition against a Public Campaign for Saving Funds);
6.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment);
7.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public according to modalities determined by Article 177 (Prohibition against Operating the Establishment);
8.	confiscation of instruments, materials or objects which were used to commit offences or were intended to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
9.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
10.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
11.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
12.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

SECTION 3 THREATS

Article 231: Acts of Threat
A threat to commit a felony or misdemeanour against persons when it is repeated again
 
and again or expressed by a letter, a picture or an object is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 6 (six) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand ) Riels and 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.
Article 232: Threat through order to Fulfil any Conditions
A threat, under any form whatsoever, to commit a felony or a misdemeanour against a person is punishable for an imprisonment of between 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels if this threatening is carried out with an order to fulfil any condition.

Article 233: Death Threat
The death threat when it is repeated again and again or expressed by a letter, a picture or an object is punishable by an imprisonment of between 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 234: Death Threat with an Order to Fulfil any Conditions
The death threat, under any form whatsoever when it is carried out with an order to fulfil any condition, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 235: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
7.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
8.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
9.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 4 UNINTENTIONAL INJURIES
 
Article 236: Acts of Unintentional Injuries
The offence that causes unintentional injuries to another is an act of injuring other persons through:
1.	an imprudence, a carelessness or a negligence that causes the inability to work for a period of equal to or more than 8 (eight) days;
2.	violation of an obligation, safety or carefulness imposed by law.

The unintended offence causing wounds is punishable by an imprisonment of between 6 (six) days and 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels and 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 237: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For offences in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the offence was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against driving motor vehicles of whatever types for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	suspension of driver's licence for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
6.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
7.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 238: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 236 (Acts of Unintentional Injuries).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 5,000,000 (five million) Riels to 20,000,000 (twenty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment);
5.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public according to modalities determined by Article 177 (Prohibition against Operating the Establishment);
6.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
 
7.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).


CHAPTER 3 SEXUAL ASSAULTS

SECTION 1 RAPE

Article 239: Elements of Rape
All acts of sexual penetration, of any kind whatsoever, or an act of penetrating any object into sexual organs of a person of either the same sex or different sexes by violence, coercion, threat or surprise constitutes a rape:
The rape is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) to 10 (ten) years. Legality of sexual intercourse is determined from the age of 15 (fifteen) years old. Article 240: Aggravating Circumstances which Based on Means Used or
Connection with the Offender
The rape is punishable by an imprisonment of between 7 (seven) to 15 (fifteen) years when it is committed:
1.	with a utilization of weapon or a threat with a weapon;
2.	with a utilization of drug or all other methods of any kind designed to suppress or weaken the resistance of the victim;
3.	by a person who has authority over the victim;
4.	by a person who abuses his/her power which was vested in him/her;
5.	by several persons acting in their capacity as an perpetrator, co-perpetrators, an instigator or an accomplice.

Article 241: Aggravating Circumstances in connection with Victims
The rape is punishable by an imprisonment of between 7 (seven) and 15 (fifteen) years when it is committed:
1.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her age;
2.	on a woman with pregnancy where this pregnancy is apparent or known to the offender;
3.	on a person particularly vulnerable because of his/her sickness or disability while his/her conditions are apparent or known to the perpetrator.

Article 242: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Maiming or Disability
The rape is punishable by an imprisonment of between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years when it results in a maiming or permanent disability of the victim.
 

Article 243: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Tortures or Barbarous Acts
The rape is punishable by an imprisonment of between 10 (ten) and 30 (thirty) years when it preceded, accompanied or followed by tortures or barbarous acts.

Article 244: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Death of the Victim The rape is punishable by an imprisonment of between 15 (fifteen) and 30 (thirty) years when it results in the death of the victim without intention of so doing.

Article 245: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies laid out in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
7.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
8.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
OTHER SEXUAL ASSAULTS

Article 246: Acts of Immodest
All acts of immodest of any kind whatsoever, committed on any person by violence, coercion, threat or by surprise is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) and 3 (three) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) Riels and 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 247: Aggravating Circumstances which are based on Means Used or in connection with Offenders
The offence specified in Article 246 (Acts of Immodest) is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed:
 
1.	with a utilization of a weapon or a threat with a weapon;
2.	with a utilization of drug or all other methods of any kind designed to suppress or weaken the resistance of the victim;
3.	by a person who has authority over the victim;
4.	by a person who abuses his/her power which was vested in him/her;
5.	by several persons acting in their capacity as a perpetrator, co-perpetrators, an instigator or an accomplice.

Article 248: Aggravating Circumstances Depending on Victims
The offence specified in Article 246 (Acts of Immodest) is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels when it is committed:
1.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her age;
2.	on a woman with pregnancy where this pregnancy is apparent or known to the offender;
3.	on a person particularly vulnerable due to his/her sickness or disability while his/her conditions are apparent or known to the perpetrator;

Article 249: Exposure of Sex Organ
All sex organs exposed within the sight of another person in a place which is accessible to the public eyes is punishable by an imprisonment of between 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 250: Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment is an act that a person abuses the power which was vested to him/her in his/her functions in order to put pressure again and again on other persons in exchange for sexual favour.

The sexual harassment is punishable by an imprisonment of between 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 251: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in the present Chapter carries the same punishment as misdemeanours.

Article 252: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For offences in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 5 (five)
 
years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) year;
5.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon and explosive for definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
7.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
8.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
CHAPTER 4 INFRINGEMENT OF LIBERTIES

SECTION 1
ILLEGAL ARREST, DETENTION AND CONFINEMENT

Article 253: Illegal Arrest, Detention or Confinement
Any person who arrests, detains or confines other persons without order from the legitimate authorities or except for the cases provided by the law is punished to:
1.	imprisonment of between 1 (one) and 3 (three) years if the arrest, detention or confinement is less than 48 (forty eight) hours;
2.	imprisonment of between 3 (three) and 5 (five) years if the arrest, detention or confinement is from 48 (forty eight) hours to less than 1(one) month;
3.	imprisonment of between 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years if the arrest, detention or confinement is equal to or more than 1 (one) month;

Article 254: Aggravating Circumstances of Punishment
Any person who arrests, detains or confines other persons without order from the legitimate authorities or except for the cases provided by the law is punished to imprisonment of between 15 (fifteen) and 30 (thirty) years for one of the following cases:
1.	with tortures or barbarous acts;
2.	causing the death of the victim without intention of so doing;
3.	carrying out with the intention to extort for a ransom.
Article 255: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not
 
more than 5 (five) year;
5.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon and explosive for definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2 INFRINGEMENT ON OTHER LIBERTIES

Article 256: Taking Control of Means of Transportation by Force
The acts of seizing or of taking control, by violence or the threat of violence, of any means of transportation on which many people have boarded, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years.

Article 257: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming or Disability
The offences specified in Article 256 (Taking Control of Means of Transportation by Force) is punishable by an imprisonment of between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years if it results in a maiming or permanent disability of the victim.

Article 258: Aggravating Circumstances Caused by Tortures or Barbarous Acts The offences specified in Article 256 (Taking Control of Means of Transportation by Force) is punishable by an imprisonment of between 15 (fifteen) and 30 (thirty) years if tortures or barbarous acts are committed before, during or after the offence.

Article 259: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming or Disability
The offences specified in Article 256 (Taking Control of Means of Transportation by Force) is punishable by an imprisonment of between 15 (fifteen) and 30 (thirty) years if it results in death of one or several persons.

Article 260: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in
 
the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon and explosive for definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 5 INFRINGEMENTS ON DIGNITY

SECTION 1
INFRINGEMENT ON THE RESPECT REQUIRED FOR THE DEATH

Article 261: Infringement on the Integrity of a Corpse
The act of infringing on the integrity of a corpse is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 262: Desecrating Cemeteries
The acts of desecrating, by whatever means, a tomb, a burial site, a funeral urn or a monument erected to the memory of the deaths is punishable for an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 263: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in the present Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 264: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 

Section 2 Discrimination

Article 265: Acts of Refusing to Supply Goods or Service
The act of refusing to supply goods or service to a person is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (ten thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels when the refusal is based on one of the following motives:
1.	a person's belonging to or not belonging to a specified ethnicity, a nation or a race;
2.	a person's belonging to or not belonging to a specified religion;
3.	a person's political tendencies;
4.	a person's trade-union activities;
5.	a person's family situation;
6.	a person's sex;
7.	a person's state of health ;
8.	a person's disability.

Article 266: Conditional Provision of Goods or Service
The act of provision of goods or a service to a person on the ground of one of the following conditions, is punishable for an imprisonment of between 1(one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels:
1.	a person's belonging to or not belonging to a specified ethnicity, a nation or a race;
2.	a person's belonging to or not belonging to a specified religion;
3.	a person's political tendencies;
4.	a person's trade-union activities;
5.	a person's family situation;
6.	a person's sex;
7.	a person's state of health ;
8.	a person's disability.
Article 267: Acts of Refusing to Hire a Person
The acts of refusing to hire a person is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels when the refusal is based on the motives specified in points No. 1 to 8 of Article 265 (Acts of Refusing to Supply Goods or Service) of this Code.

Article 268: Acts of Refusing Employment of a Person
The acts of offering employment based on the ground of one of the conditions specified in points No.1 to 8 of Article 265 (Conditional Supply of Goods or Service) of this Code,
 
is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 269: Penalties Applicable for Dismissal or Discharge based on Discrimination
Any decision made to discharge or dismiss a person based on one of the motives specified in points No.1 to 8 of Article 265 (Acts of Refusing to Supply Goods or Service) of this Code, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and
1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 270: Discrimination and Denial of Rights by Civil Servants
The acts of refusing the benefit of any rights to a person by a government official, civilian or military during his/her official functions or during the course of the performance of his/her functions, when this refusing is based on one of the motives specified in points No.1 to 8 of Article 265 (Acts of Refusing to Supply Goods or Service) of this Code, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 6 (six) months and 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels and 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 271: Discrimination Authorized by Law
The offences specified in the present Chapter do not constitute as elements in cases where the discrimination is allowed by law.

The provisions of the present Chapter are not applicable to the following cases:
1.	discrimination based on health conditions when the discrimination is intended to prevent danger of a person's integrity, working capability or disability;
2.	discrimination based on health conditions or disability when this discrimination is a refusal of employment and dismissal from work due to incapability with medical certification;
3.	in the case of employment, discrimination is based on the ground of sexes when sex is the requisite condition for any work or professional activities.

Article 272: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
Article 273: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 265 (Acts of Refusing to Supply Goods or Service) and Article 269 (Penalties Applicable for Dismissal or Discharge based on Discrimination).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
2.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
3.	posting decision on penalties according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
4.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communication according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).
SECTION 3
WORKING CONDITIONS VERSUS HUMAN DIGNITY

Article 274: Submission under Working Conditions Incompatible with Human Dignity
The acts of submitting a person, by abusing his/her vulnerability, or his/her situation of dependence, to working conditions incompatible with the human dignity, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 275: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Article 274 (Submission under Working Conditions Incompatible with Human Dignity) is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 276: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
Article 277: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 274 (Submission under Working Conditions Incompatible with Human Dignity).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined in Article 173 (Expulsion from public markets);
5.	prohibition against launching public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined in Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Fund Saving);
6.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment);
7.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public according to modalities determined by Article 177 (Prohibition against Operating the Establishment);
8.	confiscation of instruments, materials or any objects which were used to commit offences or were intended to commit offences according to modality determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
9.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences according to modality determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
10.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
11.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
12.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181(Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

SECTION 4 CORRUPTION OF EMPLOYEE
 
Article 278: Corruption Committed by an Employee
The acts committed by an employee to solicit or accept a gift, a present, a promise or any benefit to perform or not perform his/her duty without the knowledge of the employer and without his/her consent, is punishable for an imprisonment of between 6 (six) months and 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels and 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 279: Bribes Given to an Employee
Any person who hands over an employee any gift, present, makes a promise to him/her or provides him/her with any benefit in order for the latter to perform or to abstain from performing his/her duty, without the knowledge of the employer and without his/her consent, is punishable for an imprisonment of between 6 (six) months and 2 (two) years and a fine of between 1,000,000 (one million) Riels and 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 280: Corruptions Committed by Individual such as Governor
1.	if a person specified in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 393 (Breach of Special Trust by A Governor or another Person) or an inspector received profits as properties or demanded or is promised to receive benefits from illegal assistance, he/she is punished to imprisonment of between 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years;
2.	provisions of Paragraph 1 above is also applicable with the person who provides benefits specified in Paragraph 1 above or requests to provide or promise to provide the benefits;
3.	benefits as properties specified in Paragraph 1 above will be confiscated. If they cannot be confiscated in whole or in any part, the missing parts are to be paid in monetary amount.

Article 281: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Article 278 (Corruption Committed by an Employee) and Article 279 (Bribes Given to an Employee) is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 282: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 283: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 279 (Bribes Given to an Employee).
 
Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 5,000,000 (five million) Riels to 20,000,000 (twenty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined in Article 173 (Expulsion from public markets);
5.	prohibition against launching public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined in Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Fund Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
7.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
8.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communication).

SECTION 5 PROCURING

Article 284: Procuring
The procuring is an act of:
1.	drawing a financial profit from the prostitution of another;
2.	assisting or protecting the prostitution of another or running with whatever means the prostitution activities;
3.	recruiting , abducting or luring any person to become a prostitute;
4.	exercising pressure on a person to become a prostitute.

The procuring is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 285: Intermediary between Man or Woman Prostitute and Procurer
The act of serving as an intermediary between man or woman prostitute and procurer is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 286: Justification of Presumed Resources
The acts of any person who facilitates or covers up the resources that he/she earned
 
from procuring is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

The same punishment is also applied to any person who cannot justify his/her resources by habitually living with the person who commits prostitution or by habitually communicating with one or several persons who commit prostitution.

Article 287: Acts of Hindering the Prevention of Prostitution
The acts of hindering actions of preventing, assisting or rehabilitating carried out by either public service agencies or by the specialized private organizations for the benefit of persons who indulge in prostitution or who are in danger of prostitution is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 288: Aggravating Circumstances with Regard to Procuring
Procuring is punishable by an imprisonment of between 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years for the following cases:
1.	when the procurer/procuress or master of prostitution is an ascendant or a descendent of the person who indulges in prostitution;
2.	when the procurer/procuress or master of prostitution abuses the authority that was vested to him/her by his/her functions over the person who indulges in prostitution;
3.	when the procurer/procuress or master of prostitution who employs violence or coercion towards the person who indulges in prostitution;
4.	when the procuring was committed by an organized groups;
5.	when procuring was committed with several persons indulge in prostitution.

Article 289: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Victim
Procuring is punishable by an imprisonment of between 7 (seven) and 15 (fifteen) years when the person who indulges in prostitution is a minor.

Article 290: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Tortures or Barbarous Acts
Procuring is punishable by an imprisonment of between 10 (ten) and 20 (twenty) years when the procurer/procuress or master of prostitution utilizes tortures or barbarous acts towards the person who indulges in prostitution.

Article 291: Acts of Operating an Establishment of Prostitution
The acts of managing, exploiting, directing, operating or financing an establishment of prostitution, directly or through a intermediary, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 292: Authorization of Prostitution Activities in an Establishment
It is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for the person who
 
manages, exploits, directs, or operates any establishment opened to the public, directly or through an intermediary, authorize or tolerates that:
1.	a person indulges habitually in prostitution inside this establishment or its annexes;
2.	a person looks habitually for clients with a view to prostitution inside this establishment or its annexes.

Article 293: Acts of Rendering a Place for Prostitution
It is punishable by an imprisonment of between 2 (two) and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 4,000,000 (four million) and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for the person who sells or makes available for a person the place not utilized by the public, knowing that the person will use it for prostitution activities.

Article 294: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 295: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	the confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offence;
7.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from the offence;
8.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the place where offence was committed;
9.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
10.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
11.	closure of the establishment which was used to prepare or commit the offence definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
12.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
13.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
14.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
 
15.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 296: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences prescribed in this Chapter.

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment);
5.	prohibition against operating the establishment which is opened to public or used by public according to modalities determined by Article 177 (Prohibition against Operating the Establishment);
6.	confiscation of instruments, materials or objects which were used to commit offences or were intended to commit offences according to modalities determined by Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
7.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of Third Party);
8.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
9.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
10.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communication according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

SECTION 6
OTHER TYPES OF INFRINGEMENT ON DIGNITY

Article 297: Apparent Intoxication
Any person who is in a state of apparent intoxication on public roads is punishable by a
 
fine of between 5,000 (five thousand) Riels and 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.


Article 298: Soliciting Other Person In Public Place
Any person who solicits other person in public place in order to incite her/him to have sexual relations is punishable for a fine of between 5,000 Riels (five thousand) to 50,000 (fifty thousand) Riels.

CHAPTER 6 INFRINGEMENT ON A PERSON

SECTION 1 INFRINGEMENT ON PRIVACY

Article 299: Breaking into a Residence
The acts of breaking into a residence of another person by means of violence, compulsion, threat or of any schemes is punishable, except for the cases where it is authorized by law, by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (ten thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 300: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Perpetrator
The acts of breaking into a residence of another person against his/her will by a government civil servant or military official during his/her official functions or during the course of the performance of his/her functions, is punishable, except for the cases where it is authorized by law, by an imprisonment of between 1(one) year and 2 (two) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) and 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 301: Listening or Recording Private Speeches
The acts of listening or recording the privately announced or confidential speeches without the consent of the concerned person, is punishable, except for the cases where it is authorized by law, by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

If the affected person is informed of the listening or the recording and he did not oppose to it, his consent is therefore presumed.

Article 302: Infringement on the Right of Private Picture
The acts of taking picture of a person in a private place without the consent of the latter, is punishable, except for the cases where it is authorized by law, by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

If the affected person is informed of the picture taking and he/she did not oppose to it, his/her consent is therefore presumed.
 
Article 303: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.
Article 304: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2 DEFAMATION AND INSULT

Article 305: Public Defamation
Any allegation or slanderous charge that undermines the honour or the reputation of a person or an institution constitutes defamation.

The defamation that was committed by one of the following means, is punishable by a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels:
1.	by speeches, by any means whatsoever, announced in a public place or in public meeting;
2.	in writing or sketches by any means whatsoever, circulated in public or exposed to the sight of the public;
3.	by any means of audio-visual communications intended for the public.

Article 306: Defamation through Media
The defamation committed by means of media is subject to the provisions of the press law.

Article 307: Public Insulting
Any insulting expression, any scorning term or any other verbal abuses which does not affect the slanderous charges constitutes an insult.

The insult committed by one of the following means is punishable by a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels:
1.	by speeches, by any means whatsoever, announced in a public place or in public meeting;
2.	in writing or sketches by any means whatsoever, circulated in public or exposed to the sight of the public;
3.	by any means of audio-visual communications intended for the public.
 
Article 308: Insulting through Media
The insult committed by means of media is subjected to the provisions of the press law.

Article 309: Court Proceeding with Regard to Defamation and Insulting
For the case of defamation or insulting against members of the Royal Government, public civil servants or any citizen who is assigned to perform public mission or public mandate the charge is filed by the person concerned or by the head of the institution concerned.

For the case of defamation or insulting against private individual, the charge is filed by the person who suffered from defamation or insult. The referral of the case for adjudication is made directly by the plaintiff by stating his/her residence in a province/municipality where the court receives the complaint and will notify the accused and the prosecutor.

However, the charge may be automatically filed by a prosecutor if the defamation or insulting is committed against a person or a group of persons based on the grounds of origin, ethnicity, race, nationality or religion of the person. In this case, procedures for referring the case for adjudication shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.

After receiving the complaint which follows the above procedures, the court may order the plaintiff to pay deposit. Conditions and procedures for paying deposit that are carried out by the investigating judge and provided in Article 140 (Payment of Deposit) of the Criminal Procedure Code will be applicable to the court that receives complaint.

The respect of the procedures is mandatory otherwise the charge will be considered as null and void.

Article 310: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	posting the decision of sentence;
2.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
3.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications.

The additional penalties as mentioned in Point 3 above may be broadcasted for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 3 SLANDEROUS DENUNCIATION

Article 311: Acts of Slanderous Denunciation
The act of denouncing a fact that is known to be incorrect and it is so knowingly to result in criminal or disciplinary sanctions constitutes a slanderous denunciation, when it is
 
addressed to:
1.	a competent authorities, such as a judge, a judicial police officer, or an employer;
2.	or a person with power to refer the matter to the competent authorities.

Article 312: Penalties to be Imposed and Conditions of Charge
The slanderous denunciation is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The statute of limitation of criminal charge for this offence will be expired within the period of 1 (one) year.

The start of statute of limitation will be counted from the day the complaint on slanderous denunciation arrives or the day the complaint is submitted to the competent authorities.

In case where the complaint on slanderous denunciation has given rise to criminal prosecution, the procedures on slanderous denunciation will suspend the statute limitation until the completion of the prosecution.

Article 313: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours specified in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
2.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
3.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 4
INFRINGEMENT ON PROFESSIONAL CONFIDENTIAL

Article 314: Acts of Infringement on Professional Confidential
Any person who holds, by reason of his/her position, profession, function or mission, an information of confidential nature, and if he/she has revealed the said information to an unauthorized person to know its content, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The offence does not constitute in the case where the law authorizes or imposes the revelation of the secrets.

Article 315: Derogation for the Case of Revelation of Bad Conduct Misdemeanours specified in Article 314 (Acts of Infringement on Professional Confidential) does not constitute as an offence, when the person who knows the facts while pursuing his/her profession has revealed to the judicial, administrative or medical
 
authorities the ill treatment on minors of less than 15 (fifteen) years of age.


Article 316: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For misdemeanours specified in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
2.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
3.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 5
INFRINGEMENT ON THE SECRECY OF THE CORRESPONDENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Article 317: Infringement on Correspondence
The acts of opening, disappearing, delaying or diverting the correspondences addressed to the third party, in bad faith, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1(one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The acts of fraudulently acquiring knowledge of the content of correspondences addressed to a third party are punishable by the same penalties.

Article 318: Infringement on Secrecy of Telephone Conversation
The act of listening or jamming the telephone conversations, in bad faith, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The act of intercepting or jamming the messages transmitted by means of telecommunications or by way of fraudulently acquiring knowledge of their content, in bad faith, is punishable by the same penalties.

Article 319: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 320: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
 
5.	broadcasting the	decision	of	sentence by all	means	of	audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

TITLE 3
INFRINGEMENT ON MINORS AND FAMILY


CHAPTER 1 ABANDONMENT OF MINORS

Article 321: Abandonment of Minors
The acts of abandonment by a person who has authority to take care a minor of less than 15 (fifteen) years of age, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) year and 5 (five) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) Riels and 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, if the abandonment puts the health or the safety of the minor in danger.

Article 322: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 323: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 2 ABANDONMENT OF FAMILY

Article 324: Abandonment of Family
In defiance of final court decision, the acts of failing by a person to pay child support alimony for a period of at least 2 (two) months to his/her spouse or ex-spouse, to a minor child, to a descendant or to an ascendant or other relatives, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 325: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1	deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
 
4	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 3 INFRINGEMENT ON THE CARE OF MINORS

Article 326: Failure to Hand Over a Minor
The acts of failing, in bad faith, to hand over a minor child to a person who has legitimate rights of claim, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 327: Taking Away a Minor
The act of illegal taking away a minor child from the person who has a legitimate care is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 1 (one) year and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

This offence is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) year and 3 (three) years and a fine of between 2,000,000 (two million) Riels and 6,000,000 (six million) Riels, if the minor child is kept outside of the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

Article 328: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 329: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 4 INFRINGEMENT ON CHILDHOOD

Article 330: Incitement to Abandon a Child
The acts of direct inciting, for profit making purpose, the parents or one of them to abandon an already-born or a yet-to-be-born child, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 6 (Six) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 331: Intermediary to Adopt a Child or Abandon a Child
The acts of serving one-self as an intermediary between a person or a couple who desires to adopt a child and a parent who desires to abandon his/her already-born or a
 
yet-to-be-born child, for profit making purpose, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 6 (six) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 332: Intermediary between an Adoptive Parent and a Pregnant Woman The acts of serving one-self as an intermediary between a person or a couple who desires to adopt a child and a woman accepting to bear a pregnancy of the child and to deliver this child to them afterward, for profit making purpose, is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 6 (six) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 333: Acts of Substitution, Simulation or Concealment of Child Existence The acts of substituting one child for another child, simulating or concealing the existence of one child, when this action has resulted in a falsification of civil registration certificate is punishable by an imprisonment of between 1 (one) month and 6 (six) months and a fine of between 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels and 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 334: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 335: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting decision on the sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 336: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences prescribed in Article
330 (Incitement to Abandon a Child), Article 331 (Intermediary to adopt a Child or Abandon a Child) and Article 332 (Intermediary between an Adoptive Parent and a Pregnant Woman).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 5,000,000 (five million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
2.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
3.	closure of the establishment which was used to commit offences according to
 
modalities determined by Article 176 (Closure of Establishment);
4.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
5.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
6.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communication according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).


CHAPTER 5 ENDANGERING MINORS

Section 1
Infringement on Health, Mentality and Education

Article 337: Acts of Depriving Foods or Cares for Minors of Less Than 15 Years of Age
The acts of any person who has authorities over a minor of less than 15 (fifteen) years of age to deprive foods or cares to a certain extent where his/her health is endangered are punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 338: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Death of the Victim The offence specified in Article 337 (Acts of Depriving Foods or Cares for Minors of less than 15 Years of Age) is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when this offence had resulted in the death of the victim.

Article 339: Placing a Minor to Working Conditions which Endanger his/her Health
The acts of placing a minor to working conditions which are detrimental to his/her health or his/her physical development are punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 340: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Death of the Victim The offence specified in the Article 339 (Placing a Minor to Working Conditions which Endanger his/her Health) is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when this offence had resulted in the death of the victim.

Article 341: Obscene Acts on a Minor of Less Than 15 Years of Age
The acts of, by a mature person, committing the obscene acts on a minor of less than 15 (fifteen) years of age without violence is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one)
 
year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.


Article 342: Aggravating Circumstances
The offence specified in Article 341 (Obscene Acts on a Minor of Less Than 15 Years of Age) is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, when it is committed:
1.	by an ascendant;
2.	by a person who has an authority over the minor;
3.	by several persons acting as the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, the instigator or the accomplice;
4.	by payment of remunerations.

Article 343: Failure to Send a Minor to School
The act of failing, by any person who takes care of a minor, to enrol him/her in a school without valid reason which violate the measures in force relating to age and schooling period of the minor, is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Section 2
Inciting Minors to Commit Illegal or Dangerous Acts

Article 344: Inciting Minors to Use Addicted Drugs
The act of directly inciting a minor to illegally utilize addicted drugs are punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 345: Inciting Minors to Transport, Keep or Supply Addicted Drugs
The act of directly inciting a minor to transport, keep in possession or to supply the addicted drug is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 343: Inciting Minors to Consume Habitually and Excessively Alcoholic Drinks
The act of directly inciting a minor to consume habitually and excessively the alcoholic drinks is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 344: Incitement of a Minor to Beg
The act of directly inciting a minor to beg is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 345: Inciting a Minor to Commit Felonies or Misdemeanours
 
The act of directly inciting a minor to commit felonies or misdemeanours is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 346: Gathering for Sexual Exhibitions or Sexual Relations with Involvement of Minors
The act of, by an adult person, gathering that includes sexual exhibitions or sexual relations at which a minor has seen or participated is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 5 (five) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Section 3
Abuse of Parental Authorities

Article 347: Abuse of Parental Authorities
The act of a person who has parental authorities or guardianship authorities to deprive the freedom of a minor by abusing his/her authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels if the act severely affects health, safety, mentality or education of the minors.

Section 4 Attempt and Penalties

Article 348: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 349: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes mentioned in the present Chapter, the following penalties may be announced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
5.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
6.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 6
OTHER INFRINGEMENTS ON FAMILY
 
Article 350: Bigamy
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for an act of registering new marriage certificate before the dissolution of the present marriage.
The same punishment shall be applied to a civil registration official who is well aware of the fact and still authorizes the organization of the marriage or registration of the marriage before the dissolution of the present marriage.

Article 351: Sexual Infringement on a Minor by an Ascendant
An act of having sexual intercourse with a minor of less than 18 (eighteen) years of age is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years if the perpetrator is an ascendant of the minor.

Article 352: Sexual Infringement Among Consanguinity
An act of having sexual intercourse among consanguinity or affinity of 3 (three) generations is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.


Book 3
OFFENCE AGAINST PROPERTIES

TITLE 1
FRAUDULENT OWNERSHIP OVER PROPERTIES OF OTHER PERSONS

CHAPTER 1
THEFT AND SIMILAR OFFENCES

SECTION 1 THEFT

Article 353: Definition of Theft
Theft is an act of fraudulently taking away a property of another person by whatsoever means with the purpose of making ownership on it.
Article 354: Theft of Energy
It is considered as theft for an act of fraudulently use energy which damages the interests of other persons.

Article 355: Family Immunities
Criminal penalty may not be imposed with:
1.	the theft of property of an ascendant or descendant;
2.	the theft of property of spouse.

Article 356: Penalties to be Imposed
Theft is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 3 (three) years and a fine
 
from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 357: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Violence
A theft is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years for the following cases:
1.	the theft is committed before, during or after a violent act;
2.	the theft is committed with burglary.

Article 358: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming and Disability
A theft is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years if it is committed before, during or after a violent act which results in a maiming or permanent disability.

Article 359: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Tortures and Barbarous Acts
A theft is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years if the theft is committed before, during or after tortures or barbarous acts.


Article 360: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in the Death of a Victim
A theft is punished to a life imprisonment if the theft is committed before, during or after a violent act which results in the death of a victim without any intention of so doing.

Article 361: Attempt
Any attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 362: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in this present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against driving vehicles of whatsoever types definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for felonies or not more than 5 (five) years for misdemeanours;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
8.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences
 
9.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
10.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
11.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon or any explosive definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
12.	closure of establishment which was used to prepare or commit the offence definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
13.	prohibition against operation the establishment which was opened to public or used by public definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
14.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
15.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
16.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2 EXTORTION

Article 363: Extortion
Extortion is an act of obtaining, by violence, threat of violence or coercion:
1.	a signature;
2.	a commitment or a renunciation;
3.	a disclosure of a secret;
4.	a delivery of funds, of assets or of any property.

Article 364: Penalties to be Imposed
Extortion is punished to an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 365: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Victims
The extortion is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years when it is committed:
1.	on the person particularly vulnerable because of his/her age;
2.	the pregnant woman while her pregnancy is apparent or known to the perpetrator;
3.	a person particularly vulnerable because of his/her sickness or disability, while his/her condition is apparent or known to the perpetrator.

Article 366: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Use of Weapon
The extortion is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when this offence is committed with a use of or a threat with a weapon.

Article 367: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming or Disability
The extortion is punished to an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years if the extortion is committed before, during or after a violent act which results in a maiming or permanent disability.
 
Article 368: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from Tortures and Barbarous Acts
The extortion is punished to an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years if it is committed before, during or after tortures or barbarous acts.
Article 369: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in the Death of a Victim
The extortion is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years if it is committed before, during or after a violent act which results in the death of a victim without any intention of so doing.

Article 370: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 371: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for felonies or not more than 5 (five) years for misdemeanours;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
7.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
8.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
9.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
10.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon or explosive definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
11.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
12.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
13.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

 


Article 372: Blackmail
 
SECTION 3 BLACKMAIL
 
The blackmail is an act of obtaining, by means of threatening to disclose or to impute facts so as knowingly to ruin a person's honour or friendship:
1.	a signature;
 
2.	a commitment or a renunciation;
3.	the disclosure of a secret;
4.	the delivery of funds, of assets or any property.

Article 373: Penalties to be Imposed
Blackmail is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 374: Aggravating Circumstances based on Practical Application of Blackmail
When the blackmail to disclose or to impute facts to ruin a person's honour or friendship is carried out, the perpetrator is punished to an imprisonment from 5 (five) and 10 (ten) years.
Article 375: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 376: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
7.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
8.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
9.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
10.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon or explosive definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
11.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
12.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
13.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 



CHAPTER 2 FRAUD AND SIMILAR ACTS

SECTION 1 FRAUD

Article 377: Definition of Fraud
Fraud is an act of deceiving any natural person or a legal entity by using false name, by claiming false status, by abusing true status or by utilizing fraudulent schemes, so as to obtain from this person at his/her expenses or at the expenses of the third party:
1.	the delivery of funds, of assets, of any property;
2.	the provision of services;
3.	the written consent effective as an obligation or renunciation of any obligation.

Article 378: Penalties to be Imposed
Fraud is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 379: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard To Victims
Swindling is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years when it is committed at the expenses of:
1.	the person particularly vulnerable because of his/her age;
2.	the pregnant woman while her pregnancy is apparent or known to the perpetrator;
3.	a person particularly vulnerable because of his/her sickness or disability, while his/her condition is apparent or known to the perpetrator.

Article 380: Other Aggravating Circumstances
Fraud is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years when it is committed by:
1.	public official as a civilian or military during his/her official functions or during the course of the performance of his/her functions;
2.	a person who designates him/herself as public official;
3.	a person who appeals to the public to issue securities;
4.	a person who solicits funds for humanitarian or social assistance;
5.	organized group.

Article 381: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 382: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
 
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
7.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
8.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
9.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
10.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon or explosive definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
11.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
12.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
13.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
SIMILAR OFFENCES OF FRAUD

Sub-Section 1
Taking Advantages from Weaknesses

Article 383: Taking Advantages from Weaknesses
The act of knowingly abusing either the ignorance or the weakness of a person because of her pregnancy, his/her sickness or disability in order to constrain this person to act or to abstain at his/her own grave expenses, is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Sub-Section 2 Cheating

Article 384: Cheating
Cheating is an act committed by a person who knows that it is absolutely impossible for him/her to pay or who is determined not to pay:
1.	to have someone served him/her foods or beverages in a bar, a restaurant or
 
any other establishment opened to the public;
2.	to have someone provided with and to occupy a room in a hotel or any other establishment opened to the public;
3.	to have someone driven him/her in a tricycle, in a taxi/bus or in any other means of transportation.

The cheating is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 385: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 386: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	the deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
4.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
5.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
6.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
7.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Sub-Section 3
Infringement on the Freedom of Biddings

Article 387: Improper biddings
In a public sale by bidding, the act of excluding a bidder or undermining the biddings by giving a gift, a promise, an agreement or any other fraudulent means is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 388: Acts of Hindering the Freedom of Biddings
In a public sale by bidding, the acts of hindering the freedom of a bidding by means of violence or threats, is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels .

Article 389: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.
 
Article 390: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
4.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
5.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
6.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
7.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 3
BREACH OF TRUST AND SIMILAR ACTS

SECTION 1 BREACH OF TRUST

Article 391: Definition of Breach of Trust
The breach of trust is an act committed to misappropriate, at the expenses of another person, funds, assets or any other property by a person who has been entrusted with and that he/she has accepted with a duty to return them, to present them or to make a specific use of them.

Article 392: Penalties to be Imposed
The breach of trust is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 393: Breach of Special Trust by a Governor or other Persons
All governors or supervisors of legal entities of corporation with limited responsibilities or funding legal entities or persons who are assigned by a court to act on its behalf, or employees who are authorized by a legal entity who breach the trust for their own benefit or the benefit of the third party or with the purpose of damaging the legal entity and resulting in damage of property of the legal entity are punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Provisions of Paragraph 1 above is also applicable to the cases where liquidators of legal entities of corporation with limited responsibilities or funding legal entities or persons who are assigned by a court to act on behalf of the liquidators commit an act as mentioned in Paragraph 1 above and damage the properties of the legal entities.
 
The attempt to commit offences as mentioned Paragraphs 1 and 2 above is punished by the same penalties.


Article 394: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Offenders
The breach of trust is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, when it is committed:
1.	by a person who made a public appeal for delivery of funds or assets either for his/her own benefits or for the benefits of a business or an industrial enterprise;
2.	by a legally authorized agent or a court junior official in exercising his/her functions or during the course of exercising of his/her functions;
3.	by a public civil servant, civilian or military in office or during the course of exercising of his/her functions.

Article 395: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 396: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
4.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
5.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
6.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
EMBEZZLEMENT OF THE SEIZED OR SECURED OBJECTS

Article 397: Embezzlement of the Seized or Secured Objects
The act of a debtor to embezzle or destroy an object seized or impounded by a competent authority or mortgaged is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month
 
to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.


Article 398: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

CHAPTER 4 COMPLEMENTARY OFFENCES

SECTION 1 RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS

Article 399: Receiving Stolen Goods
Receiving stolen goods is the act of concealing, holding or transmitting an object knowingly that this object derives from a felony or a misdemeanour.
The following acts also constitute receiving stolen goods:
1.	the act of serving as an intermediary in order to transmit an object knowingly that this object derived from a felony or a misdemeanour;
2.	the acts of benefiting, with full knowledge of the facts, from a felony or misdemeanour.

Article 400: Penalties to be Imposed
Receiving stolen goods is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 401: Aggravating Circumstances
Receiving stolen goods is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years, when it is committed:
1.	with a habitual manner;
2.	by utilizing the facilitation made available through the pursuance of a profession;
3.	by an organized group
Article 402: Maximum Fine
The maximum fine may run up to the value of the properties earned from .Receiving stolen goods

Article 403: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession
 
definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against driving vehicles of whatsoever types definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of objects or funds which were intended to commit offences;
8.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
9.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
10.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
11.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
12.	closure of an establishment used to prepare or commit the offence definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
13.	prohibition against operating an establishment which was opened to public or used by public definitely or for a period of note more than 5 (five) years;
14.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
15.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
16.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


SECTION 2 MONEY LAUNDERING

Article 404: Definition of Money Laundering
Money laundering is an act of providing, by any means, the false justifications to conceal the direct or indirect benefits of a felony or a misdemeanour.

The act of lending support to further its operational transaction for investing, concealing or converting the direct or indirect benefits of a felony or a misdemeanour is also considered as money laundering.

Article 405: Penalties to be imposed
Money laundering is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels up to the value of funds, assets and properties which were the subject of money laundering.

In the event that the offences that were the source of assets or funds, and they were the subject of money laundering, which is punishable to an imprisonment which is longer than the imprisonment term mentioned in paragraph 1 above, the imprisonment
 
sentence shall be the same as the offence to the knowledge of the perpetrator and if the offence has several aggravating circumstances then the perpetrator shall be punished according to the circumstances he/she is aware of only.

Article 406: Aggravating Circumstances
Money laundering is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years, when it is committed:
1.	by a habitual manner;
2.	by utilizing facilitation made available through the pursuance of a profession;
3.	by an organized group.

Article 407: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 408: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
4.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
5.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
6.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the resident where the offence was committed;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
Article 409: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences prescribed in Article 407 (Definition of Money Laundering).

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 100,000,000 (one hundred million) Riels to 500,000,000 (five hundred million) Riels to one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to formalities determined in Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of a Legal Entity)
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by
 
Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined in Article 173 (Expulsion form Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against conducting public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined in Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Fund Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
7.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
8.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
9.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 182 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

TITLE 2 INFRINGEMENTS ON PROPERTIES

CHAPTER 1
DESTRUCTION, DEGRADATION AND DAMAGE

SECTION 1
DESTRUCTION, DEGRADATION AND DAMAGE

Article 410: Intentional Damage
The intentional act to destroy, deteriorate or damage properties belonging to other persons is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels, unless those acts which result in minor damage.

Article 411: Aggravating Circumstances
The offence specified in Article 413 (Intentional Damage) is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for the following cases:
1.	when it is committed by several persons acting in their capacity as perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator or accomplice;
2.	when it is committed in a premise serving as a residence;
3.	when it is committed in a premise served as a place of storage of funds,
 
assets, merchandises or materials;
4.	when it is committed at the expenses of the public buildings or public roads;
5.	when it is committed at the detrimental to cultivation or crops.
6.	When it is committed at the damage of pillar international border of Cambodia

Article 412: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Victims
The offence specified in article 410 (Intentional Damage) is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels in the following cases:
1.	when it is committed at the expenses of a magistrate, of a civil servant or of a lawyer in order to influence his/her conduct in the performance of his/ her function;
2.	when it is committed at the expenses of a victim or of a civilian party in order to prevent them from denouncing an offence or from demanding the compensation to the damage;
3.	when it is committed at the expenses of a witness in order to prevent him/her from testifying during an inquiry, an investigation, a hearing or a court proceeding or to influence his/her testimony;
4.	when it is committed at the expenses of a victim or a civilian party because the latter has denounced an offence or demanded the compensation to the damage;
5.	when it is committed at the expenses of a witness because of his/her testimony that he/she had provided during an inquiry, an investigation, a hearing or a court proceeding.
Article 413: Aggravating Circumstances due to Measures Endangering Persons Intentional acts in order to destroy, deteriorate or damage properties belonging to other persons by means of an explosive, setting fire or by any other measures endangering the persons is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 414: Aggravating Circumstances due to Injuring Other Person
The offence specified in Article 413 (Aggravating Circumstances due to Measures Endangering Persons) is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years when it has injured other persons.
Article 415: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming or Disability
The offence specified in Article 413 (Aggravating Circumstances due to Measures Endangering Persons) is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when it has resulted in maiming or rendering permanent disability.

Article 416: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from the Commission of Organized Offences
The offence specified in Article 413 (Aggravating Circumstances due to Measures Endangering Persons) is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when it is committed by an organized group.
 
Article 417: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in the Death of Another Person
The offence specified in Article 416 (Aggravating Circumstances due to Measures Endangering Persons) is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) to 20 (twenty) years when it has resulted in a death of another person without intention of so doing.
Article 418: Acts that Result in Minor Damage
The intentional act to destroy, deteriorate or damage properties belonging to another person is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels, if this act has resulted in minor damage only.

The provisions of this article are not applied to public or private cultural properties that are parts of the Cambodian national heritage.

Article 419: Other Damages due to Imprudence or Non-observance
Destruction, deterioration or damage of properties belonging to another person by means of an explosive or setting fire is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels, when it is resulted:
1.	by an imprudence, an inattention or a negligence;
2.	by a violation of obligation, a security or the legally imposed prudence.

Article 420: Damaging Posters or Official Notice
Intentional acts to destroy, deteriorate or damage an official poster or an official notice of the administrative bodies is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 421: Attempt
Except offences specified in Article 419 (Other Damages due to Imprudence or Non-observance), the attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 422: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against driving vehicles of whatsoever types definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in
 
the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
8.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
9.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the residence where the offence was committed;
10.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
11.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
12.	closure of an establishment used to prepare or commit the offence definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
13.	prohibition against operating an establishment which was opened to public or used by public definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
14.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
15.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
16.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


Section 2
Threats to Destroy, Damage or Deteriorate

Article 423: Threats to Damage
Threats to commit destruction, deterioration or damage is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels if it was repeated again and again or if this threat was done by writing, by a sketch or by any other object.

If the properties which are the subject of threats to commit destruction, deterioration or damage have little value, the monetary fine from 5,000 (five thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels is imposed.

Article 424: Threats to Commit Destruction Followed by an Order
The threat, by means whatsoever, to commit destruction, deterioration or damage is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels if the threat was followed by an order to perform or not to perform any thing.

Article 425: Falsification of Information
The act of communicating or disclosing false information with intention to create an impression that destruction, deterioration or damage to persons be committed is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.
 
Article 426: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Title, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against driving vehicles of whatsoever types definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	prohibition against taking a residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering and taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
8.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
9.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the residence where the offence was committed;
10.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
11.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
12.	closure of an establishment used to prepare or commit the offence definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
13.	prohibition against operating an establishment which was opened to public or used by public definitely or for a period of note more than 5 (five) years;
14.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
15.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
16.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


CHAPTER 2
OFFENCES IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SECTOR

Article 427: Accessing or Maintaining Access to Automated Data Processing Systems
The acts of fraudulently having access to a system of automated data processing or maintaining access to it, is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

When the act has resulted in either deletion or modification of the data contained in the system, or an alteration of the functioning of the system, it is punishable by an
 
imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 428: Act of Obstructing the Operations of Automated Data Processing System
Any act of obstructing the operations of the automated processing system of data is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4 (four million) Riels.

Article 429: Fraudulent Introduction, Deletion or Modification of Data
The fraudulent acts of introducing, deleting or modifying data in an automated processing system are punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 430: Participation in a Group or a Agreement to Prepare for the Commission of Offences
The participation in a group or in a knock-out agreement established in order to prepare for the commission of one or several offences specified in the present Chapter is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 431: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 432: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the felonies and misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
4.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
5.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
6.	confiscation of utensils, materials or moveable objects at the residence where the offence was committed;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 


CHAPTER 2 OFFENCES AGAINST ANIMALS

Article 436: Ill Treatment or Cruel Acts Against Domestic, Tamed Animals or Animal Held in Captivity
The acts of publicly or not publicly exercising serious ill-treatment or cruelty towards a domestic or a tamed animal, or an animal held in captivity, is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 437: Persecution Against Domestic, Tamed Animals or Animal Held in Captivity
The acts of publicly or not publicly exercising persecution without necessity towards a domestic animal or a tamed animal, or an animal held in captivity, is punishable by a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 438: Unnecessary Killing of a Domestic Animal, a Tame Animal or An Animal Held in Captivity
The acts of publicly or not publicly killing without necessity a domestic animal or a tamed animal or an animal held in captivity is punishable by a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 439: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
2.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
3.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
Book 4
OFFENCES AGAINST THE NATION

TITLE 1
INFRINGEMENTS AGAINST THE MAJOR INSTITUTIONS OF THE STATE
TITLE 1 INFRINGEMENT AGAINST THE KING

CHAPTER 1
REGICIDE AND INFRINGEMENT AGAINST THE KING

Article 433: Regicide
Regicide is an assassination of the King. Regicide is punished to a life imprisonment.
Article 434: Tortures or Barbarous Acts Against the King
Tortures or barbarous acts against the King is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years.

Article 435: Violence Against the King
The intentional commission of violence is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 436: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting from in or Disability
Intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (tweny) years when it has resulted in maiming or permanent disability of the King.

Article 437: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Death
Intentional violence is punishable by an imprisonment from 20 (twenty) years to 30 (thirty) years when it has resulted in a death without intention of so doing.

CHAPTER 2 INSULTING THE KING


Article 445: Insulting the King
Insulting the King is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months, and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, when it is committed:
1.	by speeches, of any kind whatsoever, pronounced in a public place or in any public meeting;
 
2.	by writing or sketches, of any kind whatsoever, distributed in public or exposed to the sights of the public;

Article 446: Insulting Committed through Media
The insulting committed through media is subject to the provisions of the press law.

Article 438: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


CHAPTER 2 INFRINGEMENTS ON SECURITY OF THE STATE

SECTION 1 TREASON AND ESPIONAGE

Article 439: Treason and Espionage
The offences described in this Chapter constitute treason when they are committed by a Cambodian citizen or by Cambodian military person and constitute espionage, when they are committed by any other persons.

Article 440: Delivering to a Foreign State Whole or Part of National Territory
The act of delivering to a foreign state or to its agents whole or part of the national territory, is punishable by a life imprisonment.
 
Article 441: Delivering to a Foreign State the National Armed Forces
The act of delivering to a foreign state or to its agents the national armed forces is punishable by a life imprisonment.

Article 442: Delivering to a Foreign State the Equipment especially for National Defence
The act of delivering to a foreign state or its agents the materials, buildings, equipment, installations, or mechanical apparatus for national defence, is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 443: Espionage
The acts of entering into secret agreement with a foreign state or with its agents in order to create hostilities or aggression against Cambodia is punishable by imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 444: Provision of a Foreign State with Means of Undertaking Hostilities or Aggression
The acts of providing a foreign state or its agents with the means of undertaking the hostilities or aggressions against Cambodia, is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 445: Provision of a Foreign State with Information which Undermines National Defence
The act of giving or facilitating easy access by a foreign state or its agents, to information, processes, objects, documents, data, information technologies or memorandum slip which undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 446: Acts of Collecting Information which May Undermine National Defence
The act of receiving or colleting with a view to delivering power to a foreign state or its agents the information, processes, objects, documents, data, information technologies or memorandum slip which may undermine national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 447: Destruction of Materials which May Undermine National Defence
The act of destroying, damaging or embezzling any documents, materials, buildings, equipment, installations, mechanical apparatus, technical device or the automated data processing system, or of producing some defect to them, when these acts undermine the national defence, is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 448: Provision of False Information
The act of providing, with a view to serve the interests of a foreign state, to the civilian or military authorities of Cambodia, false information which may undermine the national defence, is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a
 
fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 449: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Article 448 (Provision of False Information) is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 450: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanours;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
CRIMINAL ATTEMPT AND CONSPIRACY

Article 451: Criminal Attempt
The acts of committing one or several acts of violence with a view to endanger the institutions of the Kingdom of Cambodia or to undermine the integrity of the national territory constitute a criminal attempt.

The criminal attempt is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 452: Aggravating Circumstances With Regard to Offenders
The criminal attempt is punished to an imprisonment for life, when it is committed by a civil servant.
 
Article 453: Conspiracy
Any scheme set up between several persons to commit a criminal attempt, and this scheme was materialized by one or several concrete actions, constitutes a conspiracy.

Conspiracy is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

The offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years when it is committed by civil servants.

Article 454: Exemption from Penalty
Any person having participated in a conspiracy is exempted from penalty if, before any prosecution, he/she has revealed to the competent authorities the existence of the conspiracy and thereby permitting the identification of other participants.

Article 455: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
SECTION 3 INSURRECTION

Article 456: Insurrection
Any collective violence likely to endanger the institutions of the Kingdom of Cambodia or to undermine the integrity of national territory constitutes an insurrection.

Article 457: Penalties to be Imposed
The acts of participating in the movement of insurrection are punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years:
1.	by erecting barricades, trenches or by constructing any works with the purpose of preventing the action of the public forces;
2.	by occupying of a building or an installation by force or by the scheme;
3.	by destroying a building or an installation;
4.	by undertaking the transportation or supplies of logistic for insurgents;
5.	by direct provoking the assembly of the insurgents;
6.	by possessing or carrying a weapon;
7.	by substituting the legitimate authorities.

Article 458: Aggravating Circumstances of Insurrection
The act of participating in the movement of insurrection is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years:
1.	by seizing by force, weapons, munitions, explosives or any other substance dangerous to persons;
2.	by providing the insurgents with weapons, ammunitions, explosives or the substances dangerous to the persons.

Article 459: Leading of Insurrection
The act of leading the movement of insurrection is punishable by an imprisonment from 20 (twenty) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 460: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five)
 
years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 4
USURPATION OF A COMMAND AND CONSTITUTING ARMED FORCES

Article 461: Usurpation of a Command
The act of taking a military command without authorization or permission from a legitimate authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 462: Unlawful Retaining Command
The act of retaining the military command against the order of the legitimate authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 463: Unlawful Constituting of Armed Forces
The act of constituting the armed forces without authorization or permission from a legitimate authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 464: Inciting People to Take Arms against the State Authority
The act of direct inciting people to take up arms against legitimate authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

When this inciting was materialized, the offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 465: Inciting People to Take Up Arms against Part of Population
The act of direct inciting people to take up arms against part of the population is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

When this inciting was materialized, the offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 15 (fifteen) years to 30 (thirty) years.

Article 466: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Chapter is punishable by the same
 
penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 467: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Section 5
Infringement against the Security of the Armed Forces

Article 468: Inciting Soldiers to Serve in Foreign Power
The act of direct inciting soldiers belonging to the Cambodian Armed Forces to join the services of a foreign power with a view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.
Article 469: Hindering Normal Functioning of Military Materials
The act of hindering the normal functioning of the military materials with the view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 470: Hindering the Movement of Military Personnel or Materials
The act of hindering the movement of the military personnel or materials with the view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million)
 
Riels.

Article 471: Inciting Military Personnel to be Disobedient
The acts direct inciting the military personnel to be disobedient with the view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 472: Demoralization of Military Personnel
The act of participating in the demoralization of military personnel with the view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 473: Fraudulently Entering in Military Bases
The act of fraudulently entering in a base, building, or facility that is assigned to military authorities or under the control of military authorities without authorization from competent authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 1 (one) year and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 474: Hindering the Functioning of Services for National Defence
The acts of hindering the normal functioning of the services, establishments or enterprises, public or private, that contributes to the national defence, with the view to undermine the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 475: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 476: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in this Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five)
 
years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 6
INFRINGEMENT ON THE SECRET OF THE NATIONAL DEFENCE

Article 477: Principle of Secrecy Protection of National Defence
The information, processes, objects, documents, memorandum slip or computerized data whose divulgence is susceptible to undermine the national defence may become the subject of protective measures intended to restrict their dissemination.

The modalities of organization of these protective measures are established by the Royal Government.

Article 478: Definition of Secrecy of National Defence
The information, the processes, the objects, the documents, the memorandum slips or the computerized data whose divulgence is restricted constitutes the secrecy of the National Defence.

Article 479: Intentional or Unintentional Revealing the Secrecy of National Defence
Any person who holds, because of his/her status, of his/her profession or his/her mission, information, a process, an object, a document, a memorandum slip or computerized data which constitutes secrecy of the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, if this person has revealed this secrecy to an unauthorized person.

Infringement of secrecy of the national defence caused by negligence, carelessness or disobedience is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (million) Riels.

Article 480: Possession of Secrecy of National Defence
The acts of having in possession of information, a process, an object, a document, a memorandum slip or computerized data which constitutes secrecy of the national defence by any unauthorized person is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.
 
Article 481: Destruction or Reproduction of Secrecy of National Defence
The acts of destroying or copying information, a process, an object, a document, a memorandum slip or computerized data which constitutes secrecy of the national defence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 482: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 483: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 3 INFRINGEMENT ON PUBLIC SECURITY

SECTION 1 GROUP FOR COMBATING

Article 484: Definition of Group for Combating
Any grouping of persons who carry weapons, consists of a hierarchical organization and is susceptible to disturbing pubic order constitutes a group for combating.

Article 485: Participation in Combating
The act of participating in a group for combating is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 486: Organizing a Group for Combating
The act of organizing a group for combating is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 487: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
 
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
7.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
8.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
OFFENCES RELATING TO WEAPONS, AMMUNITIONS AND EXPLOSIVES

Article 488: Producing or Trafficking Weapons, Explosives or Similar Objects Production, importation, exportation and stocking of weapons, all kind of ammunitions and explosives, without authorization from competent authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Weapons refer to all kinds of guns that are produced or modified or assembled with which killing or injuring or damaging properties can be carried out.

All kinds of ammunitions and explosives refer to equipment or materials that are produced or modified with which killing or injuring or damaging properties can be carried.

All kinds of chemical weapons, biological weapons or other ammunitions containing chemical and biological substances refer to substances that are produced or modified or assembled to endanger health, life or properties and environment.

Article 489: Production or Trafficking of other Assaulting Weapons
Production, importation, exportation and stocking of other assaulting weapons such as bayonets or brass knuckles for killing or injuring without authorization from competent authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 490: Carrying or Transporting Weapons without Authorization
Any person, outside of his/her residence, carries or transports, without authorization from competent authorities, a weapon, the ammunition or an explosive device is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 3 (three) years and a fine from
 
1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Any person, outside of his/her residence, carries or transports a weapon falling into the scope of enforcement of Article 500 (Production or Trafficking of other Assaulting Weapons) is punishable by the same penalties.

Article 491: Abandoning of Weapons in Public Places
The acts of abandoning in public place or a place that is accessible by the public a weapon or any other object that presents a danger to persons is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 3 (three) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 492: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	prohibition against leaving the territory of the Kingdom of Cambodia for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	for a convicted foreigner, prohibition against entering or taking residency in the Kingdom of Cambodia definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 493: Confiscation in Case of Abandoning Weapons in Public Places
For the offence specified in Article 491 (Abandoning Weapons in Public Places), the court may order a confiscation of the weapon or an object that presents a danger to persons.
 
SECTION 3 PROVOCATION TO COMMIT OFFENCES

Article 494: Conditions for Existence of Provocation
For the purpose of enforcement of the present Chapter, the provocation is punishable when it is committed:
1.	by speeches, of any kind whatsoever, pronounced in a public place or in any public meeting;
2.	by writing or sketches, of any kind whatsoever, distributed in public or exposed to the sights of the public;
3.	by any means of audio-visual communications for the public.
Article 495: Provocation to Commit Crimes
The act of direct provocation aimed at committing a felony by one of the means specified in Article 503 (Conditions for Existence of Provocation) is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels, if the provocation produced no effect.

Article 496: Provocation to Commit Discrimination
The act of direct provocation, by one of the means specified in Article 494 (Conditions for Existence of Provocation), hinting a discrimination, malice or violence against a person or a group of persons because of their belonging to or non-belonging to an ethnicity, a nationality, a race or a specific religion, is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels if the provocation produced no effect.

Article 497: Provocation through Media
The offences specified in the present Chapter committed through media are subject to the provisions of the Press Law.

Article 498: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
4.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
5.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
SECTION 4 MALEFACTOR COMMUNITY

Article 499: Elements of Malefactor Community and Penalties to be Imposed
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for the acts of participating in a group or a knock-out agreement established in order to:
1.	commit one or many felonies against the persons specified in Chapter 1 on Unintentional Infringement on Life to Chapter 6 on Infringement on Privacy in Title 2 on Infringement on Human Life of Book 2 on Crime Against Privacy of this Code.
2.	commit one or many felonies against properties specified in Book 3 of the present Code;

Article 500: Exemption from Penalties
The person is exempted from the penalty when he/she, having participated in the group or a knock-out agreement, and before any prosecution could take place, has revealed the competent authorities the group or the knock-out agreement and thus lead to the identification of other perpetrators.

Article 501: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
6.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
7.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
8.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
CHAPTER 4 INFRINGEMENT ON STATE AUTHORITIES

SINGLE SECTION INSULT AND REBELLION

Article 502: Elements of Insult and Penalties to be Imposed
The use of words, gestures, writings, sketches or objects which undermine the dignity of a person constitutes an insult.

The insult directed against a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandate by an election in office or in the occasion of performing his/her function is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 503: Elements of Rebellion and Penalties to be Imposed
The acts of opposing with violent resistance against a public official who acts in order to enforce laws and orders of public authorities or the decisions of the court constitute rebellion.

The rebellion is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 504: Aggravating Circumstances of Rebellions
Rebellions are punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 1 (one) year and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels, in the following cases:
1.	it is committed by several persons acting in their capacity as perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator or accomplice;
2.	the perpetrator carried a weapon.

Article 505: Inciting to Commit Rebellions
A direct inciting leading to the commission of rebellion is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 1 (one) month and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 506: Obstruction against the Implementation of Public Works
The act of obstructing by violence against the implementation of public works or the works for the interests of the public is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 507: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
 
1.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 5 INFRINGEMENT ON STATE RELIGION

SECTION 1 OFFENCE AGAINST BUDDHISM

Article 508: Celebration of Buddhist Ceremony without Authorization
According to Article 43 of the Constitution, Buddhism is the religion of the state.

The acts of celebrating, in a religious premise open to the public, a Buddhist ceremony without having been authorized by a religious authority are punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

The act of wearing clothes in public where he/she is not entitled to wear such clothes for religious affairs is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Rield to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 509: Theft of Object Dedicated to Buddhism
Without prejudice to the most severe penalties instituted by the present code, the theft of an object dedicated to Buddhism committed in a religious premise is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 510: Damaging Religious Premise or Dedicated Objects
Without prejudice to the most severe penalties instituted by the present code, the act of intentional commission to destroy, damage or deteriorate a religious premise dedicated to Buddhism or an object dedicated to this religion is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 511: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 512: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
 
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitely or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
5.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
6.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2
OFFENCES AGAINST BUDDHIST MONKS AND NUNS OR LAYMEN

Sub-Section 1 Violence

Article 513: Intentional Violence
The act of intentional violence against Buddhist monks and nuns or laymen are punishable from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 514: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Maiming and Disability Intentional violence against Buddhist monks and nuns or laymen is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years when it entails a maiming or a permanent disability.

Article 515: Aggravating Circumstances Resulting in Death of Victim
Intentional violence against Buddhist monks and nuns or laymen is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years when it results in the death of the victim without any intention of so doing.

Sub-Section 2 Insulting

Article 516: Insulting Buddhist Monks and Nuns or Laymen
When insulting specified in Paragraph 1 of Article 502 (Elements of Insult and Penalties to be Imposed) of this Code is committed against Buddhist monks, nuns, laymen during the performance of their functions or during the course of performance of their functions, it is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.
 
TITLE 2
Infringement on Justice

TITLE 1
INFRINGEMENT ON AUTHORITIES OF THE COURTS

CHAPTER 1
INFRINGEMENT ON JUDGES AND COURT ASSISTANTS SECTION 1
Briberies Committed by a Judge

Article 517: Briberies Committed by a Judge
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years, for the act of any judge who, without any right, solicits or accepts either directly or indirectly any donation, present, promise or any interest:
1.	to fulfil any act in his/her function;
2.	or not to fulfil any act in his/her function.

Article 518: Briberies Given to a Judge
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years, for the act of any person who, without any right, gives either directly or indirectly, any donation, present, promise or any interest to a judge so that the judge:
1.	fulfil any act in his/her function;
2.	or not fulfil any act in his/her function.
Article 519: Criminal responsibilities of Legal Entity (new article)
Article 528: Intimidation against a Judge or a Lawyer
Any act of intimidation against a judge or a lawyer to influence over his/her behaviour in the exercise of his/her functions is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years, and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten) million Riels.

It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years if this offence produces an effect.

Article 529: Insulting a Judge
When insulting specified in Article 511 (Elements of Insult and Penalties to be Imposed) of this Code is committed against a judge in office or during the course of performance of their functions, it is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 1 (one) month and a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.
If such insult was committed in the court hearing, it is punishable by an imprisonment
 
from 1 (one) month to 3 (three) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.
SECTION 2
INFRINGEMENT ON THE COURT DECISIONS
Article 530: Interference in the Performance of Functions of the Court
Any act of a public servant, a soldier or citizen receiving public mandates through an election who interferes in the performance of function of the court is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 520: Refusal to Enforce the Court Decision
Any act of a public civil servant or a soldier in office who refuses to enforce the decision or judgement or order of the court authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 521: Issuing Unlawful Order to Detain or Release
Any act under whatever form of a public civil servant, a soldier or a citizen receiving public mandates through an election, who issues an order to detain or release a detainee is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 522: Publication of any Commentaries to Put Pressure on Jurisdiction
Any publication, prior to the final decision of the court, of any commentaries aiming at putting pressure on the court where a law suit is filed, in order to influence over the decision of the court is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months, and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 523: Discrediting the Court Decision
Any act of criticizing a letter or a court decision aiming at creating disturbance of public orders or endangering institutions of the Kingdom of Cambodia is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Failure to enforce the decision of the court is punishable by the same penalties specified in Paragraph 1 above.

Article 524: Denunciation with Lies to the Court Authority
Any act of denunciation by lying to the court or administrative authority of a fact
 
constituting an offence, when such act leads to a useless investigation is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months, and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 525: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified Article 520 (Interference in the Performance of Functions of the Court) and Article 524 (Denunciation with Lies to the Court Authority) of this Code carries the same punishment as misdemeanours.

Article 526: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
4.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years;
5.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
6.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
7.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
Article 538: Criminal Responsibilities of the Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 518 (Bribery Committed by a Judge).
Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which are the subject of the offence according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and
 
Destruction of the Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Persons);
7.	Confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of the Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
8.	Posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
9.	Publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting by all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

CHAPTER 2
INFRINGEMENT ON ACTIVITIES OF THE COURTS


SECTION 1
FILE A COMPLAINT TO THE COURT


Article 527: Intimidation to not File a Complaint
Any act of intimidation and threat to incite the victim not to file a complaint or to withdraw his/her complaint is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years, and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels if this offence produces an effect.

Article 528: Failure to File Complaint of a Felony or Misdemeanour by a Public Agent
Any act of a public servant, a soldier or citizen receiving public mandates through an election who fails to complain to the court authority of the felony or misdemeanour which he/she has known while in office or during the performance of his/her functions is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 529: Suppression and Exemption of Penalties for Failure to Complaint about a Felony
Any person who has knowledge of a felony which can be prevented or reduced its
 
effects but fails to complaint it to the court authority or administrative authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.
However, punishment is exempted for:
1.	ascendant and descendant, brothers and sisters of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;
2.	a spouse of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;
3.	a person who is required by a law to maintain the confidentiality of the profession.

Article 530: Failure to Complaint about Mistreatment of a Minor
Any person who has knowledge of mistreatment or sexual abuse against a minor of less than 15 (fifteen) years of age, but fails to inform the court or administrative authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

SECTION 2
FILE A COMPLAINT TO THE COURT


Article 531: Hiding a Dead Body
Any act of disappearing or hiding a dead body of any victim of a homicide or a violence is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 532: Hiding Leads
Any act of modifying or disappearing leads or marks at a scene of felony or misdemeanour with the purpose of creating obstacles to finding facts is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 533: Disappearing Evidence
Any act of disappearing or moving or taking away any object at a scene of felony or misdemeanour with the purpose of creating obstacles to finding facts is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 534: Destruction of Documents
Any intentional act of destroying, stealing, or modifying a document or an object which
 
may facilitate the discovery of a felony or misdemeanour, the identification or the arrest of a perpetrator is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 535: Breaking Seals
Any act of breaking seals affixed by a competent authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 536: Destruction or Disappearance of Objects Affixed with Seals
Any act of destroying or disappearing objects affixed with the seals made by a competent authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 537: Refusal to Give Answers
Any person who declared publicly that he/she knows the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator or accomplice of a felony or misdemeanour and refuses to answer the questions posed to him/her about the case by a judge is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 538: Refusal to Appear
Any person who is summoned to testify as witness before a prosecutor or an investigating judge or a criminal court and refuses to appear himself/herself following the summon without any valid reason is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 539: Penalties and Exemption
Any person who has evidence proving the innocence of any accused or convicted and fails to provide such evidence to the court or administrative authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.
However, the penalties are exempted for:
1.	the perpetrator, co perpetrators, instigator or accomplice of the charged offence;
2.	ascendant and descendant, brothers and sisters of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;
3.	a spouse of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;
 
4.	a person who is required to maintain the confidentiality of the profession.

Article 540: Using Identity of Others
Any act of taking the name of the third person under the circumstance which leads to a criminal prosecution against the third person or which may lead to a criminal prosecution against the third person is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 541: Refusal to Follow Order
The driver of any vehicle who refuses to follow the order to stop issued by a police or a gendarmerie officer wearing a police or gendarmeries emblem to search for evidence is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 542: Refusal by a Driver to be Examined
The driver of any vehicle who refuses to submit himself/herself or his/her vehicle for examination carried out by a police or gendarmerie officer wearing a police or gendarmeries emblem to search for evidence is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 3 (three) months and a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 500,000 (five hundred thousand) Riels.
.
Article 543: Definition of Evasion and Penalties
The act committed by a driver of a land, river or maritime vehicle who has clear knowledge that he/she has just provoked an accident or a damage but fails to stop in order to evade from the criminal or civil responsibility which may be imposed on him/ her is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 1,000,000 (one million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 544: Penalties and Exemption for Assistance to Perpetrator, Co Perpetrator, Instigator and Accomplice
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels for any act of providing to a perpetrator, co-instigators, instigator or accomplice of a felony with:
1.	a lodging;
2.	a hiding place;
3.	means for living;
4.	all means which facilitates the evasion or escape from an investigation.
 
However, punishment is exempted for:
1.	ascendant and descendant, brothers and sisters of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;
2.	a spouse of the perpetrator, co-perpetrators, instigator, or accomplice;

Article 545: Penalties and Exemption for False Testimonies
False testimonies made after taking an oath before the court or a judicial police officer who acts under the framework of a rogation commission order is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

A liar witness is exempted from punishment, if he/she has spontaneously retracted his/her testimony and only speaks the truth before the decision to terminate the inquiry or trial procedures is taken.

Article 546: Intimidation Against a Witness
Any act of intimidation committed by a perpetrator alone or with consent of a third party to instigate a witness not to give any statement or to provide false oral or written testimony is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years if the offence produces an effect.

Article 547: Bribery Taken by a Witness to Produce False Testimonies
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years for the act of any witness who directly or indirectly solicits or accept donation, present, promise or any interest in order:
1.	not to testify as a witness;
2.	to provide false testimony.

Article 548: Bribery Given to a Witness
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years any person who gives directly or indirectly donation, present, promise or any interest to a witness in order:
1.	not to testify as a witness;
2.	to provide false testimony.
 

Article 549: Publication Aiming at Putting Pressure on a Witness
Any publication, prior to the final decision of the court, of any commentaries which intends to put pressure on a witness in order to influence over the testimony of the witness is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) days to 1 (one) month and a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

SECTION 3 TRANSLATION/INTERPRETATION AND FORENSIC EXAMINATION

Article 550: Perversion Committed by Interpreter/Translator
Any act of perversion intentionally committed by an interpreter/translator of the substance of the words or of the translated documents is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 551: Perversion Committed by an Expert
Any act committed by an expert to falsify the written report or oral statement on data or result of a forensic examination is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 552: Intimidation against Expert or Translator/Interpreter
Any act of intimidation against an expert or a translator/interpreter in order to influence over his/her behaviour during the performance of his/her function is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) to 10 (ten) years if the offence produces an effect.

Article 553: Bribery Committed by an Interpreter/Translator
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years for the act of any interpreter/translator who directly or indirectly solicits or accept donation, present, promise or any interest in order to pervert the substance of the words or the translation of the document.
 
Article 554: Bribery Given to an Interpreter/Translator
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years any person who gives directly or indirectly donation, present, promise or any interest to an interpreter/translator in order to pervert the substance of the words or the translation of the document.

Article 555: Bribery Committed by an Expert
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years for the act of any expert who directly or indirectly solicits or accept donation, present, promise or any interest in order to falsify the written report or oral statement on any data or result of a forensic examination.

Article 556: Bribery Given to an Expert
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years any person who gives directly or indirectly donation, present, promise or any interest to an expert in order to falsify the written report or oral statement on any data or result of a forensic examination.

SECTION 4
ATTEMPT AND ADDITIONAL PENALTIES


Article 557: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified Article 527 (Intimidation to not File a Complaint) and Article 531 (Hiding a Dead Body), Article 536 (Destruction or Disappearance of Objects Affixed with Seals), Article 540 (Using Identity of Others) and Article 544 (Penalties and Exemption for Assistance to Perpetrator, Co Perpetrators, Instigator and Accomplice) of this Code carries the same punishment as misdemeanours.

Article 558: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
 
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subject of the offence;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 559: Criminal Responsibilities of the Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences provided in Article 548 (Bribery Given to a Witness), Article 556 (Bribery Given to an Interpreter/Translator) and Article 568 (Bribery Given to an Expert) of this Code.

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 20,000,000 (twenty million) Riels to 200,000,000 (two hundred million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to modalities determined by Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of Legal Entities);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined by Article 173 (Expulsion from Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined by Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which are the subject of the offence according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of the Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Persons);
7.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of the Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
8.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
9.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting by all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).
 

CHAPTER 3
OFFENCES WITH REGARD TO DETENTION


SECTION 1 ELEMENTS OF ESCAPE

Article 560: Escape
The act of a detainee who escaped from detention by all means.

It is also considered as escape even though the above means are the act of the third person.

It is considered as a detainee, any person:
1.	who is placed in a custody;
2.	who is about to be brought or being brought to appear before the court authority after an arrest or in execution of an order to bring or an arrest warrant;
3.	who has received a notification of the detention warrant or arrest warrant;
4.	who serves the imprisonment sentence or who is arrested for implementing this sentence;
5.	who is detained within the framework of an extradition procedure;
6.	who is under semi-liberty regime as provided for in Article 127 (Conditions for the Semi-Liberty Regime) of this Code.

Article 561: Penalties to be Imposed
Escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 562: Acts Treated as Escape
It is considered as an escape and is subjected to the same punishment for:
1.	any act of a detainee placed in a health or hospital establishment or other places such as court, police headquarters, who escaped from being under surveillance;
2.	any act of a convicted person who is benefiting from a regime of semi-freedom, suspension of sentence, or split of punishment or permission to go
 
outside the prison, and does not return to the prison at the expiration of the period of the freedom.
SECTION 2
AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES RELATING TO ESCAPE AND FACILITATION OF ESCAPE


Article 563: Intimidation by Weapon or by Concerted Activities
An escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, if it is committed under the following circumstances:
1.	by a threat with a weapon or an explosive;
2.	in a framework of concerted activities between several detainees.

Article 564: Use of Weapon
An escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years, if a weapon or explosive was used.

Article 565: Provision of Means for Escape
Any act of providing a detainee with all means for escape or facilitating his/her escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 566: Aggravating Circumstances Relating to the Provision of Means for Escape
Any act of providing the detainee with weapons or explosive substances or incendiary substances or poisonous substances or acid to be used as means or facilitating escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 567: Facilitation of Escape by a Guardian
An act by a person who has duty to guard and facilitates or prepares for an escape of a detainee, even if it is by a voluntary abstention is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years .

Article 568: Aggravating Circumstances Relating to Facilitation of Escape by a Guardian
An act by a person who has duty to guard and provides the detainee with a weapon or explosive substances, or incendiary substances or poisonous substances or acid to be used as means or facilitating escape is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven)
 
years to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 569: Facilitation of Escape by a Person Authorized to Enter the Prison
An act by a person who is authorized to enter the prison and facilitates or prepares for an escape of a detainee, even if it is by a voluntary abstention is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 570: Aggravating Circumstances Relating to Facilitation of Escape by a Person Authorized to Enter the Prison
An act by a person who is authorized to enter the prison and provides a detainee with a weapon or explosive substances or incendiary substances or poisonous substances is punishable to an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.

CHAPTER 3
Unlawful Delivery of Money and an Object to a Detainee

Article 571: Unlawful Delivery and Aggravating Circumstances
An act of delivering or sending to a detainee of money, correspondence, an object or any substance, except that authorized by the regulations is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The above offences are punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels if they are committed:
1.	by a person who is in charge of guardianship of the detainees;
2.	by a person who is authorized to enter the prison.

Article 572: Unlawful Receipt and Aggravating Circumstances
An act of receiving from a detainee money, correspondence, an object or any substance, except that authorized by the regulations is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

The above offences are punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels if they are committed:
1.	by a person who is in charge of guardianship of the detainees;
 
2.	by a person who is authorized to enter the prison.

SECTION 4 ATTEMPT AND PENALTIES

Article 573: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 574: Exemption from Penalties
Any person as perpetrator, co-perpetrator, instigator or accomplice who attempts to commit any offences specified in Article 561 (Penalties to be Imposed) and Article 563 (Intimidation by Weapon or by Concerted Activities) to Article 570 (Aggravating Circumstances Relating to Facilitation of Escape by a Person Authorized to Enter the Prison) is exempted from punishment, if he/she had informed it to an administrative or judicial authority in order to prevent the escape from materialized.

Article 575: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the crimes described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subject of the offence;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 


CHAPTER 4
VIOLATION ON CERTAIN DECISIONS OF THE COURT

SINGLE CHAPTER
FAILURE TO ENFORCE CERTAIN PENALTIES IMPOSED BY THE COURT


Article 576: Violation on Prohibition against Taking Residency
The act of a person who is prohibited against taking residency as prescribed by the court authority and appears at the place of prohibition is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 577: Failure to Respect Surveillance Measures
Any act by a person who is prohibited against taking residency and evades himself/ herself from surveillance measure as prescribed by the court authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 578: Violation on Posting Penalty
In case that a sentence to post the decision of the court is pronounced, any act of disappearing, hiding or lacerating the poster is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels.

Article 579: Violation on Prohibition Against Pursuing Profession
In case that a sentence to prohibit against pursuing a profession is pronounced, any act of violation of this prohibition is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 580: Violation on Penalty which Limits Certain Rights
A violation by the convicted person of the obligations or prohibitions resulting from the punishment to suspension of driving-license, the prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon, the prohibition against issuing checks, the closure of the establishment or expulsion from public market places is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.
 


Article 581: Failure to Respect Confiscation
An act of destroying, hiding or dissimulating the confiscated object is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 582: Refusal to Hand-Over Driver-Licence
An act of refusing to hand-over the competent authorities a suspended driver- license or a confiscated object which fails to respect an effective court's decision is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 583: Violation of Community Work Obligation
A violation by the convicted person of the obligations resulting from the sentence to community work is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 584: Violation of Obligations Pronounced Against Legal Entities
When an obligation or prohibition is pronounced on a legal entity, the violation by a natural person of this obligation or prohibition is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 585: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the misdemeanours described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
3.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
4.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 



BOOK 3
INFRINGEMENT ON REGULARITY OF ELECTIONS

SINGLE TITLE
INFRINGEMENT ON REGULARITY OF ELECTIONS

SINGLE CHAPTER INFRINGEMENT ON REGULARITY OF ELECTIONS


Article 598: Infringement on the Free Exercise of Rights to Vote and Aggravating Circumstances
Any act of violence, coercion, threat or fraudulent trick which affects the free exercise of the rights to vote or to the regularity of the election is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

This offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels, if a weapon was used during the commission the offence.

Article 599: Propagating False Information to Prevent Voting
An act of propagating false information in order to prevent voters not to go to vote is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 600: Participating in a Voting Without Eligibility
An act of a person who is not eligible to vote and participate in a voting is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 601: Participating in a Voting by Using False Identity
An act of participating in a voting by using a false identity is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 602: Instigating a Voter by a Candidate
 
An act of a candidate to give any voter a gift or a present or an agreement to provide any interest in order to obtain a vote in his/her favour is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 603: Manipulating the Result of an Election by a Person in Charge of Vote Counting
An act of manipulating the result of an election, by whatever means, committed by any person who is in charge of vote counting or election supervising is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 604: Intimidation Against Members of a Polling Station
Any act of intimidation against any member of a polling station in order to influence his/her behaviour during the performance of his/her function is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 605: Manipulating the Result of an Election by a Person in Charge of Vote Counting
Without prejudice to more severe penalties as prescribed by this Code, the intentional violence against any member of a polling station is punishable by an imprisonment from
2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 606: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 607: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 10 (ten) years for a felony or not more than 5 (five) years for a misdemeanour;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subject of the offence;
 
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offence;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 608: Stealing of a Ballot Box
Without prejudice to more severe penalties as prescribed by this Code, the stealing of a ballot box containing ballots therein is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 609: Destroying or Damaging a Ballot Box
Without prejudice to more severe penalties as prescribed by this Code, any act committed intentionally to destroy, or damage or deteriorate any ballot box containing ballots therein is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

TITLE 3
INFRINGEMENT ON THE FUNCTIONING OF ADMINISTRATION


CHAPTER 1
INFRINGEMENT ON ADMINISTRATION BY A REPRESENTATIVE OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES


SECTION 1 DISOBEDIENCE OF DUTIES

Sub-Section 1 Abuse of Power
Article 586: Taking Measures to Prevent Law Enforcement and Aggravating Circumstances
The acts committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election in office or during the performance of his/her function to take measures to prevent law enforcement is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten
 
million) Riels.

This offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years if it produces an effect.
Article 587: Unlawful Continuation to Perform Functions
The acts committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to continue to perform his/her functions when this functions is terminated is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.


Sub-Section 2
Abuse of Power Against Individuals

Article 588: Infringement on Freedom of Individuals
The acts committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election in office or during the performance of his/her function to unlawfully continue the performance of tasks which affect the freedom of individual is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.


Article 589: Refusal to Release a Person who is Unlawfully Detained
The acts committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election in office or during the performance of his/her function to unlawfully deprive freedom and intentionally refuse to terminate this deprivation while he/she has the authorities to terminate the deprivation of this freedom or fails to request for interventions from competent authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.


Article 590: Unlawful Detention or Release
The act of a prison administration agent to detain or release a person without a warrant, a judgement or an order for detention or release issued in accordance with the law is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.


Article 591: Prolongation of Unlawful Detention
The act of a prison administration agent to unlawfully prolong a detention is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.
 




SECTION 2 CORRUPTION AND SIMILAR OFFENCES

Sub-Section 1 Misappropriation of Public Fund

Article 592: Definition of Misappropriation of Public Fund
The Misappropriation of Public Fund is an act committed by a civil servant or by a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to:
1.	demand or receive as entitlement, as tax, as excise in the amount which he/she knows is not due or exceed the exact due amount to be paid;
2.	grant, under any form and under any motives whatsoever, an exemption or an immunity from paying taxes or excise which he/she knows that it is illegal.

Article 593: Penalties to be Imposed
Misappropriation of Public Fund is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.


Sub-Section 2 Accepting of Bribery

Article 594: Accepting Bribery
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years for any act committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to directly or indirectly solicit or accept without authorization the donation, gift, promise, or any interest in order:
1.	to perform any act of his/her functions to facilitate anything using his/her functions;
2.	not to perform any act of his/her functions to facilitate anything using his/her functions;

Sub-Section 3 Passive Influential Deal

Article 595: Definition of Influential Deal
Passive influential deal is an act committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to directly or indirectly solicit or accept without authorization the donation, gift, promise, or any interest in order to obtain from a State institution due to real or assumed influence a job, a contract, an insignia or other
 
preferences.

Article 596: Penalties to be Imposed
Passive influential deal is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.


Sub-Section 4 Unlawful Exploitation

Article 597: Definition of Unlawful Exploitation
Unlawful exploitation is an act committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to directly or indirectly accept or retain any interest in
1.	an enterprise in which he/she has, in part or in whole, the responsibility of supervision, administration or liquidation;
2.	in an operation in which he/she has, in part or in whole, the responsibility of supervision or the payment.

Article 598: Penalties to be Imposed
Unlawful exploitation is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.



Section 5
Unlawful Control of Activities

Article 623: Unlawful Control of Activities
The act of public officials who carries out directly or indirectly commercial activities is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Section 6 Favouritism
Article 599: Definition of Favouritism
Favouritism is an act committed by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election to unlawfully give advantages to other persons while making public contract.

Article 600: Penalties to be Imposed
Favouritism is punishable by an imprisonment from 6 (six) months to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.
 



SECTION 3 DESTRUCTION AND EMBEZZLEMENT

Article 601: Intentional Destruction and Embezzlement
A civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election who, by virtue of his/her function, holds notice, bonds, public funds, private funds or any other objects is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years if he/she has destroyed them intentionally or has embezzled them fraudulently.

Article 602: Unintentional Damage or Disappearance
A civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election who, by virtue of his/her function, holds notice, bonds, public funds, private funds or any other objects is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels if he/she destroyed them or has made them disappeared unintentionally.

SECTION 4 ATTEMPT AND PENALTIES

 


Article 603: Attempt
 
Section 1 Attempt
 
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Chapter, except the misdemeanours prescribed in Article 589 (Refusal to Release a Person who is Unlawfully Detained) and Article 602 (Unintentional Damage or Disappearance) carries the same punishment as misdemeanours.

Section 2 Additional Penalties

Article 604: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences described in the current Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession if the crimes are committed in the course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for the period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
 
4.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subject of the offence;
5.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offence;
6.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
7.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period not more than 5 (five) years;
8.	posting the decision on sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision on sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision on sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


CHAPTER 2
INFRINGEMENT ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION COMMITTED BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS

SECTION 1 CORRUPTION AND SIMILAR OFFENCES

Sub-Section 1 Delivering of Briberies

Article 605: Delivering of Briberies
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years for an unauthorised person who directly or indirectly delivers present or gift, makes promise or give interests to a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election so that the latter:
1.	perform any act of his/her functions or facilitate any thing using his/her functions;
2.	not perform any act of his/her functions or facilitate any thing using his/her functions;

Sub-Section 2 Active Influential Deal

Article 606: Active Influential Deal
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for an unauthorised person who directly or indirectly delivers present or gift, makes promise or give interests to a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election in order to obtain from a State institution due to real or assumed influence a job, a contract, a distinction or other preferences.
 


 


Article 607: Intimidation
 
Sub-Section 3 Intimidation
 
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels any intimidation against a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election so that:
1.	the public servant or elected citizen performs any act of his/her function;
2.	the public servant or elected citizen not performs any act of his/her function;
3.	the public servant or elected citizen will abuses his/her real or assumed influence, in order to obtain an employment, a contract, a distinction or any other preferences.
SECTION 2 DESTRUCTION AND EMBEZZLEMENT

Article 608: Destruction and Embezzlement
Destruction, embezzlement or theft of notice, bonds, public funds, private funds or any other objects held by a civil servant or a citizen entrusted with public mandates through an election by virtue of his/her function is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.
SECTION 3
INTERFERENCE IN PUBLIC FUNCTIONS AND OFFICIAL POSITIONS


Article 609: Unlawful interference in the Performance of Public Functions
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels for any unlawful interference in the performance of one of public functions which is reserved for the authorized person only.

Article 610: Activities which Create Misleading with the Performance of Public Functions
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for any person who conduct activities under conditions which misleads the public that they are public functions.
 
Article 611: Use of Letters or Documentations which Create Confusion
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) for unauthorized use of letters or documentations similar to those of the administration or the court which may create confusion in the minds of the public.

Article 612: Unlawful Use of Costume for Public Authorities
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for the act of wearing in public the unauthorized costumes, uniforms or decorations for public authorities.

Article 613: Unlawful Use of Profession's Certified Documents
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for the act of unauthorized use in public of profession's certified documents  determined by the public authorities.

Article 614: Unauthorized Use of Badge Determined by Public Authorities
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for the act of unauthorized use in public of badge determined by the public authorities.

Article 615: Unauthorized Use of Vehicles with Signs Similar to those of Police or Military
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for the act of unauthorized use of vehicles with external signs similar to those used by police or military agents.

Article 616: Use of Uniforms Similar to those of Police or Military
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for the act of unauthorized use in public of costumes, uniforms, identity cards, badges, or police or military vehicles that are similar to those used by police or military which may create confusion in the minds of the public.

Article 617: Aggravating Circumstances Due to Preparation for Felonies or Misdemeanours
Offences prescribed in Article 611 (Use of Letters or Documentations which Create
 
Confusion) to Article 616 (Use of Uniforms Similar to those of Police or Military) are punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 618: Unauthorised Use of Position's  Certified  Card  in a Profession
Determined by Public Authorities

The act of unauthorized use of position's certified card in a profession determined by public authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.



Article 619: Unauthorized Use of Diploma
The act of unauthorized use of diploma or qualifications under which the conditions for delivering are determined by the public authority is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 620: Irregular Use of a Title
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels for an act of a leader of any enterprise who makes appearance or maintains the appearance in any publication for the interest of this enterprise, the name and title of a member or a former member of the Royal Government, or of a member or a former member of parliament, or of a judge or a former judge.

Article 621: Use of Identity Different from the Official Identify in Public Affairs
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 6 (six) months and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 1,000,000 (one million) Riels for an act of using any identity different from his/her official identity in public documents or for submission to public authorities.

CHAPTER 4 OTHER OFFENCES

Section 1 Violation of Regulations
 
Article 647: Violation of Regulations
Any person who violates a regulation of the administrative authority is punishable by a monetary fine from 5,000 (five thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels. However, such violation does not constitute an offence, if the regulation is contrary to a law.
Section 4
Shifting Boundary Demarcation

Article 622: Shifting Boundary Demarcations
Any act of lifting or shifting boundary demarcations which were placed by public authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

SECTION 5 ATTEMPT AND PENALTIES

Article 623: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Title is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 624: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration

For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
4.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
5.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
6.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
7.	prohibition against possessing or carrying a weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

Article 625: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
 
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences prescribed in Article 605 (Delivering of Briberies), Article 606 (Active Influential Deal) and Article 607 (Intimidation) of this Code.

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 50,000,000 (fifty million) Riels to one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to formalities determined in Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of a Legal Entity);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined in Article 173 (Expulsion form Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against conducting public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined in Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Fund Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
7.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
8.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
9.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

TITLE 4 INFRINGEMENT ON PUBLIC TRUST
CHAPTER 1


FORGERY


SECTION 1
FORGERY OF DOCUMENTATIONS
 
Article 626: Elements of Forgery
A forgery is an intentional act to harm facts expressed through letters or other means of expression of opinion, if all the following conditions are fulfilled:
1.	the harm has subject or may have power as evidence of a right or an act which has judicial consequence;
2.	the harm may cause a damage.

Article 627: Penalties to be Imposed
A forgery is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 628: Use of Forged Documents
The use of forged documents is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels.

Article 629: Forgery of Public Documents
Any forgery committed in an authentic document or in any document issued by a public administration to confirm a right, an identity or a status, or to grant an authorization is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 630: Use of Forged Public Documents
The use of forged public documents as defined in Article 629 (Forgery of Public Documents) is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 631: Fraudulent Delivery of Documents
An act of fraudulently delivering other persons documents issued by a public administration to confirm a right, an identity or a status, or to grant an authorization is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 632: Fraudulent Request for Documents
An act of fraudulently requesting a public administration to deliver a document to confirm a right, an identity or a status, or to grant an authorization is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.
 
Article 633: False Declaration
An act of providing a false declaration to a public administration for the purpose of obtaining an allowance, a payment or any unlawful advantage is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 2 (two) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 4,000,000 (four million) Riels.

Article 634: Delivering Forged Documents
Except the cases prescribed in this Chapter, any act of issuing an attestation or a certificate describing a state of affairs which is actually not true is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 635: Forging Attestation
Any act of falsifying or forging an attestation or a certificate is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 636: Use of a Falsified or Forged Certificate
The use of falsified or forged attestation or certification is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 637: Briberies	Taken	by	an	Authorized	Person	to	Issue	Forged Documents
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for any act committed during the pursuance of one's profession to solicit or accept any donation, gift, present, promise or any interest in order to issue an attestation or a certificate describing a state of affairs which is actually not true.

Article 638: Briberies Given to an Authorized Person to Issue Forged Document
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels for any act of giving any donation, gift, present, promise or any interest to any person to issue an attestation or a certificate describing a state of affairs which is actually not true.

Article 639: Briberies Taken by a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels for the act of any medical
 
staff or a person who is a member of a health organization to solicit or accept any donation, gift, present, promise or any interest in order to issue an attestation or a certificate describing a state of affairs which is actually not true.

Article 640: Briberies Given to a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate
It is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) year to 3 (three) years and a fine from 2,000,000 (two million) Riels to 6,000,000 (six million) Riels for an act of giving donation, gift, present, promise or any interest to any medical staff or a person who is a member of a health committee in order to issue an attestation or a certificate describing a state of affairs which is actually not true.

Article 641: Enforcement of Misdemeanours of Article 639 and Article 640 for all Health Professions
Provisions of Article 639 (Briberies Taken by a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate) and Article 640 (Briberies Given to a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate) are applicable to every person who pursues health profession.

Article 642: Attempt
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in Article 633 (Fraudulent Request for Documents), Article 638 (Briberies Given to an Authorized Person to Issue Forged Document) and Article 640(Briberies Given to a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate) is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 643: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
9.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
10.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.
 
Article 644: Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities
Legal entities may be pronounced to be criminally responsible according to conditions of Article 42 (Criminal Responsibilities of Legal Entities) for offences prescribed in Article 638 (Briberies Given to an Authorized Person to Issue Forged Document) and Article 640 (Briberies Given to a Member of a Health Organization to Issue a Forged Certificate) of this Code.

Legal entities are punished to monetary fine from 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels to 100,000,000 (one hundred million) Riels and one or more additional penalties as followed:
1.	dissolution according to formalities determined in Article 170 (Dissolution and Liquidation of a Legal Entity);
2.	placement under the court surveillance according to modalities determined by Article 171 (Placement under the Court Surveillance);
3.	prohibition against operating one or more activities according to modalities determined by Article 172 (Prohibition from Operating Activities);
4.	expulsion from public market places according to modalities determined in Article 173 (Expulsion form Public Market Places);
5.	prohibition against conducting public campaign for fund saving according to modalities determined in Article 174 (Prohibition against Public Campaign for Fund Saving);
6.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences according to modalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Parties);
7.	confiscation of incomes and properties earned from offences according to formalities determined in Article 178 (Confiscation of Ownership, Sale and Destruction of Confiscated Objects) and Article 179 (Confiscation and Rights of the Third Party);
8.	posting decision on punishment according to modalities determined by Article 180 (Posting Decision);
9.	publication of decision on punishment on newspapers or broadcasting on all means of audio visual communications according to modalities determined by Article 181 (Broadcasting Decision by all Means of Audi-Visual Communications).

Section 2 Counterfeited Currencies

Article 645: Counterfeiting Cambodian Currency which has Legal Tender Value
Counterfeiting or falsifying currency or bank-notes which have legal tender values in the Kingdom of Cambodia is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years.
 
Article 646: Counterfeiting Foreign Currencies which have Legal Tender Value
Counterfeiting or falsifying currency or bank-notes printed by foreign or international institutions which are rehabilitated for their purposes is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years.

Article 647: Circulating Counterfeited Currencies
Circulation of counterfeited or falsified currencies or bank notes per state in article 645 and article 646 of this code shall be punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

This offence is punishable by an imprisonment from 10 (ten) years to 20 (twenty) years if it is committed by an organized group.

Article 648: Holding Counterfeited Currencies
Holding the counterfeited or falsified currencies or bank notes for circulation is punishable by an imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years.

Article 649: Counterfeiting Currencies which no longer have Legal Tender Values
Counterfeiting or falsifying Cambodian or foreign currencies or bank-notes which no longer have legal tender values is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels

Article 650: Unlawful Holding of Equipment for Producing Currencies
Unauthorized holding of specific equipment and materials specifically for producing bank-notes and currencies is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 651: Recirculation of Counterfeited Currencies
The act of any person who receives counterfeited or falsified currencies or bank-notes and puts them in circulation again, even he/she has knowledge that they are counterfeited or falsified is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) day to 6 (six) days and a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 652: Penalty Exemption
Any person having attempted to commit one of the offences prescribed in this Chapter
 
is exempted from penalty if he/she has made the offences not become materialized and eventually has led to know the identification of other offenders by notifying administrative or court authorities.



Article 653: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For the offences laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

CHAPTER 2
FORGING DOCUMENTATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES


SECTION 1 FORGING CARDS

Article 654: Forging Cambodian Bonds
Counterfeiting or falsifying bonds issued by the Kingdom of Cambodia with the seal of the Kingdom of Cambodia or the logo the Kingdom of Cambodia is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 655: Forging Foreign Bonds
Counterfeiting or falsifying bonds issued by a foreign state with the seal or the logo of
 
the foreign state which issues them is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.



Article 656: Use of Counterfeited or Falsified Bonds
The use of counterfeiting or falsifying bonds is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 657: Counterfeiting Postal Stamp
Counterfeiting or falsifying postal stamps or other products with financial values printed by the Kingdom of Cambodia is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 5,000,000 (five million) Riels to 20,000,000 (twenty million) Riels.

Article 658: Use of Counterfeited Postal Stamp
The use of counterfeiting or falsifying postal stamps or other products with financial values is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 1,000,000 (a million) Riel to 5,000,000 (five million) Riels.

Article 659: Attempts
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Section is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.

Article 660: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes laid out in the present Chapter, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period
 
of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.

SECTION 2 COUNTERFEITING INSIGNIA OF AUTHORITIES

Article 661: Counterfeiting Seal of the Kingdom of Cambodia
Counterfeiting or falsifying the seal of the Kingdom of Cambodia or national seal or official seal is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 662: Use of Counterfeited Seal
The use of counterfeiting or falsifying seal of the Kingdom of Cambodia or national seal or official seal is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 663: Counterfeiting Official Letter-Head Papers
Counterfeiting or falsifying official letter-head papers used by public authorities is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 664: Use of Official Letter-Head Papers
The use of counterfeiting or falsifying official letter-head papers used by public authorities or official seal is punishable by an imprisonment from 2 (two) years to 5 (five) years and a fine from 4,000,000 (four million) Riels to 10,000,000 (ten million) Riels.

Article 665: Counterfeiting Printed Papers to make them Identical to the Official Ones
The production, sale, distribution or use of printed papers identical to the official letter-head papers used by public authorities which may create confusion in the minds of the public is punishable by an imprisonment from 1 (one) month to 1 (one) year and a fine from 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels to 2,000,000 (two million) Riels.

Article 666: Attempts
The attempt to commit misdemeanours specified in this Section is punishable by the same penalties as misdemeanours.
 
Article 667: Additional Penalties: Categories and Duration
For crimes in the present Section, the following additional penalties may be pronounced:
1.	deprivation of certain civil rights definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
2.	prohibition against pursuing a profession during which time the crime was committed in course of or during the occasion of pursuing of this profession definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
3.	prohibition against taking residency for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
4.	confiscation of any instruments, materials or any objects which have been used to commit the offence or were intended to commit the offence;
5.	confiscation of objects or funds which were the subjects of offences;
6.	confiscation of incomes or properties earned from the offences;
7.	confiscation of one or several vehicles belonging to the convicted person;
8.	prohibition against possessing or carrying weapon definitively or for a period of not more than 5 (five) years;
9.	posting the decision of sentence for a period of not more than 2 (two) months;
10.	publication of the decision of sentence in the newspapers;
11.	broadcasting the decision of sentence by all means of audio-visual communications for a period of not more than 8 (eight) days.


BOOK 5- BOOK 6
FROM ARTICLE 668-ARTICLE 672 ARE NEW VERSION


INFRINGEMENT ON SOCIAL LIFE


SINGLE CHAPTER INFRINGEMENT ON SOCIAL LIFE

CHAPTER 1 INFRINGEMENT CAUSED BY ANIMALS

Article 694: Letting Animals Ramble Around
An act of an owner or a guardian who let any animal ramble around which may endanger human being is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 695: Instigating Animals to Cause Danger
 
Any act of an owner or a guardian to instigate or not to keep animals in custodian which may endanger human being is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 696: Temporary Custodian of Animals
In case of punishment for petty crime as prescribed in Article 694 (Letting Animals Ramble Around) and Article 695 (Instigating Animals to Cause Danger ), the court may order the animals be handed over to the competent authorities to take temporary custodian.
CHAPTER 2
WASTE AND OTHER DISTURBANCE


Section 1 Waste

Article 697: Illegal Disposal of Rubbish in Public Places
Any act of dumping, disposing or throwing away any rubbish, waste, or any construction material, at public places outside the locations indicated by the administration is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 698: Illegal Disposal of Vehicle Wreckage and Objects in Public Places
An act of dumping, disposing or throwing away at public places, outside the locations indicated by the administration, any vehicle wreckage or rubbish or waste or materials transported by vehicles is punishable by a fine from 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels to 100,000 (one hundred thousand) Riels.

Article 699: Illegal Disposal of Rubbish at a Private Place
An act of dumping, disposing or throwing away any rubbish, waste, or any construction material, at a private place without consent from the occupant of the place is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 700: Illegal Disposal of Vehicle Wreckage and Objects in a Private Place
An act of dumping, disposing or throwing away any vehicle wreckage or rubbish or waste or materials transported by vehicles at a private place without consent from the occupant of the place is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 701: Illegal Disposal of a Wreckage or an Object on Public Roads
 
An act of obstruction any public road by dumping or leaving unnecessarily any construction material or object which hinders or lessen the free traffic of the persons or vehicles is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.

Article 702: Transportation order is the Burden of the Convicted Person
In case of punishment for petty crime as prescribed in Articles 698 (Illegal Disposal of Vehicle Wreckage and Objects in Private Places) and Articles 701 (Illegal Disposal of a Wreckage or an Object on Public Roads), the court may order the convicted person to transport the wreckage, rubbish, waste, or construction materials under his/her costs to a location designated by the court.

Section 2 Disturbance Noise

Article 703: Creating Sound or Noise
An act to create sound or noise which disturbs the quietness of other people is punishable by a fine from 1,000 (one thousand) Riels to 10,000 (ten thousand) Riels.
