IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BANGKALAN REGENCY GOVERNMENT

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKALAN REGENCY

NUMBER 6 OF 2009

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE REGENT OF BANGKALAN,

Considering:

a. that until now the number of violence against women and children in Bangkalan Regency is still high, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
b. that in connection with the consideration referred to in letter a, it is deemed necessary to regulate the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence by Regional Regulation.

In View of:

1. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions Within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 41), as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
2. Law Number 6 of 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 23 of 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1992 Number 100, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
6. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment Occupation) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action for The Elimination of The World Forms Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
9. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
10. Law Number 10 of 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
11. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4419);
12. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4437), as last amended by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
13. Law Number 33 of 2004 concerning Financial Balance between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
16. Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
17. Presidential Decree Number 88 of 2002 concerning National Action Plan (RAN) for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
18. Presidential Decree Number 40 of 2004 concerning National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 2004-2009;
19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2006 concerning Types and Forms of Regional Legal Products;
20. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 16 of 2006 concerning Procedures for Preparation of Regional Legal Products;
21. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 17 of 2006 concerning Regional Gazette and Regional News;
22. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 53 of 2007 concerning Supervision of Regional Regulations and Regional Head Regulations.

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANGKALAN REGENCY

and

THE REGENT OF BANGKALAN

HAS DECIDED:

To Enact:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Regional Government is the Bangkalan Regency Government.
2. Regent is the Regent of Bangkalan.
3. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
4. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, or psychological to the victim.
5. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
6. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
7. Sexual violence is an act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and or for certain purposes.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
9. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
10. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
11. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in a Hospital, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
12. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
13. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, as well as mother and children.
15. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (housemaids, drivers, and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2 The principles of organizing protection for women and children victims of violence are:
a. respect for the rights of victims.
b. justice and gender equality.
c. non-discrimination.
d. best interests of the victim.

Article 3

The purpose of organizing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence based on gender equality and the best interests of the child that occur in the household and/or public.

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4

1. Every community or individual has the right to report on incidents of violence against children and women.
2. Every victim has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions whether Regional Government or non-government.

Article 5

In the event of violence, every victim has the right to receive assistance both psychologically and legally and to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 6 (1) The Regional Government is obliged and responsible to carry out efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence as well as laws and regulations;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the organization of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the organization of protection for women and children victims of violence.
2. To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government is obliged to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
2. The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V

ORGANIZATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Institutional

Article 7

1. The organization of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework.
2. PPT Bangkalan can forward case referrals from sub-districts in Bangkalan.
3. Provisions regarding this will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Service Mechanisms Article 8 (1) Forms of services to victims organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services, which are forms of medical services for the purposes of proof in the legal field;
c. psycho-social services, which are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
2. Service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) are organized according to standard operating procedures (SOP) which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Service Principles

Article 9

The organization of services to victims is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, empathetically, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and with guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 10

PPT managers are obliged to organize services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 9.

CHAPTER VI

ASSISTANCE

Article 11

Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have the expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT.

CHAPTER VII

SANCTION PROVISIONS

Article 12

1. Any person who intentionally does not provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, and or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
2. If officials appointed to organize protection do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
3. PPT managers who carry out service tasks that violate service principles, may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal mechanisms of PPT.

CHAPTER VIII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 13

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Bangkalan Regency.

Enacted in Bangkalan

on 7 August 2009
