IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

REGENT OF TABALONG

PROVINCE OF SOUTH KALIMANTAN

REGIONAL REGULATION OF TABALONG REGENCY

NUMBER 04 OF 2017

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF TABALONG,

Considering:

a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity must be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature without discrimination;
c. that the Regional Government is obligated to implement protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 8 of 1965 concerning the Establishment of Level II Region of Tanah Laut, Level II Region of Tapin and Level II Region of Tabalong (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 51, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2756);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 8 of 1981 concerning Criminal Procedure Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1981 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
11. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 27 of 1983 concerning the Implementation of the Criminal Procedure Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1983 Number 36, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3258);
14. Government Regulation Number 40 of 2011 concerning Guidance, Assistance, and Recovery for Children Who Become Victims or Perpetrators of Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 86, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5237);
15. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 44);
16. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions, as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 927);
17. Regional Regulation of Tabalong Regency Number 05 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Tabalong Regency of 2016 Number 05, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tabalong Regency Number 02);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF TABALONG REGENCY

and

REGENT OF TABALONG

DECIDES:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1 In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Tabalong Regency.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regional Head hereinafter referred to as Regent is the Regent of Tabalong.
4. Regional Apparatus Organization hereinafter abbreviated as OPD is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Agency is the Agency for Women's Empowerment, Child Protection, Population Control and Family Planning of Tabalong Regency.
6. Head of Agency is the Head of the Agency for Women's Empowerment, Child Protection, Population Control and Family Planning of Tabalong Regency.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles, functions and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural circumstances of society.
8. Gender-based violence is any act of deviation caused by an imbalance of power in the relationship between women and men that results in misery or suffering of women and children whether physically, sexually and/or psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily that occurs in the private/domestic sphere and in the public sphere.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women and children carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
11. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 years including the fetus in the womb.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or suffering as a result of violence and/or threat of violence.
13. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an Integrated Activity Center that provides services for women and children victims of violence in Tabalong Regency free of charge covering information services, psychological, legal and religious consultation, assistance and advocacy as well as health services and safe houses with referrals.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for and fulfillment of the rights of victims;
b. justice;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims;
e. legal certainty; and
f. legal protection.

Article 3

Protection of Women and Children aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against Women and Children;
b. protect women and children; and
c. provide services to Women and Children victims of violence.

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 4

Every Woman and Child has the right:
a. to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. to obtain protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
c. to physical, psychological and sexual health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by the victim;
d. to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to determine their own decisions.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 5

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide Protection to Women and Children.
2. The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. implementing the obligations of Protection of Women and Children based on laws and regulations;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children;
c. completing facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
d. allocating budget in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children; and
e. fostering and supervising the implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

Article 6

1. The community has the obligation and responsibility to provide Protection to Women and Children.
2. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in the form of:
a. preventing acts of violence against Women and Children;
b. providing Protection to victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against Women and Children to the competent authorities; and
e. participating in handling victims of violence.

CHAPTER V

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 7

1. In implementing Protection of Women and Children in the Region, the Regent may establish P2TP2A.
2. The establishment and development of P2TP2A shall be adjusted to the development of priority needs, and the financial capacity of the Region as well as the institutional and personnel capacity available in the Region.
3. P2TP2A established by the Regional Government shall have at least 4 (four) counselors.
4. Counselors as referred to in paragraph (3) include:
a. counselors in the field of law;
b. counselors in the field of health;
c. counselors in the field of psychology; and
d. counselors in the field of religion.

Article 8

1. Forms of services implemented at P2TP2A include:
a. legal consultation;
b. assistance for victims;
c. psychological consultation;
d. medical service referral;
e. safe house services with referral;
f. home visit; and
g. counseling.
2. P2TP2A working partners include:
a. Health Office;
b. Education Office;
c. Social Office;
d. Regional General Hospital;
e. Community Health Center;
f. Population and Civil Registration Office;
g. Women and Children Protection Unit (Police Resort and Police Sector);
h. TPPKK;
i. Ministry of Religious Affairs;
j. Office of Religious Affairs; and
k. Religious Court.

Article 9

The handling flow at P2TP2A includes:
a. case reception;
b. registration;
c. case assessment;
d. intervention planning;
e. intervention agreement;
f. intervention implementation;
g. case recording; and
h. termination.
2. The handling flow at P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d includes:
a. legal services;
b. medical services;
c. psychological services;
d. spiritual services; and
e. safe house services.

Article 10

In providing Protection to Women and Children, P2TP2A has the obligation to:
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to victims;
b. implement protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, repatriation and legal assistance;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants required for victims;
d. provide convenience, comfort and safety for victims; and
e. maintain victim confidentiality.

CHAPTER VI

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 11

1. To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women and Children victims of violence, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
2. Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Protection of Women and Children victims of violence in the Region.
3.  Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus Organizations that implement policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children.
4. Monitoring is conducted from the planning stage until the policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children for the current year.

Article 12

1. Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children is conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
2. The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children are used as input for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children for the following year.
3. Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 13

1. The Regent is responsible for preparing reports on the implementation of P2TP2A for Protection of Women and Children in the Region.
2. Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted annually or when necessary submitted to the Provincial Government.
3. The form of report as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

FINANCING

Article 14

Financing for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children is sourced from the regional revenue and expenditure budget and other legitimate and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 15

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of P2TP2A for Protection of Women and Children in the Region.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes coordination, facilitation, guidance, supervision, consultation, education and training.

Article 16

In the context of supervision, the Regent conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women and Children.

CHAPTER X

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 17

1. In implementing Protection of Women and Children, the community may:
a. establish family partners at the sub-district/village level by the community;
b. conduct socialization of the rights of Women and Children independently;
c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to the competent authorities if violence against Women and Children occurs in the environment.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector and mass media.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 18

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Tabalong Regency.

Enacted in Tanjung on 15 May 2017, REGENT OF TABALONG,

H. ANANGSYAKHFIANI

Promulgated in Tanjung

on 15 May 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TABALONG REGENCY,

H.ABDUL MUTHALIBSANGADJI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TABALONG REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 04

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TABALONG REGENCY SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE:(47/2017)
