SERVICES AND PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

REGENT OF WEST MANGGARAI

EAST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY

NUMBER 1 OF 2017

CONCERNING

SERVICES AND PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE REGENT OF WEST MANGGARAI,

Considering:

a. that violence and discrimination in any form against women and children constitutes a violation of Human Rights, therefore violence and discrimination against women and children occurring in West Manggarai Regency must receive optimal services and protection;
b. that the provision of services for women victims of violence and child protection is one of the authorities of the regency government in accordance with the provisions of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, therefore it needs to be regulated by Regional Regulation;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Services and Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 8 of 2003 concerning the Establishment of West Manggarai Regency in East Nusa Tenggara Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 28, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4271);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587); As has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 09 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5070);

With Mutual Approval of

THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY

and

THE REGENT OF WEST MANGGARAI

HAS DECIDED:

To Enact:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING SERVICES AND PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is West Manggarai Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of West Manggarai Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of West Manggarai.
4. Woman is a person who has reproductive organs that can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth and breastfeeding.
5. Child is a person who is not yet 18 years old, including a child in the womb.
6. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, or psychological to the victim.
7. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness or causes death.
8. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
9. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
10. Economic violence is the neglect of family members in the form of not providing a decent living care and maintenance.
11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Services for women and children are actions that must be immediately taken including protection provided to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or having occurred violence against victims.
13. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Community, the Police, the Prosecutor's Office, the Court, social institutions or other parties who know or hear of impending or having occurred violence against women.
14. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
16. Women and Children Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as P3A is an institution providing services to victims of violence in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
17. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
18. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and or community organizations.
19. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children.
20. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

The Principles of Services and Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence are:
a. Respect and recognition of equal and equivalent human rights and dignity;
b. Respect for the rights of victims;
c. Justice and gender equality;
d. Non-discriminatory; and
e. Best interests of the victim.

Article 3

The Objectives of Services and Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence are to provide services and protection for women and children victims of violence that are gender-based and in the best interests of children occurring in the household and or public.

CHAPTER III

RESPONSIBILITY

Article 4

1. The Regional Government is responsible for implementing efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence in the form of:
a. Collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence in accordance with Laws and Regulations;
b. Conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children;
c. Conducting socialization of Laws and Regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. Conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of services and protection for women and children victims of violence;
2. To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence, the Regional Government provides and organizes services for victims in the form of:
a. Establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. Encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
3. The Regional Government in providing and organizing services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 5

Every victim has the right to receive protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions whether Government or Non-Government.

Article 6

In the event of violence, every victim has the right to receive assistance, whether medical, psychological or legal, and to receive guarantees of their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

CHAPTER V

PROVISION OF SERVICES

Part One

Institutional Arrangements

Article 7

1. The Regent shall establish a public service work unit that functions as a facilitator for P3A.
2. P3A as referred to in paragraph (1) in handling services and protection for women and children victims of violence may establish partnerships with social community institutions and customary functionaries engaged in the field of services and protection for women and children.
3. Further provisions regarding P3A institutional arrangements shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Services and Protection

Article 8

1. The forms of services and protection for victims organized by P3A consist of:
a. Medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services are a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. Psychosocial services are services provided by assistants in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving their problems;
d. Legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. Economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism of services and protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to Standard Operational Procedures (SOP) which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Principles of Services and Protection

Article 9

Services and Protection for victims shall be carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatory, easily accessible and with guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 10

P3A managers are obliged to organize services and protection in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 9.

CHAPTER VI

ASSISTANCE

Article 11

Assistance shall be carried out by persons or bodies/institutions that have expertise in conducting counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with P3A.

CHAPTER VII

FUNDING

Article 12

1. Funds for the provision of services and protection for women and children victims of violence are sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD) of the Regency.
2. funds as referred to in paragraph (1) may also come from other lawful sources.

CHAPTER VIII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 13

Regent Regulations as Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months after this Regional Regulation is stipulated.

Article 14

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of West Manggarai Regency.

Stipulated in Labuan Bajo,

on the date, 21 February 2017

REGENT OF WEST MANGGARAI,

AGUSTINUS CH. DULA

Promulgated in Labuan Bajo,

on the date, 21 February 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY,

MBON ROFINUS

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 1.

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY EAST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE: 01 YEAR 2017.

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY

NUMBER 1 YEAR 2017 CONCERNING SERVICES AND PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Services and protection for women and children constitute a series of activities that must be pursued continuously, sustainably, in a directed manner and guarantee the growth and development of children physically, mentally, spiritually and socially so as to realize a good life and be able to become potential, resilient successors of the nation, of noble character and possessing a strong sense of nationalism to maintain the unity and integrity of the nation and state. In addition, the Government also guarantees that the rights of women and children are fulfilled through Laws and Regulations that protect women and children from violence and discrimination. This is philosophically stated in the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution, that the first purpose of the establishment of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and all of Indonesia's territory.

Therefore, the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) on 10 December 1948 and ratified CEDAW (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms Of Discrimination Against Women) with Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against women, and is therefore obliged to comply with these provisions.

Likewise in the Amendment to the 1945 Constitution and Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights, it is stated that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially www.jdih.manggaraibaratkab.go.id the Government, and the Law is also a legal umbrella for all the formation of Laws and Regulations that guarantee the realization and protection of women's human rights in implementing the elimination of discrimination. Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence against Women of 1999, it is stated that women as Mothers of the nation and children as the next generation of the nation are creatures created by Almighty God and therefore must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE.

Article 1

Services also include protection for women and children victims of violence.

Article 2

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Respect for the rights of victims is intended to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims.

Paragraph (3)
Gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women;

Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings; to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and national security activities and equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Paragraph (4)
Non-discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and class.

Paragraph (5)
The best interests of victims are all actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, Society, Legislative Bodies, Judicial Bodies, so the best interests of victims must be a primary consideration.

Article 3

What is meant by "gender-based violence" is actions based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men.

This excerpt sits under: CHAPTER IV > RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4

What is meant by "receiving protection" is obtaining protection from individuals, groups or institutions, both Government and Non-Government.

Obtaining information about the existence of complaint centers, Women and Children Service Centers (P3A) and matters related to the fulfillment of their rights and being involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and development of case handling.

What is meant by "Integrated Services" are services that include medical, medicolegal, psychosocial and legal.

What is meant by "Continuous Handling" is handling that does not only stop at physical and psychological healing, but until the victim can resume their life in society including the restoration of their good name.

Article 5

What is meant by "Receiving Psychological and Legal Assistance" is receiving psychological and legal assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST MANGGARAI REGENCY NUMBER 168.
