REGENT OF BADUNG
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BADUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2013
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BADUNG,

Considering : a. that every citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of Violence;
b. that Women and Children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence which constitutes an act that violates human rights and need to receive legal Protection;
c. that the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence in Badung Regency needs to be supported by institutions and regulations so that its implementation can be guaranteed;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 69 of 1958 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions within the Level I Regional Areas of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
10. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
11. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
18. Regional Regulation of Badung Regency Number 4 of 2008 concerning Government Affairs that are the Authority of Badung Regency (Regional Gazette of Badung Regency of 2008 Number 4, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Badung Regency Number 4);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BADUNG REGENCY
REGENT OF BADUNG
DECIDES :
TO ESTABLISH : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Badung Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Badung.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Badung Regency.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to Victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person recognized by law as a Woman.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child still in the womb.
8. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
9. Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
10. Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child.
11. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences misery and/or suffering as a result of Violence and/or threat of Violence.
12. Victim of Violence is an individual or group of people who experience suffering either physically, mentally or emotionally, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of Violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or Regional Government apparatus or by individuals.
13. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of Victims covering physical, psychological, and sexual health so that Victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
14. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions naturally.
15. Repatriation is an effort to return Victims of Violence from the Region to their Region of origin.
16. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
17. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or Victims of acts of Violence.
18. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main duties of integrated services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, covering complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and Legal Assistance.
19. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, Social Rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as Repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of Victims; b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Victims; and
e. legal certainty.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of Violence against Women and Children;
b. protect Women and provide services to Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
c. empower Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every Female and Child Victim of Violence has the right: a. to have their dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. to obtain Protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order determination from the court;
c. to physical, psychological and sexual health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by the Victim of Violence;
d. to special handling related to the confidentiality of the Victim;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to determine their own decisions.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 5
(1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide Protection to Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. implementing policies for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence based on laws and regulations;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
d. allocating budget in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
e. fostering and supervising the implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

Article 6
(1) The community has the obligation and responsibility in providing Protection to Women and Child Victims of Violence.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of Violence against Women and Children;
b. providing Protection to Victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing information and/or reporting acts of Violence against women and Children to the competent authorities; and
e. participating in the handling of Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 7
(1) In implementing Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence in the Region, the Regent may establish a PPT.
(2) The establishment and development of PPT shall be adjusted to the development of priority needs, and the financial capacity of the Region as well as the institutional and personnel capacity available in the Region.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may accommodate institutions/work units that provide services for Victims of Violence such as P2TP2A, Safe Houses, Child Social Protection Houses, Trauma Center Protection Houses, Women's Social Protection Houses, Shelters and other service activities in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(4) Forms of services implemented by PPT include:
a. complaints;
b. Health rehabilitation;
c. Social rehabilitation;
d. legal aid;
e. repatriation; and
f. social reintegration.
(5) In providing Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence, PPT is obligated to:
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to Victims;
b. implement Protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, social reintegration and legal aid;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for Victims;
d. establish networks with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of Victims and cooperate with witness and Victim protection institutions, social protection houses or trauma centers owned by the government, community, or other institutions for health recovery of Victims;
e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for Victims;
f. maintain confidentiality of Victims;
g. provide fulfillment of legal aid for Victims;
h. in the event that integrated service implementation is carried out through networking, PPT remains responsible for the entire referral service process required by Victims.
(6) The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be implemented in accordance with SPM.

Article 8
(1) Community Institutions may establish PPT.
(2) In the establishment of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), it shall be guided by the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS
Article 9
MSS for the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, includes services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of Victims of Violence against Women and Children;
b. health services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
c. Social rehabilitation for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
d. law enforcement and legal assistance for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

Article 10
SPM as referred to in Article 9 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive health services by trained health personnel at Puskesmas and Hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of Violence against Women and Children;
f. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive legal aid services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER VII
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 11
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Work Units that implement policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(4) Monitoring is conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence for the current year.

Article 12
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women and Children for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING
Article 13
(1) The Regent is responsible for making a report on the implementation of SPM in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Region to the Governor with a copy submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted annually.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 14
Funding for the implementation of Protection for Women and Children from acts of Violence, is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 15
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing implementation instructions, guidance, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of service implementation for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER XI
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 16
(1) In implementing Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence, the community may:
a. establish family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. conduct independent socialization of the rights of Women and Children; c. provide first aid to Victims; and
d. report to the competent authorities if Violence against Victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 17
In the event that the PPT as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) has not yet been established, the existing P2TP2A shall continue to carry out the tasks and functions of integrated services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Region.

CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Badung Regency.
Enacted in Mangupura on the date of 19 November 2013

REGENT OF BADUNG,
signed.
ANAK AGUNG GDE AGUNG Promulgated in Mangupura on the date of 19 November 2013

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BADUNG REGENCY,
signed.

KOMPYANG R. SWANDIKA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BADUNG REGENCY YEAR 2013 NUMBER 15
Copy in accordance with the original Head of Legal and Human Rights Division Regional Secretariat of Badung Regency, signed.
Komang Budhi Argawa,SH.,M.Si.
Pembina

NIP. 19710901 199803 1 009
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BADUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2013
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The State has an obligation to provide Protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. That Women and Children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence and therefore need to receive Protection. Violence against Women and Children constitutes a violation of human rights and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination.

Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child. The existence of Women and Children Victims of Violence has not yet received adequate services so that minimum services are required for Victims of Violence.

In order to prevent and overcome Violence against Women and Children in Badung Regency so that they are protected from Violence, threats of Violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for Women and Children Victims of Violence specifically in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of Women and Children Victims of Violence in Badung Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "community institution" is an institution formed by members of the Indonesian Citizen community voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, which consists of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
At the time the PPT is formed, P2TP2A constitutes part of the PPT.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BADUNG REGENCY NUMBER 15.