COPY
REGENT OF BULELENG
PROVINCE OF BALI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY NUMBER 5 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT OF BULELENG REGENCY
YEAR 2019
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

COPY
REGENT OF BULELENG
PROVINCE OF BALI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY NUMBER 5 OF 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF BULELENG,

Considering : a. that every citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence that degrade human dignity;
b. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence, thus need to receive optimal protection;
c. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection constitute mandatory government affairs for regional governments;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children From Acts of Violence;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 69 of 1958 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions within the Level I Regional Areas of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia jdih.bulelengkab.go.id Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
7. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
8. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587); as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number jdih.bulelengkab.go.id 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
9. Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
10. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
11. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
19. Regional Regulation of Bali Province Number 6 of 2014 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Bali Province Year 2014 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bali Province Number 6 Year 2014);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BULELENG REGENCY and

REGENT OF BULELENG
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Buleleng Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Buleleng Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Buleleng.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Buleleng Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and community organizations and/or associations.
8. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband and wife and their child, or father and his child, or mother and jdih.bulelengkab.go.id his/her child, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
9. Every person is an individual person or corporation.
10. Violence is any act that results in suffering or hardship physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
11. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering or hardship to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
12. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
15. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
17. Cooperation is an activity or effort carried out by several people to achieve common goals.
18. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will, is or has occurred.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
19. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
20. Victim recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of violence, both physically and psychologically.
21. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main tasks of integrated services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, including complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and Legal Aid.
22. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, Social Rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal aid, as well as Repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims of acts of violence; b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims of acts of violence; and e. legal certainty.

Article 3
The Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence aims to: a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children; b. protect Women and provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence; and
c. empower women and children victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every Woman and Child Victim of Violence has the right:
a. to have their dignity and worth as a human being respected;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
b. to obtain Protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order determination from the court;
c. to physical, psychological and sexual health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by the victim of violence;
d. to special handling related to the confidentiality of the Victim;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to resolution through mediation, if it constitutes the best resolution for the interests of the victim; and
h. to determine their own decision.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
General

Article 5
The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence;
d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and
h. threats of certain actions.

Article 6
Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 5 is obligated to make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence; c. provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. assist in the process of submitting an application for protection order.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

Article 7
Protection of child victims of acts of violence is implemented by means of: a. formulating policies for prevention, reduction of vulnerable risks, handling of victims and child data and information systems;
b. organizing maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children, both within institutions and outside institutions;
c. providing shelters, maintenance and care for neglected children; and
d. organizing special protection for children.

Second Part
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 8
(1) Regional Government conducts prevention of acts of violence against women and children by means of:
a. conducting socialization of laws and regulations; b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education on the dangers of domestic violence; d. conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
e. forming work networks in efforts to prevent violence; f. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
g. forming a violence prevention system, mapping of locations or areas prone to violence occurrence; and
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms.
(2) In addition to conducting prevention as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention of acts of violence against children is also conducted by means of increasing family capacity in child protection and child care skills.
(3) In addition to Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is obligated to be implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social community institutions;
f. Desa pakraman; and jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
g. business sector and other institutions.

Article 9
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to prepare Prevention programs or activities as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan;
(2) Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) are to support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Article 10
(1) Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment shall implement prevention as referred to in Article 8;
(2) Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in conducting prevention may cooperate with vertical Agencies.

Third Part
Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 11
(1) Regional Government implements integrated services for victims of acts of violence through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social rehabilitation services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and
g. repatriation and reintegration.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms within the police force;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/or
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
(3) Services as referred to in paragraph (1), including the preparation of visum et repertum, are conducted free of charge.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id (4) Implementation of services for victims of acts of violence is conducted in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A and other social institutions;
(5) P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner;
(6) Integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) are implemented in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures;
(7) Provisions regarding Standard Operating Procedures as referred to in paragraph (6) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Fourth Part
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 12
(1) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence against women is carried out by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and c. capital assistance.
(2) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence against children is carried out by the Regional Government in the form of providing education, guidance, and counseling.
(3) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

Part Five
Special Protection of Children

Article 13
(1) Special protection for children is provided to:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances abuse;
f. Children who are victims of pornography;
g. Children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
i. Children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. Children who are victims of sexual crimes;
k. Children who are victims of terrorist networks;
l. Children with disabilities;
m. Children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. Children with deviant social behavior; and
o. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(2) Regional Government implements special protection for children as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER V
COOPERATION AND COORDINATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 14
(1) Regional Government conducts cooperation and coordination in order to ensure the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
(2) Cooperation and coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Second Part
Institutional Framework for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 15
(1) The Regional Government in the context of services for victims of violence against women and children, establishes P2TP2A;
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) functions as: a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and c. an empowerment center for women and children.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is obligated to: a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to witnesses and/or victims;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
b. organize protection and fulfillment of the rights of witnesses and/or victims to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for witnesses and/or victims;
d. network with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperate with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or trauma centers owned by the government, community or other institutions for health recovery of victims.
e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for witnesses and/or victims;
f. maintain confidentiality of witnesses and/or victims;
g. provide fulfillment of legal assistance for witnesses and/or victims; and
h. in the event that integrated service delivery is carried out in a networked manner, be responsible for the entire referral process of services needed by victims.
(4) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duties of: a. providing integrated services to victims of violence; and b. providing protection to victims of violence, reporters and witnesses.
(5) The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (4) letter a is implemented in accordance with the Standard Operating Procedures established by the Regional Government.
(6) The appointment of P2TP2A management as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent Decree.

Third Part
Cooperation

Article 16
(1) In certain circumstances the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with:
a. other regional governments;
b. police;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
e. social workers;
f. companion volunteers;
g. spiritual counselors;
h. other law enforcers, to assist victims in the court hearing process;
i. national commission on violence against women;
j. Indonesian child protection commission or child protection institutions; and/or
k. certain parties desired for the benefit of victims.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

Fourth Part
Coordination

Article 17
(1) The Regent coordinates the protection of women and children from acts of violence with:
a. the government;
b. the provincial government;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; and
e. community institutions.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
c. education affairs;
d. social affairs;
e. legal affairs; and
f. manpower affairs.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

CHAPTER VI
PARTICIPATION OF THE COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS SECTOR
Article 18
(1) Every person may participate in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by means of:
a. reporting acts of violence against women and/or children; b. providing first aid to victims of Acts of Violence; c. independently disseminating the rights of women and children; and/or
d. establishing independent community social institutions.

Article 19
In the event that community social institutions implement protection for women and children from acts of violence, they are obligated to coordinate with P2TP2A.

Article 20
(1) The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children; and
b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS
Article 21
MSS for the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, includes services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of Victims of Violence against Women and Children;
b. health services for Women and Children Victims of Violence; c. Social rehabilitation for Women and Children Victims of Violence; d. law enforcement and legal assistance for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

Article 22
SPM as referred to in Article 21 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive health services by trained health workers at Puskesmas and Hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for Women and Children Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of Violence against Women and Children;
f. coverage of Women and Children Victims of Violence who receive legal aid services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women and Children Victims of Violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 23
(1) The Regional Government provides guidance and supervises P2TP2A and other social institutions.
(2) The guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by regional apparatus that administers the affairs of women and children empowerment.
(3) The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be reported to the Regent.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

CHAPTER IX
INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM
Article 24
(1) The Regional Government prepares and develops an information and reporting system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The Information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 25
(1) The Regent is responsible for making reports on the implementation of SPM in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence in the Region to the Governor with copies submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
(2) Reporting on implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted annually.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 26
Financing for activities of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence, may be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 27
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Buleleng Regency.
Enacted in Singaraja on 20 August 2019

REGENT OF BULELENG,
PUTU AGUS SURADNYANA
Promulgated in Singaraja on August 20, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BULELENG REGENCY,
DEWA KETUT PUSPAKA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULELENG REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 5.
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY, BALI PROVINCE : ( 5  , 33 / 2019 ) jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

ELUCIDATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY NUMBER 5 OF 2019
CONCERNING
COPY
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION.
The purpose of the establishment of the State is stated in the fourth paragraph of the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which states that "The State protects all Indonesian people and all Indonesian territory and to promote general welfare, educate the life of the nation and participate in implementing world order based on independence, eternal peace and social justice". The meaning of protecting here includes protecting every citizen including from all forms of violence. Furthermore, in Article 28 G paragraph 2 of the 1945 Constitution it states that every person has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity. Thus the right to obtain protection from acts of violence is guaranteed by the constitution.
Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights. Women and children victims of violence must have their dignity and honor protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Buleleng Regency, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of Regional Regulation.
Protection of women and children victims of violence in the Region requires institutional and regulatory support that can guarantee its implementation. The Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for victims specifically in terms of prevention, services, and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in Buleleng Regency.

II. ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE EXPLANATION
Article 1
Sufficiently clear jdih.bulelengkab.go.id

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Letter a What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and or causes death Letter b What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, forced sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
Letter c What is meant by "economic violence" is an action that restricts humans from working inside or outside the home to produce money and goods, including allowing humans who work to be exploited, while someone does not fulfill the economic needs of the family.
Letter d What is meant by "social violence" is an act of a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life of a person or can cause physical damage or damage to another person's property Letter e What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Letter f What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:
a. actions that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. actions of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be;
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id
c. actions that neglect people within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. actions that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h What is meant by "threat of certain actions" is any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "complaint service" is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.
Letter b What is meant by "health service" is an effort that includes promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
Letter c What is meant by "counseling" is a process of providing objective and complete information, carried out systematically with interpersonal communication guidance, guidance techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge jdih.bulelengkab.go.id which aims to help a person recognize their current condition, the problem being faced, and determine a solution or effort to overcome the problem.
Letter d What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and development for humans so that it can provide peace, tranquility and coolness of heart to humans by always providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, trust in God and continue to carry out their obligations.
Letter e What is meant by "social rehabilitation service" is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
Letter f What is meant by "legal aid and assistance service" is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
Letter g What is meant by "repatriation and reintegration" is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c What is meant by "Service Center and Safe House" is what is known as a trauma center, while safe house is known as a shelter.
Letter d Sufficiently clear jdih.bulelengkab.go.id Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Letter 0 What is meant by "stigmatization" is the giving of a "mark" or stigma to a person, or a group of people with a meaning that has a certain significance in a certain situation and context either openly or covertly to influence the thinking power or evaluation power of a person or a group of people towards something.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULELENG REGENCY NUMBER 4.
jdih.bulelengkab.go.id