REGENT OF SLEMAN
SPECIAL REGION OF YOGYAKARTA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SLEMAN REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF SLEMAN,

Considering : a. that in order to restore the dignity and honor of women and child victims of violence and to restore their social function, it is necessary to undertake efforts for protection, empowerment of women, and rehabilitation of child victims of violence;
b. that based on Article 12 of Law 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, empowerment of women and protection of children constitute mandatory governmental affairs for regional governments;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 15 of 1950 concerning Establishment of Regency Areas within the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 44);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606) as amended by Government Regulation in Lieu of Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Government Regulation Number 32 of 1950 concerning Stipulation of the Effective Date of Laws Number 12, 13, 14 and 15 concerning Establishment of Regency Areas in East/Central/West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 59);
7. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
8. Regional Regulation of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Number 3 of 2012 concerning Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Year 2012 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Year 2012 Number 3);
9. Regional Regulation of Sleman Regency Number 18 of 2013 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Year 2013 Number 4 Series E, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Number 79);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SLEMAN REGENCY
REGENT OF SLEMAN
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
2. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as receive protection from violence and discrimination.
3. Women is a person who is female in gender. 4. Children is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children who are still in the womb.
5. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence that occurs within the Regional territory.
6. Violence is any act against women and children that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully.
7. Empowerment of women is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to strive and work independently after being recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
8. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural circumstances of society.
9. Social rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological and social conditions in order to be able to carry out their roles normally again both in the family and in society.
10. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with their families and communities.
11. Assistance is an activity to provide counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims carried out by a person or representative from an institution that has expertise.
12. Prevention is the effort of the government together with families and communities as well as the private sector and/or business world to prevent the occurrence of violence through socialization, education, advocacy and promotion activities.
13. Handling is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing, and knowing that violence against victims will, is, and/or has occurred.
14. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy, and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
16. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is a technical implementing unit of the Regional Apparatus that carries out technical operational activities and/or technical support activities for integrated services for women and children victims of violence.
17. Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence, hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK, is a coordination forum for prevention, handling and empowerment of victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner and is formed at the Regional, sub-district, and village levels.
18. Region is Sleman Regency.
19. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
20. Regent is the Regent of Sleman.
21. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.

Article 2
The protection of women and children victims of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and recognition of rights; and
b. equal human dignity.

Article 3
The protection of women and children victims of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. gender responsiveness;
b. non-discrimination;
c. equal and respectful relationships;
d. maintaining privacy and confidentiality;
e. providing a sense of safety and comfort;
f. respecting individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respecting the choices and decisions of victims;
i. sensitivity to the background and conditions of victims;
j. use of language that is appropriate and understood by victims; k. fast and simple;
l. empathy; and
m. best interests of victims.

Article 4
(1) The objectives of protection for women victims of violence are directed to: a. create conditions that support the development of the potential of women victims of violence;
b. strengthen the potential already possessed by women victims of violence; and
c. improve the work skills of women victims of violence.
(2) The objectives of protection for child victims of violence are directed to: a. provide social rehabilitation for child victims of violence; b. reunite child victims of violence with their family and/or environment; and
c. improve the empowerment of child victims of violence.

CHAPTER II
PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Stages

Article 5
The stages of protection for women victims of violence include:
a. prevention of violence against women;
b. protection services for women victims of violence; and c. empowerment of women victims of violence.

Second Part
Implementation

Paragraph 1
Prevention of Violence against Women

Article 6
(1) Prevention of violence against women as referred to in Article 5 letter a shall be carried out in an integrated manner coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by involving:
a. family;
b. community;
c. private sector;
d. community institutions;
e. social institutions; and
f. educational institutions.

Article 7
Prevention of violence against women as referred to in Article 6 shall be implemented among others by:
a. establishing a network in efforts to prevent violence against women;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns with the community, private sector and non-governmental organizations; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of women.

Paragraph 2
Services for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence

Article 8
(1) Protection services for women as referred to in Article 5 letter b are provided to women residents of the Region and/or women who experience violence with the incident location in the Regional territory.
(2) The implementation of protection services for women is carried out with the principles of:
a. swift;
b. safe;
c. empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible; and
f. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 9
(1) Forms of protection services for women victims of violence include: a. legal aid services;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. repatriation and social reintegration services;
e. complaint, consultation, and counseling services; and/or f. assistance services.
(2) Protection services for women as referred to in paragraph (1) include receiving and sending case referrals from or to other service units in a network.
(3) Implementation of protection services for women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus having main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment.
(4) Further provisions regarding the forms and procedures for protection services for women victims of violence shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 10
(1) Empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is implemented through efforts including:
a. job training; and
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups.
(2) The implementation of empowerment of women victims of violence is carried out with the principles of:
a. equality of rights;
b. responsibility;
c. efficiency and effectiveness; and
d. respect for and enforcement of human rights.
(3) The implementation of empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by related Regional Apparatus in accordance with their main duties and functions.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Stages

Pasal 11
The stages of protection for child victims of violence include:
a. prevention of violence against children;
b. handling of child victims of violence; and
c. rehabilitation of child victims of violence.

Second Part
Implementation

Paragraph 1
Prevention of Violence against Children

Article 12
(1) Prevention of violence against children as referred to in Article 11 letter a is implemented among others by:
a. forming a working network in efforts to prevent violence against children;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns with the community, private sector and Non-Governmental Organizations; and
c. disseminating laws and regulations related to the protection of child victims of violence.
(2) Prevention of violence against children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in an integrated manner and coordinated by Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 13
Efforts to prevent violence against children in addition to being implemented by regional apparatus as referred to in Article 12 by involving: a. parents and/or family;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. child social welfare institutions; and/or
e. other institutions engaged in the field of child protection care.

Paragraph 2
Handling of Child Victims of Violence

Article 14
(1) The handling of child victims of violence as referred to in Article 11 letter b shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) In handling child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may cooperate with: a. vertical agencies;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. village government;
e. non-governmental organizations;
f. private parties;
g. the community; and/or
h. families.

Paragraph 3
Rehabilitation of Child Victims of Violence

Article 15
(1) Rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 11 letter c are conducted in the form of:
a. legal aid services;
b. health rehabilitation services;
c. social rehabilitation services; and/or
d. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) In rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. vertical agencies;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/municipal governments;
d. village government;
e. non-governmental organizations;
f. private parties;
g. the community; and/or
h. families.
(3) Further provisions regarding the form and procedures for rehabilitation services for child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 16
(1) Every Victim obtains the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity respected as a human being; b. the right to health and psychological recovery;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of their identity;
f. the right to compensation from the perpetrator;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
j. the right to assistance.
(2) Child victims of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (1), also obtain the following special rights:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and/or
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 17 (1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, in the form of:
a. collecting data and organizing an information system for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women and children; and
c. disseminating laws and regulations related to the empowerment of women and protection of child victims of violence.
(2) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to provide and organize services for Victims in the form of: a. establishing and organizing technical service institutions for Victims by involving community elements; and
b. encouraging public awareness of the importance of protection for Victims of violence.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
General

Article 18
Technical service institutions for Victims are implemented by P2TP2A and FPKK.

Second Part
P2TP2A
Article 19
(1) The provision of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.

Article 20
(1) P2TP2A provides services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house.
(2) In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a safe house, then victims of violence are referred to other integrated service centers that have a safe house.

Article 21
(1) P2TP2A consists of several counseling fields.
(2) The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of at least:
a. law;
b. health;
c. spiritual; and
d. psychology.
(3) The implementation of counseling is carried out by counselors and may be implemented in a networked manner by involving related parties.

Article 22
(1) Forms of services for Victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial services;
d. legal services;
e. social reintegration services; and
f. economic independence services.
(2) Further provisions regarding the service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Part Three
FPKK
Article 23
(1) In order to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence, FPKK is established.
(2) FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of:
a. Regional FPKK;
b. Sub-district FPKK; and
c. Village FPKK.
(3) The establishment of Regional FPKK as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a is determined by the Regent.
(4) The establishment of Sub-district FPKK as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b is determined by the sub-district head.
(5) The establishment of Village FPKK as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c is determined by the village head.
(6) Further provisions regarding the organizational structure and elements of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 24
The duties and functions of FPKK as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) consist of:
a. coordinating and synchronizing prevention, services, and empowerment for victims of violence against women and children; b. maintaining and developing FPKK in prevention, services, and empowerment of victims of violence through networking and referral systems;
c. conducting education on non-discrimination values towards women and children;
d. disseminating laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
e. collecting, compiling, and presenting data reports on victims of violence; and
f. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 25
(1) The community may participate in the protection of Victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. provision of safe houses and/or shelters;
b. establishment and management of orphanages for children;
c. establishment of child rehabilitation centers;
d. active monitoring of violence against women and children and reporting to the competent authorities;
e. providing first aid to victims;
f. reporting the occurrence of violence against women and children and providing protection;
g. forming family partners at the village level by the community; and h. other forms of community participation related to the implementation of protection of women and protection of children.

Article 26
(1) In addition to P2TP2A as referred to in Article 20, the community may establish forums/groups at the sub-district and village levels that function as networks of P2TP2A in the context of implementing protection efforts for women and children victims of violence.
(2) The establishment of forums/groups in villages as referred to in paragraph (1) may be facilitated by the Village Government.

CHAPTER VIII
MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND REPORTING
Article 27
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that has the duties and responsibilities in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 28
(1) Regional Apparatus that has duties and responsibilities in the field of women's empowerment and child protection is obligated to conduct monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of the results of protection activities for women and children victims of violence on a regular basis.
(2) Reporting of activity results as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Regent through the Regional Apparatus that has duties and responsibilities in the field of regional development planning.
(3) Implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) involves forums for handling victims of violence against women and children in a tiered manner.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 29
(1) Guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus with duties and responsibilities in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall include:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a shall cover aspects related to planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b shall cover aspects related to planning, implementation, procedures, financing, quality, control and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted periodically every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency.
Enacted in Sleman on 22 May 2017

# BUPATI SLEMAN REGULATION
NUMBER 78 OF 2016

CONCERNING

# SECOND AMENDMENT TO BUPATI SLEMAN REGULATION NUMBER 25 OF 2012 CONCERNING GUIDELINES FOR THE FORMATION OF REGIONAL LEGAL PRODUCTS

WITH THE BLESSING OF ALMIGHTY GOD

BUPATI SLEMAN,

Considering : a. that in order to improve the quality of Regional Legal Products, it is necessary to adjust the Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products;

b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to stipulate a Bupati Regulation concerning Second Amendment to Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products;

In View of : 1. Law Number 15 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of the Yogyakarta Special Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 3, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 10) as amended by Law Number 9 of 1955 concerning Amendment to Law Number 15 of 1950 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1955 Number 43, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 827);

2. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

4. Government Regulation Number 16 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Preparation of Regional House of Representatives Regulations concerning Rules of Procedure of the Regional House of Representatives (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 22, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5106);

5. Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products (Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency of 2012 Number 25, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Number 13) as amended by Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 48 of 2015 concerning Amendment to Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products (Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency of 2015 Number 48, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Number 28);

HAS DECIDED:

To Stipulate : BUPATI REGULATION CONCERNING SECOND AMENDMENT TO BUPATI SLEMAN REGULATION NUMBER 25 OF 2012 CONCERNING GUIDELINES FOR THE FORMATION OF REGIONAL LEGAL PRODUCTS.

Article I

Several provisions in Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products (Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency of 2012 Number 25, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Number 13) as amended by Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 48 of 2015 concerning Amendment to Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products (Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency of 2015 Number 48, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency Number 28) are amended as follows:

1. The provisions of Article 1 number 19 are amended, so that Article 1 reads as follows:

Article 1

In this Bupati Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the administration of government affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principle of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the broadest autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
2. Regional Government is the Bupati as an element of Regional Government administration that leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regency is Sleman Regency.
4. Bupati is the Bupati of Sleman.
5. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional House of Representatives of Sleman Regency.
6. Regional Legal Products are written legal regulations formed by the Regional Government or other authorized institutions.
7. Regional Regulation is a Regional Regulation of Sleman Regency.
8. Bupati Regulation is a Regulation of the Bupati of Sleman.
9. DPRD Regulation is a Regulation of the Regional House of Representatives of Sleman Regency.
10. Formation of Regional Legal Products is the making of Regional Legal Products which includes the stages of planning, drafting, discussion, ratification or stipulation, and promulgation.
11. Program for the Formation of Regional Regulations, hereinafter abbreviated as Prolegda, is a planning instrument for the formation of Regional Regulations in the context of planning the development of regional law in a planned, integrated and systematic manner.
12. Draft Regional Regulation, hereinafter abbreviated as Ranperda, is a draft Regional Regulation whether originating from DPRD, Bupati or the community.
13. Draft Bupati Regulation, hereinafter abbreviated as Ranperbup, is a draft Bupati Regulation.
14. Academic Manuscript is a written result of research or legal study and other research results on a particular issue which can be scientifically justified regarding the regulation of the issue in a Draft Regional Regulation or Draft Bupati Regulation as a solution to community problems and legal issues.
15. Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency is the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency.
16. Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency is the Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency.
17. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Sleman Regency.
18. Regional Legal Bureau is the Legal Bureau of the Regional Secretariat of Sleman Regency.
19. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is a Regional Apparatus Work Unit within the Sleman Regency Government.

2. The provisions of Article 5 paragraph (2) are amended, so that Article 5 reads as follows:

Article 5

(1) The formation of Regional Legal Products is carried out based on the principles of the formation of good legislation.
(2) The principles of the formation of good legislation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. clarity of purpose;
b. appropriate institutional or forming official;
c. correspondence between type, hierarchy and material content;
d. implementability;
e. efficiency and effectiveness;
f. clarity of formulation; and
g. openness.
(3) The material content of Regional Legal Products must reflect the principles:
a. protection;
b. humanity;
c. nationality;
d. kinship;
e. archipelago;
f. unity in diversity;
g. justice;
h. equality in law and government;
i. order and legal certainty; and/or
j. balance, harmony, and alignment.

3. The provisions of Article 6 paragraph (2) are amended, so that Article 6 reads as follows:

Article 6

(1) Types of Regional Legal Products include:
a. Regional Regulation;
b. Bupati Regulation; and
c. DPRD Regulation.
(2) In addition to the types of Regional Legal Products as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government can stipulate other Regional Legal Products such as Bupati Decrees and Bupati Instructions.
(3) Regional Legal Products as referred to in paragraph (2) are prohibited from containing:
a. criminal provisions; and/or
b. imposition of levies and other forms of public obligations.

4. The provisions of Article 7 paragraph (3) are amended, so that Article 7 reads as follows:

Article 7

(1) Regional Regulations are formed by DPRD with the joint agreement of the Bupati.
(2) Bupati Regulations are stipulated by the Bupati to implement Regional Regulations or upon the order of higher legislation.
(3) DPRD Regulations are stipulated by DPRD to implement:
a. Law;
b. Government Regulation; or
c. Regional Regulation,
concerning the Rules of Procedure of DPRD.

5. The provisions of Article 8 paragraph (2) are amended, 1 (one) paragraph, namely paragraph (2a) is inserted between paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), so that Article 8 reads as follows:

Article 8

(1) The material content of Regional Regulations contains material in the context of implementing regional autonomy and assistance tasks as well as further elaboration of higher legislation.
(2) The material content of Bupati Regulations contains material to implement Regional Regulations or upon the order of higher legislation.
(2a) The material content of Bupati Regulations as referred to in paragraph (2) can be in the form of regulations of an administrative nature.
(3) The material content of DPRD Regulations contains material to implement Law, Government Regulation or Regional Regulation concerning the Rules of Procedure of DPRD.

6. The provisions of Article 9 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 9 reads as follows:

Article 9

(1) Regional Regulations and Bupati Regulations are prohibited from containing material that:
a. contradicts higher legislation;
b. violates public interest, decency and/or legal norms; and
c. discriminates based on religion, ethnicity, race, inter-group, gender or disability.
(2) Regional Regulations and Bupati Regulations as referred to in paragraph (1) can be canceled by the Government in accordance with the provisions of legislation.

7. The provisions of Article 10 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 10 reads as follows:

Article 10

(1) The formation of Regional Regulations is carried out in stages of:
a. planning;
b. drafting;
c. discussion;
d. ratification or stipulation; and
e. promulgation.
(2) The formation of Bupati Regulations is carried out in stages of:
a. planning;
b. drafting;
c. stipulation; and
d. promulgation.

8. The provisions of Article 11 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 11 reads as follows:

Article 11

(1) Planning for the formation of Regional Regulations is carried out in a Prolegda.
(2) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is a priority scale or priority order and coordination in the formation of Regional Regulations.
(3) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared by DPRD in coordination with the Regional Government.
(4) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared in a planned, integrated and systematic manner.
(5) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared for a period of 1 (one) year.
(6) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is further stipulated in a DPRD Decree.

9. The provisions of Article 12 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 12 reads as follows:

Article 12

(1) Prolegda contains a program for the formation of Regional Regulations with a title and a brief description of the material to be regulated.
(2) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared based on:
a. the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan;
b. orders of higher legislation; and
c. the aspirations and legal needs of the community.
(3) Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared by taking into account the coordination and synchronization of the formation of legislation at the national level.

10. The provisions of Article 13 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 13 reads as follows:

Article 13

(1) Prolegda is prepared by the DPRD Legislation Body together with the Regional Government.
(2) The community has the right to provide input orally and/or in writing in the framework of preparing Prolegda.
(3) Input as referred to in paragraph (2) can be provided through:
a. DPRD;
b. Regional Government; and/or
c. elements of the community.

11. The provisions of Article 14 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 14 reads as follows:

Article 14

(1) Prolegda is discussed by DPRD and the Regional Government to reach an agreement.
(2) Prolegda that has been agreed upon as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated in a DPRD Decree.
(3) Prolegda that has been stipulated as referred to in paragraph (2) becomes the basis and reference in the formation of Regional Regulations.

12. The provisions of Article 15 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 15 reads as follows:

Article 15

(1) Changes and/or additions to Prolegda can be made if:
a. there are orders of higher legislation;
b. there are urgent circumstances;
c. there are consequences for the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
d. to address extraordinary situations, states of conflict or natural disasters.
(2) Changes and/or additions to Prolegda as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out based on the agreement of DPRD and the Regional Government.

13. The provisions of Article 16 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 16 reads as follows:

Article 16

(1) Ranperda can originate from DPRD, Bupati or the community.
(2) Ranperda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared based on Prolegda.
(3) Ranperda as referred to in paragraph (1) must be accompanied by an Academic Manuscript.
(4) Ranperda as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared according to drafting techniques.

14. The provisions of Article 17 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 17 reads as follows:

Article 17

(1) Ranperda originating from DPRD is prepared by the DPRD Legislation Body or a Special Committee formed by DPRD.
(2) Ranperda originating from the Bupati is prepared by SKPD or several SKPDs according to their scope of duties coordinated by the Regional Legal Bureau.
(3) Ranperda originating from the community is prepared by the community or community groups.

15. The provisions of Article 18 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 18 reads as follows:

Article 18

(1) Ranperda originating from DPRD is submitted by the leadership of DPRD to the Bupati.
(2) Ranperda originating from the Bupati is submitted by the Bupati to the leadership of DPRD.
(3) Ranperda originating from the community is submitted in writing in the Indonesian language to DPRD.

16. The provisions of Article 19 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 19 reads as follows:

Article 19

(1) Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in Article 18 paragraph (3) can be submitted to DPRD if it meets the following requirements:
a. not contrary to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, Pancasila and the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. in accordance with Prolegda; and
c. accompanied by an Academic Manuscript and/or explanatory notes.
(2) Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted with at least 0.1% (zero point one percent) of the total population.
(3) Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in paragraph (1) can only be submitted 1 (one) time in 1 (one) session period.

17. The provisions of Article 20 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 20 reads as follows:

Article 20

(1) Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in Article 19 is submitted to the leadership of DPRD.
(2) The leadership of DPRD submits Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in paragraph (1) to the DPRD Legislation Body to be studied.
(3) The DPRD Legislation Body studies and provides opinions on Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in paragraph (2).
(4) Ranperda originating from the community as referred to in paragraph (2) is submitted to a plenary session to obtain a decision on whether or not it is accepted.
(5) In the event that Ranperda originating from the community is accepted, it is further processed according to the provisions of legislation.
(6) In the event that Ranperda originating from the community is not accepted, it is returned to the proposer.

18. The provisions of Article 21 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 21 reads as follows:

Article 21

(1) Ranperda that has been accepted is discussed by DPRD and the Bupati to reach joint agreement.
(2) The discussion of Ranperda as referred to in paragraph (1) goes through 2 (two) levels of discussion.
(3) Level I discussion as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in a working meeting between the DPRD Legislation Body and the Regional Government.
(4) Level II discussion as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out in a plenary session.
(5) Ranperda that has reached joint agreement is submitted by the leadership of DPRD to the Bupati to be ratified into a Regional Regulation.

19. The provisions of Article 22 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 22 reads as follows:

Article 22

(1) Ranperda that has reached joint agreement must be ratified by the Bupati by signing it into a Regional Regulation.
(2) Ranperda as referred to in paragraph (1) is ratified by the Bupati no later than 30 (thirty) days from the date the Ranperda is approved together.
(3) In the event that Ranperda is not signed by the Bupati within the time period as referred to in paragraph (2), the Ranperda automatically becomes a Regional Regulation and must be promulgated by placing it in the Regional Gazette.

20. The provisions of Article 23 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 23 reads as follows:

Article 23

(1) Regional Regulations are promulgated by placing them in the Regional Gazette.
(2) Bupati Regulations are promulgated by placing them in the Regional Gazette.
(3) DPRD Regulations are promulgated by placing them in the Regional Gazette.

21. The provisions of Article 24 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 24 reads as follows:

Article 24

(1) Everyone has the right to obtain copies of Regional Regulations, Bupati Regulations and DPRD Regulations.
(2) Regional Regulations, Bupati Regulations and DPRD Regulations as referred to in paragraph (1) are disseminated by:
a. the Regional Legal Bureau; and
b. DPRD Secretariat.

22. The provisions of Article 25 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 25 reads as follows:

Article 25

(1) The community has the right to provide input orally and/or in writing in the formation of Regional Regulations.
(2) Oral and/or written input as referred to in paragraph (1) can be provided through:
a. public hearings;
b. working visits;
c. socialization; and/or
d. seminars, workshops, and/or discussions.
(3) The community as referred to in paragraph (1) is individuals or groups of people who have an interest in the substance of the Draft Regional Regulation.

23. The provisions of Article 26 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 26 reads as follows:

Article 26

(1) To find out the aspirations of the community, public hearings can be held.
(2) Public hearings as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the DPRD Legislation Body or a Special Committee.
(3) Public hearings as referred to in paragraph (1) can be held more than 1 (one) time.

24. The provisions of Article 27 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 27 reads as follows:

Article 27

(1) Ranperbup is prepared by SKPD or several SKPDs according to their scope of duties coordinated by the Regional Legal Bureau.
(2) Ranperbup as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared based on the order of higher legislation or upon its own initiative.
(3) Ranperbup as referred to in paragraph (1) is prepared according to drafting techniques.
(4) Ranperbup as referred to in paragraph (1) can be accompanied by an Academic Manuscript.

25. The provisions of Article 28 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 28 reads as follows:

Article 28

(1) Ranperbup that has been prepared is submitted to the Regional Secretary to obtain approval.
(2) Ranperbup that has obtained approval from the Regional Secretary as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted to the Bupati to be stipulated into a Bupati Regulation.
(3) Ranperbup that has been stipulated into a Bupati Regulation as referred to in paragraph (2) is promulgated by placing it in the Regional Gazette.

26. The provisions of Article 29 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 29 reads as follows:

Article 29

(1) The community has the right to provide input orally and/or in writing in the formation of Bupati Regulations.
(2) Oral and/or written input as referred to in paragraph (1) can be provided through:
a. public hearings;
b. working visits;
c. socialization; and/or
d. seminars, workshops, and/or discussions.
(3) The community as referred to in paragraph (1) is individuals or groups of people who have an interest in the substance of the Draft Bupati Regulation.

27. The provisions of Article 30 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 30 reads as follows:

Article 30

(1) Regional Legal Products are drafted according to drafting techniques.
(2) Drafting techniques as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. framework of thinking;
b. subject matter;
c. language and terms;
d. structure; and
e. format.

28. The provisions of Article 31 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 31 reads as follows:

Article 31

(1) The framework of thinking in drafting Regional Legal Products must be based on the principles of the formation of good legislation.
(2) The framework of thinking as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. philosophical basis;
b. sociological basis; and
c. juridical basis.

29. The provisions of Article 32 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 32 reads as follows:

Article 32

(1) The subject matter in drafting Regional Legal Products must be clear and specific.
(2) The subject matter as referred to in paragraph (1) must be in accordance with the type and hierarchy of Regional Legal Products.
(3) The subject matter as referred to in paragraph (1) must be formulated clearly and specifically.

30. The provisions of Article 33 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 33 reads as follows:

Article 33

(1) The language used in drafting Regional Legal Products is Indonesian that is good and correct.
(2) The language as referred to in paragraph (1) must be clear, straightforward and easy to understand.
(3) Terms used in drafting Regional Legal Products must be consistent and not cause multiple interpretations.

31. The provisions of Article 34 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 34 reads as follows:

Article 34

(1) The structure of Regional Legal Products consists of:
a. title;
b. opening;
c. body;
d. closing;
e. attachment; and
f. explanation.
(2) The structure of Regional Legal Products as referred to in paragraph (1) is further regulated in the Appendix which is an inseparable part of this Bupati Regulation.

32. The provisions of Article 35 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 35 reads as follows:

Article 35

(1) The format of Regional Legal Products must be in accordance with the provisions of legislation.
(2) The format of Regional Legal Products as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. paper size;
b. margins;
c. font type and size;
d. line spacing; and
e. paragraph format.
(3) The format of Regional Legal Products as referred to in paragraph (1) is further regulated in the Appendix which is an inseparable part of this Bupati Regulation.

33. The provisions of Article 36 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 36 reads as follows:

Article 36

(1) Regional Legal Products are disseminated to the public.
(2) Dissemination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. print media;
b. electronic media; and/or
c. other media.
(3) Dissemination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. the Regional Legal Bureau; and
b. DPRD Secretariat.

34. The provisions of Article 37 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 37 reads as follows:

Article 37

(1) Regional Legal Products are documented and stored properly.
(2) Documentation and storage as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. the Regional Legal Bureau; and
b. DPRD Secretariat.
(3) Documentation and storage as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in:
a. hard copy form; and
b. soft copy form.

35. The provisions of Article 38 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 38 reads as follows:

Article 38

(1) Regional Legal Products are evaluated periodically.
(2) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out to:
a. assess the effectiveness of implementation;
b. assess the benefits; and
c. assess the impact.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. the Regional Legal Bureau; and
b. DPRD Secretariat.

36. The provisions of Article 39 paragraph (1) are amended, so that Article 39 reads as follows:

Article 39

(1) Regional Legal Products that are no longer in accordance with the legal needs of the community can be revoked or amended.
(2) Revocation or amendment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out according to the provisions of legislation.
(3) Revocation or amendment as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. DPRD and the Bupati for Regional Regulations;
b. the Bupati for Bupati Regulations; and
c. DPRD for DPRD Regulations.

37. The Appendix to Bupati Sleman Regulation Number 25 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for the Formation of Regional Legal Products is amended, so that it reads as contained in the Appendix which is an inseparable part of this Bupati Regulation.

Article II

This Bupati Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Bupati Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sleman Regency.

Stipulated in Sleman
on December 30, 2016

BUPATI SLEMAN,
(Seal/signature)

SRI PURNOMO
Promulgated in Sleman on the date of 22 May 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY
SLEMAN REGENCY,
(Seal/signature)

SUMADI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SLEMAN REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SLEMAN REGENCY, SPECIAL REGION OF YOGYAKARTA: ( 2 , 17 /2017 )

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SLEMAN REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
Acts of violence against women and children are experiencing an increasingly rising trend. Economic factors, social environment and technological development have a major influence on the increase of such acts of violence. This condition demands the Regional Government to take concrete steps through program activities as efforts to prevent and protect women and children from acts of violence.

One of the efforts to prevent violence against women is carried out through women's empowerment and optimization of previously possessed potential, so that it is expected to be able to improve and develop themselves to play a role and be protected from potential acts of violence. This condition will strengthen the form of appreciation and respect for women while maintaining their role and nature as women to play a role in educating and supporting the welfare and happiness of their families.

Efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against children are the obligation of parents, families, the community and the private sector. Community service is the frontline when potential violence against children occurs. The mechanism for violence prevention efforts and protection of child victims of violence involves multiple sectors coordinated by the Regional Government. The intended efforts are carried out with the direction of providing social rehabilitation for child victims of violence, reuniting child victims of violence with their families and/or environment, and increasing the empowerment of child victims of violence.

In connection with this matter, to realize the provision of protection efforts for women and children victims of violence as well as for legal certainty in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence in the Regional area, it is necessary to regulate this in a Regional Regulation.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Letter a What is meant by "gender responsive" is that all service officers must be gender sensitive when examining the problems experienced by victims and be able to provide protection to women and children victims of violence.
Letter b What is meant by "non-discrimination" is that the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is provided to every woman and/or every child and is not differentiated based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status, and physical or mental condition.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.
Letter l Sufficiently clear.
Letter m Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Letter a What is meant by "network" is the working partner of the Regional Government in the implementation of prevention of violence against women in the form of family partners, including family groups, and dasawisma.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "socialization" is the dissemination of information on laws and regulations carried out through mass media, electronic media, and/or direct counseling to the community.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by "in a networked manner" is that the Regional Government may conduct coordination among related agencies in efforts to protect child victims of violence and recovery of victims of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by "equality of rights" is fair treatment given to every female victim of violence without regard to background. Equality of rights also means that female victims of violence have the right to work and conduct business in accordance with their expertise and abilities, the same as men.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "safe house" is a house as a temporary shelter for victims during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators of violence.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) What is meant by "related parties" includes among others:
a. implementation of counseling in the legal field involving the police, prosecutor's office, district court, religious court, legal advocacy institutions and non-governmental organizations;
b. implementation of counseling in the health field involving the health office, regional general hospital, and other health services;
c. implementation of counseling in the spiritual field involving the ministry of religious affairs and religious figures; and
d. implementation of counseling in the psychology field involving psychological companions and/or psychologists.

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "medical services" is a form of medical services for the purpose of evidence in the field of law.
Letter b What is meant by "medicolegal services" is treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
Letter c What is meant by "psychosocial services" is services provided by companions in the context of traumatic recovery of the victim's condition including the provision of safe spaces and houses to protect victims from threats and intimidation.
Letter d What is meant by "legal services" is services to victims in undergoing legal processes.
Letter e What is meant by "social reintegration" is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family/institutions, or communities that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
Letter f What is meant by "economic independence services" is services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by "facilitated by the Village Government" is assistance in the formation of forums at the Village level, including providing financing in the implementation of activities, monitoring, and evaluation of women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SLEMAN REGENCY NUMBER 119