I'd be happy to help translate the text, but I don't see any text provided in your message after "r(". 

Could you please provide the text you'd like me to translate into English?

REGIONAL REGULATION OF SITUBONDO REGENCY
NUMBER 19 YEAR 2015

REGARDING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD THE REGENT OF SITUBONDO,

Considering a.
b.

c.

d.
that until now the number of violence against women and children in Situbondo Regency is still high, while services and protection have not been carried out optimally;
that in order for protection efforts for women and children to obtain optimal results, concrete actions from the regional government are needed and it is necessary to increase the participation of the community at large;
that to realize the provision of protection for women and children and to provide legal certainty in the implementation of protection for women and children in Situbondo Regency, the implementation of protection for women and children needs to be regulated in a Regional Regulation;
that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation regarding the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children.

{ Jalan PB. Sudirman Number 1, Situbondo, East Java Province Telephone (0338) 67116 Email : info@pemdasitubondo.go.idIJ IrtJ1 ;1 In View of

Article 18 paragraph (6) of the Constitution of the State
1.
Republic of Indonesia Year 1945;
Law Number 6 Year 1974 concerning
2.
Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);
Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning
3.
Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143); Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning
4.
Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning
5.
Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human
6.
Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941); Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning
7.
Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235); Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning
8.
Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning
9.
Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently

Y:
with Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number a8afl;
10. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance Between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number aa38l;
11. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number a635);
12. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 47201;
13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 52341;
14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64l.;
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82; Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number a7371;
16. Presidential Decree Number 33 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
d { Jr -t !r .: Stipulates : 17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 22 Year 2010 concerning Standard Operating Procedures for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons;
22. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence;
23. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence.
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SITUBONDO REGENCY
REGENT OF SITUBONDO
DECIDES:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
il \$ t*

I'm ready to translate the text, but I don't see any text content after the heading "BAB I" and the numbered list (1-9, with "11 5." appearing to be item 5). 

Could you please provide the actual text content that needs to be translated?

GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Regional Government is the Regional Government of Situbondo Regency.
Regent is the Regent of Situbondo.
Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and ill-treatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child committed by parties who should be responsible for the child or those who have power over the child, who should be trustworthy, such as parents, close family, teachers and companions.
Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
Service is an action that must be immediately carried out to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or having occurred violence against the victim.
Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
10. Integrated Service Center (PPT) for Victims of Violence against Women and Children of Situbondo Regency, hereinafter referred to as PPT Situbondo Regency is an institution providing services to victims of violence, which is hospital-based, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
11. Safe house (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
12. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
13. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
14. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, as well as mother and her children.
15. Household is family members and relatives such as grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, husbands, wives, cousins and so forth and non-relatives such as domestic workers, drivers and so forth who live and reside in one house.
16. Community and Women Empowerment Agency hereinafter abbreviated as BPMP is the Community and Women Empowerment Agency of Situbondo Regency.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality and justice;
c. protection of victims' rights;
d. non-discrimination; and
e. best interests of victims.

Article 3
(1) The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to victims of violence based on gender and the best interests of women and children that occur at home and/or in public places.
(2) Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic neglect; and
e. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
every victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. protection and assistance;
b. legal aid;
c. health services according to medical needs;
d. psychosocial services;
e. information; and
f. integrated services.

Article 5
(1) In the event that victims of violence as referred to in Article 4 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 6
The safe house as referred to in Article 5 (1) paragraph (1) provides a place and/or temporary safe shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
The operation and/or management of the safe house (21 as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by PPT.
For security and at the request of the victim (3) of violence, the manager or operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (21 may place the victim of violence in a certain location that is kept confidential.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional

Article 7
The implementation of protection for victims (1) of violence is carried out in an integrated manner through the PPT forum of Situbondo Regency.
The provisions regarding the PPT of Situbondo Regency (2) as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 8
(1) Forms of services for victims of violence organized by PPT include:
a. medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. legal aid services to assist victims of violence in undergoing the judicial process;
d. first psychosocial assistance to victims conducted to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;
e. accompaniment of victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT; and
f. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and provision of economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Service mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Principles of Service

Article 9
(1) (2) The provision of services to victims is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatorily, easily accessible and with a guarantee of confidentiality.
Service providers or managers of PPT or Safe Houses are prohibited from charging any fees to victims of violence.

CHAPTER V
RESPONSIBILITY
Article 10
The implementation of protection for victims of violence is a shared responsibility of:
a. district regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 1 1
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for implementing efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence and protect victims of violence.
(2) The prevention of the occurrence of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children as well as related laws and regulations;
b. conducting education on anti-violence values; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of prevention and protection of victims of violence.
(3) The protection of victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving relevant agencies/institutions and community elements;
b. facilitating assistance, legal aid and legal services according to the needs of victims;
c. providing housing, both safe houses and alternative housing along with handling mechanisms, services, and psychosocial support;
d. conducting continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and social reintegration stage;
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for victims of violence; and
f. encouraging public awareness of the importance of protection for victims of violence.
(4) In order to carry out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(5) The Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be established for a period of 3 (three) years and shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 12
The responsibility of the community as referred to in Article 10 letter b is carried out in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children; and
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties.

Article 13
The family and/or parents as referred to in Article 10 letter c and letter d have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI
SUPERVISION

Article 14
Supervision of the implementation of protection for victims (1) of violence is carried out by BPMP.
In conducting supervision as referred to (21 in paragraph (1), BPMP has the authority to:
a. place victims of violence in a safe house; b. summon and present the family of victims of violence to be heard for their statement; and c. order PPT to provide protection to a person who is a victim of violence.
\[ trl.
tt' (3) BPMP is obligated to report periodically to the Regent regarding the implementation of protection for women and children who are victims of violence.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING
Article 15
(1) Financing for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence shall be charged to the Regional Budget of Situbondo Regency and other legitimate sources.
(2) Budget management for the implementation of protection for victims of violence shall be conducted with the principles of fairness, efficiency, transparency and accountability.

CHAPTER VIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 16
Every person who deliberately allows violence against women and children to occur and/or does not report the occurrence of violence against women and children, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 17
(1) Any person who intentionally violates the provisions as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3), shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 3 (three) months or a fine of at most Rp.
50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(21 In the event that the act as referred to in paragraph (1) is committed by an official appointed to carry out protection, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(3) Organizers or managers of PPT or Safe Houses who are proven to violate the provisions as referred to in Article g paragraph (2],, shall be punished with \l t,frt imprisonment for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of the Regency Enacted in on the date of Situbondo.
Situbondo

3 1 DEC 2C13
Promulgated in Situbondo On the date of 0 g .-!i_i'l :,. '!,,{

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SITUBONDO REGENCY,
DADANG WIGIARTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SITUBONDO REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 13
t,

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SUMBONDO REGENCY

REGARDING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
The implementation of protection for victims of violence is organized based on the principles of humanity, integration and justice. Therefore, every person must obtain their right to protection for a sense of security and freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity which contradicts what is aspired to in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, namely the creation of just and civilized humanity. To achieve integrated and comprehensive Protection services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, an integrated form of service from various related institutions is required, including medical services, medicolegal, psychosocial, legal assistance, accompaniment, economic independence (training). These services are carried out evenly across all levels of society so that every citizen has the right to obtain equal opportunities to receive security and legal protection.
In principle, the strategic target of implementing protection is to maintain the sustainability of protection through integrated, comprehensive services and safe and comfortable shelters that are conducive for victims of violence. These strategic targets are pursued through interrelated stages, including planning, protection, services and financing, supervision and sanctions.
There are four important phenomena that need to be observed in relation to the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence. First, is violence against women and children from year to year the number is increasing with the mode of violence tending to be more sadistic (perpetrators who slit throats, pour hot water, throw into wells, to breaking parts of limbs and so on). Second, the many cases of violence against Domestic Workers (PRT) dominated by women that have occurred recently require attention from all parties, especially the existence of legal protection, regulations and policies that protect them. Third, the lack of facilities and infrastructure for safe and comfortable shelters that are conducive for victims of violence. These three phenomena indicate the increasing complexity of violent behavior whose victims are dominated by women and children, both those who work as domestic workers and others. Fourth, children are a trust and gift from God Almighty, in them is inherent dignity and worth as complete human beings. Children are the next generation of the nation's struggle ideals who have a strategic role, and have special characteristics and traits that are expected to ensure the continuity of the nation's and state's existence in the future. Children need to get the widest possible opportunity to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally, cognitively, spiritually and socially.
Due to its nature, children's growth and development must be carried out in an environment that protects from all dangers in the form of optimal care.
Therefore, a legal umbrella in the form of a Regional Regulation is needed that is capable of accommodating all issues related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, capable of providing integrated services holistically and comprehensively, and firmly giving a mandate to institutions to coordinate policies and supervision, and a mandate to institutions to provide services. In addition, the Regional Regulation can also open the involvement of non-governmental institutions and the community to play a broad role.
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in Situbondo Regency is carried out based on Situbondo Regent Regulation Number 6 of 2006 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Acts of Violence against Women and Children and Situbondo Regent Decree No. 188/237 1P.00 L.2/2007 concerning the Integrated Service Center (PPT) for Victims of Violence against Women and Children in Situbondo Regency. As the phenomena described above, Regent Regulation Number 6 of 2006 has not been able to become a comprehensive legal umbrella in providing protection for women and children victims of violence. With the existence of this Regional Regulation, it is expected to anticipate and overcome the conditions of violence that occur in Situbondo Regency, so that it can provide protection and services to victims of violence in an integrated and comprehensive manner.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
\ld t, i,lilrt ,l \d

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights" is that the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence as a manifestation of respect for human rights.
Letter b What is meant by "the principle of gender equality and justice" is a process of equality and conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, national defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter c What is meant by "the principle of protection of victims' rights" is the protection of personal self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.
Letter d What is meant by "the non-discriminatory principle" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter e What is meant by "the principle of the best interests of the victim" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
Paragraph (1) What is meant by gender-based violence is actions based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men.
Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by "physical violence" is acts that result in pain, falling ill, or serious injury such as slapping, hitting, spitting, pulling hair/yanking, kicking, burning with hot objects, hitting/injuring with weapons, and/or causing disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.
Point b What is meant by "psychological violence" is acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering in a person. Psychological violence can take the form of emotional abuse such as insults, hurtful comments or degrading one's self-worth, isolating the wife from the outside world, threatening or intimidating as a means of imposing one's will.
Point c What is meant by "sexual violence" is violence against sexuality which includes isolating (distancing) the wife from her emotional needs, forcing sexual intercourse, forcing one's own sexual preferences or not paying attention to the wife's satisfaction. Sexual violence can also take the form of forced sexual intercourse committed against a person residing within the household scope, forced sexual intercourse against one person within their household scope with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
Point d What is meant by "economic neglect" is neglecting the economic needs of the wife or children or family members or relatives such as not providing for the wife, even spending the wife's money, not giving or withholding the wages of domestic workers or drivers and includes acts of limiting and/or prohibiting family members from doing decent work.
Point e What is meant by "restriction of movement" is limiting the movement of the wife or children in developing their potential whether for economic or social purposes such as prohibiting them from gathering and socializing in the community as well as limiting the movement of relatives such as preventing domestic workers or drivers from communicating or having contact with their families.

Article 4
' Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
, - Paragraph (1) n Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Services for economic independence through the provision of economic access are given to victims of violence, especially women victims of violence so that they can be independent in running and sustaining their lives. such economic services can be carried out by providing training that is appropriate to the skills or talents possessed by the victim, so that the victim can develop the skills or talents they possess when the victim returns to community life. in addition, ppr can provide business information as well as job vacancies related to the skills or abilities possessed by victims of violence.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear. $d nl ,t' i,, tArticle 9 , - Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.
Article 11 Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b What is meant by "services in accordance with the needs of victims" is providing legal assistance and/or other legal accompaniment needed by victims of violence in order to restore their rights, which is carried out based on the victim's consent.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Point e Sufficiently clear.
Point f Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.
1[d t Article 13 The responsibility of the family and/or parents is carried out by strengthening family resilience with family functions such as instilling religious values; instilling social and cultural values;
. providing economic support; providing protection; and love and affection.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.
Article 18 Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SITUBONDO REGENCY NUMBER 15

# I