REGENT OF BLORA
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLORA REGENCY
NUMBER 3 OF 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BLORA,

Considering : a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, degree and honor and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence and discrimination as a form of respect, protection and enforcement of Human Rights, particularly the basic rights of women and Children, therefore it is necessary to regulate the implementation of protection for women and Child Victims of violence in Blora Regency;
b. that based on the consideration as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette dated August 8, 1950) as amended by Law Number 9 of 1965 concerning the Establishment of Batang Level II Region by amending Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 52, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2757);
3. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
4. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
7. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
8. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
9. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
10. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 44 of 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
12. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 4967);
13. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
14. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
15. Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 7, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5495);
16. Law Number 18 of 2014 concerning Mental Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 185, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 5571);
17. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
18. Government Regulation Number 6 of 1988 concerning Coordination of Vertical Agency Activities in the Regions (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 10, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3373);
19. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
20. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery for Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4606);
21. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
22. Government Regulation Number 43 of 2014 concerning Implementation Guidelines for Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 123, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5539) as amended by Government Regulation Number 47 of 2015 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 43 of 2014 concerning Implementation Guidelines for Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 157, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5717);
23. Presidential Regulation Number 87 of 2014 concerning Implementation Regulations of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 199);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BLORA REGENCY and

REGENT OF BLORA
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Blora Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of regional government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
4. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin, and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
5. Sub-district is a sub-district apparatus formed to assist or carry out part of the sub-district head's duties.
6. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child who is still in the womb.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to Victims carried out by family parties, Integrated Services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
9. Empowerment is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
10. Violence is any unlawful act that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens and/or endangers life and body and degrades dignity.
11. Violence Against Women is any act against women that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
12. Violence Against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child committed by parties who should be responsible for that Child or those who should be trustworthy.
13. Victim is a woman and Child who experiences violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
14. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
15. Integrated Service is a series of activities to handle and protect Victims of acts of violence including criminal acts of trafficking in persons carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions and the community as one unit of organizing health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance.
16. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a unified unit that organizes Integrated Services for women and Child Victims of violence.
17. Women and Child Protection Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UPPA is a unit at the sub-district and village/sub-district level that organizes protection for Victims of Violence Against Women and Children.
18. Social Rehabilitation is the recovery of Victims from psychosocial condition disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning both in the family and in the community.
19. Legal Assistance is the provision of legal assistance to Victims seeking justice who are unable and face difficulties in the legal field outside and before the court without remuneration.
20. Repatriation is the act of returning Victims to their region of origin or country of origin while prioritizing protection services and fulfillment of their needs.
21. Social Reintegration is the reunification of Victims with family parties, substitute families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
22. Safe House (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to Victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their Child, or father and his Child, or mother and her Child, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
24. Household is husband, wife, and Child, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
25. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Blora Regency.
26. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBDes is the Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget in Blora Regency.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Victim Protection is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, as well as basic principles that include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the Victim;
c. justice and gender equality;
d. protection of the Victim;
e. survival of the mother;
f. survival, growth, and development of the Child;
g. respect for the opinion of the Child;
h. transparency;
i. integration;
j. not blaming the Victim;
k. empowering;
l. confidentiality of the Victim; and
m. decision-making in the hands of the Victim.

Article 3
The objectives of implementing protection for Victims are:
a. to prevent Violence Against Women and Children; b. to provide services to women and Child Victims of Violence; and
c. to empower women and Child Victims of Violence.

BAB III
SCOPE
Article 4
The scope of protection implementation for Victims includes prevention efforts, services and empowerment for Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 5
Every Victim obtains the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. the right to determine their own decisions;
c. the right to obtain information;
d. the right to confidentiality of their identity;
e. the right to complaint handling;
f. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the Victim;
g. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
h. the right to obtain repatriation efforts and social reintegration;
i. the right to social rehabilitation; and
j. the right to obtain assistance in psychological recovery, legal services and health services.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 6 (1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of Violence.
(2) Efforts to prevent the occurrence of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may be implemented in the form of:
a. conducting efforts to increase awareness about anti-Violence values Against Women and Children;
b. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and Child Victims of violence.
(3) The Regional Government has the obligation to provide and organize services for Victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for Victims;
b. providing support for facilities and infrastructure
c. increasing the capacity of service provider institutions; d. conducting coordination and cooperation in services for women and Child Victims of violence;
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation;
f. encouraging public awareness of the importance of protection for Victims; and
g. conducting empowerment of Victims.

CHAPTER VI
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 7
(1) Forms of Violence Against Women and Children consist of: a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and
f. maltreatment.
(2) Physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is an act that results in pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
(3) Psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to the Victim.
(4) Sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment whether physical or psychological;
b. acts of sexual abuse and sexual intercourse with a Child; c. forced sexual intercourse;
d. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
e. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.
(5) Neglect as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is: a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the Victim's needs properly whether physical, mental, spiritual or social committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately failing to maintain, care for, or look after a Child as appropriate committed by parents, guardians, any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the Victim is under the control of that person.
(6) Exploitation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e is: a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; b. acts with or without the Victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits whether material or immaterial; and/or
c. any form of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the Victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.
(7) Maltreatment as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f is: a. any act or action whether intentional or unintentional committed by another person that makes an individual sick or disturbed in their feelings, or receives unpleasant feelings that make a person sad, disappointed, angry and afraid;
b. any sexual violation committed or permitted to be committed against a Child by an adult or another person legally responsible for them, including touching a Child with the intention of sexual gratification or forcing a Child to touch an adult, sexual intercourse, showing sexual activities to a Child, pornography or allowing a Child to engage in sexual intercourse that is not appropriate to their development.

BAB VII
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
First Part
Establishment of Integrated Service Center

Article 8
(1) In providing protection for women and Child Victims of Violence, the Regional Government establishes a PPT.
(2) The membership of the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Law Enforcement Apparatus;
c. Community Organizations;
d. community members who have competence in providing protection for Victims of violence.
(3) The membership composition of the PPT as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of:
a. Chairperson;
b. Vice Chairperson;
c. Secretary; and
d. Fields (4) The fields as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of at least:
a. complaint service field;
b. health service field;
c. social rehabilitation and spiritual guidance service field; d. law enforcement and legal aid service field; and/or
e. repatriation and social reintegration field.

Article 9
The PPT as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) has the duty to provide protection to Victims in the form of:
a. pursuing prevention, handling and rehabilitation, legal protection;
b. conducting coordination in the framework of handling services for Victims of Violence;
c. pursuing increased community participation; and d. conducting monitoring and reporting.

Article 10
Further provisions regarding the establishment of PPT shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Women's Protection and Child Protection Unit

Article 11
(1) In an effort to enhance protection for Victims of violence, UPPA shall be established at the sub-district and Village/Urban Village levels.
(2) UPPA at the sub-district level as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by the Sub-District Head by involving community institutions, the Family Welfare Development Driving Team at the sub-district level, community leaders and Child representatives.
(3) UPPA at the Village/Urban Village level as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by the Village Head/Urban Village Head by involving Village/Urban Village apparatus, community institutions in the Village/Urban Village, the Family Welfare Development Driving Team, community leaders and Child representatives.
(4) UPPA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the duty to provide protection to Victims in the form of:
a. pursuing prevention and handling;
b. conducting coordination in the context of handling services for Victims of Violence;
c. pursuing increased community participation; and d. conducting monitoring and reporting.

Article 12
(1) The membership composition of UPPA as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) consists of:
a. Chairperson;
b. Vice Chairperson;
c. Secretary; and
d. Sections.
(2) The sections of UPPA as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of at least:
a. prevention section;
b. case handling section; and
c. partnership development section.

Article 13
Further provisions regarding the procedures for the establishment of UPPA shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE First Part General

Article 14
The implementation of protection for Victims of Violence is carried out through:
a. prevention efforts;
b. services; and
c. empowerment.

Second Part
Prevention Efforts

Article 15
(1) Efforts to prevent Violence Against Women and Children are carried out by:
a. Regional Government coordinated by Regional Apparatus with authority over women's empowerment and protection and Children;
b. family and closest relatives;
c. community; and
d. educational institutions.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by means of:
a. forming work networks in efforts to prevent Violence;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of Violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a Violence prevention system; and
d. conducting socialization regarding prevention of Violence Against Women and Children, as well as fulfillment of Children's rights.

Third Part
Services

Article 16
(1) The provision of services to Victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner.

Article 17
The provision of services to Victims is implemented with the principles of:
a. swift;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 18
(1) Forms of services for Victims include:
a. complaint services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) Complaint services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a include:
a. identification or initial recording of Victims;
b. informed consent; and
c. basic counseling, mediation, outreach and/or referral.
(3) Assistance services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. assistance to Victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. assistance to Victims during the medicolegal process;
c. assistance to Victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of Victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of Victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
(4) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c include:
a. medical services to Victims; and
b. medicolegal services.
(5) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d include:
a. spiritual guidance to Victims; and
b. psychological recovery of Victims.
(6) Legal services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e include:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of Victims and the judicial process;
b. assisting Victims at the investigation, prosecution, and court hearing examination levels and helping Victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers.
(7) Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f may coordinate with:
a. the Provincial Government of Central Java and other district/city governments; and
b. related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Fourth Part
Empowerment

Paragraph 1
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 19
Forms of empowerment for women Victims of violence include:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 20
Job training as referred to in Article 19 letter a includes: a. pre-placement training; and
b. field work practice.

Article 21
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 19 letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training;
b. facilitation of joint business group formation; and c. assistance in business implementation.

Article 22
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 19 letter c includes:
a. assistance for work facilities and infrastructure; and
b. facilitation of working capital assistance.

Paragraph 2
Fulfillment of the Rights of Child Victims of Violence

Article 23
(1) The form of fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Violence includes the fulfillment of the basic rights of the Child in accordance with their needs.
(2) The fulfillment of the rights of Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is the responsibility of the Regional Government, family, and community.

CHAPTER IX
COOPERATION
Article 24
(1) In providing protection to Victims, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with the Government, the Provincial Government of Central Java, other regency/city governments and other institutions.
(2) Cooperation between the Regional Government and the government includes consultation, coordination and reporting.
(3) Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Provincial Government of Central Java includes consultation, coordination, advocacy, referral, repatriation, social reintegration, reporting and development of Integrated Service systems.
(4) Cooperation between the Regional Government and other regency/city governments includes coordination, referral, repatriation and social reintegration.
(5) Cooperation between the Regional Government and other institutions includes coordination, referral, social rehabilitation including provision of Safe Houses (shelters) and social reintegration.

Article 25
The implementation of cooperation as referred to in Article 24 shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 26
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection for Victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. providing protection for Victims;
b. providing emergency assistance;
c. providing advocacy to Victims and/or the community regarding the handling of cases of Violence Against Women and Children;
d. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders;
e. conveying information to the authorized authorities related to cases of Violence Against Women and Children; f. organizing the strengthening of community groups in handling Violence Against Women and Children; and g. disseminating information on the provisions of laws and regulations related to Violence Against Women and Children.

CHAPTER XI
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 27
(1) The Regent shall conduct control, guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence at the regency and Village/Sub-district levels.
(2) In carrying out the control, guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent may delegate to the Regional Apparatus that handles affairs of women's empowerment and Child protection.

CHAPTER XII
FUNDING
Article 28
Funding for the implementation of Victim protection activities carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the APBD and other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29
Funding for the implementation of protection activities for Victims carried out by the Village/Kelurahan government is sourced from the APBDes, APBD and other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 30
(1) At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, the institution/network of Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence Against Women and Children of Blora Regency and the Unit for Prevention and Handling of Victims of Violence Against Women and Children in Villages/Subdistricts that have already been formed shall continue to carry out their duties until the establishment of the institution/network of Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence Against Women and Children of Blora Regency and the Unit for Prevention and Handling of Victims of Violence Against Women and Children in Villages/Subdistricts based on this Regional Regulation.
(2) The adjustment of the network institution of Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence Against Women and Children of Blora Regency and the Unit for Prevention and Handling of Victims of Violence Against Women and Children in Villages/Subdistricts shall be implemented no later than 1 (one) year.

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Blora Regency.
Enacted in Blora on the date of 18 January 2017

HEAD OF BLORA REGENCY,
Seal Signature.

DJOKO NUGROHO
Promulgated in Blora on the date of 18 January 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BLORA REGENCY,
Seal Signature.

BONDAN SUKARNO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLORA REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLORA REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE: (3/2017) In accordance with the original Head of Legal Division Regional Secretariat of Blora Regency

A. KAIDAR ALI, SH. MH.
NIP. 19610103 198608 1 001
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLORA REGENCY
NUMBER 3 OF 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination. In order to prevent and address violence against women and children in Blora Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation. Thus far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not yet regulated protection measures at the regional level, therefore institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee its implementation. This Regional Regulation regulates protection measures for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment for women and children victims of violence in Blora Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "non-discrimination" is protection for all Victims without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
Letter b What is meant by "best interests of the Victim" is that all actions concerning Victims carried out by the government, community, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of the Victim must be the primary consideration.
Letter c What is meant by "gender justice" is fair treatment given to women and men.
What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition and position that describes harmonious, aligned and balanced relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development as well as enjoying the results of development in family life, as well as in community, national and state life.
Letter d What is meant by "Victim protection" is providing a sense of security to Victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Letter e What is meant by "maternal survival" is ensuring that a mother does not experience death that occurs during pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum, whether caused by physical or non-physical conditions Letter f.
What is meant by "growth and development" of Children is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to education, the right to play, the right to create and recreate.
What is meant by "survival" of Children is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to identity and the right to enjoy the highest attainable health status.
Letter g What is meant by "respect for the opinion of the Child" is respect for the rights of Children to participate and express their opinions in decision-making, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.
Letter h What is meant by "openness" is that in the implementation of Victim protection it is transparent among integrated service providers.
Letter i What is meant by "integration" is that in the implementation of protection for Victims of gender-based violence and Children it is carried out by building coordination between service providers, including medical services, legal advocates, psychologists, religious counselors, social workers, police.
Letter j What is meant by "not blaming the Victim" is an attitude and treatment of not blaming the Victim for the occurrence of violence experienced.
Letter k What is meant by "empowering" is that every effort provided must be able to strengthen the Victim, both physically, psychologically, socially and economically.
Letter l What is meant by "Victim confidentiality" is every action taken to ensure the Victim is in a safe condition from threats or other actions that threaten the life and psychology of the Victim.
Letter m What is meant by "decision-making in the hands of the Victim" is the right of the Victim to determine the best choice in resolving their problem.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity respected as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value and meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or their explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "the right to complaint handling" is the right to obtain complaint services at a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b - What is meant by "facilities" is everything that is used as a tool in achieving the purpose and objective, for example, examination tables and patient beds, stethoscope.
- What is meant by "infrastructure" is everything that constitutes the main support for the implementation of integrated services, for example, examination rooms, treatment rooms, Safe Houses.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Prevention efforts within the family and/or closest relatives can be carried out by strengthening resilience within the household such as: practicing religious values, managing household time, and communication between family members.
Letter c Prevention efforts within the community include: fostering environmental awareness of acts of violence occurring in their environment.
Letter c Educational institutions can participate in efforts to provide educational punishment, endeavoring to eliminate provisions that do not side with victims of violence.
Paragraph (2) Letter a What is meant by "network" includes: family partners, dasawisma, family groups existing in the Region.
Letter b What is meant by "coordination" includes: planning, implementation and monitoring of violence prevention programs.
Letter c What is meant by "violence prevention system" includes: mapping of locations or areas prone to violence and conducting promotive and preventive efforts to the community.
Letter d Socialization can be carried out through mass media, electronic media, and direct outreach to the community.

Article 16
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) These other service units can be located at the Integrated Crisis Center (PKT) based in Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Integrated Service Centers for the Empowerment of Women and Children (P2TP2A), Women and Children Service Units (UPPA), Trauma Center Shelters (RPTC), Children's Social Shelters (RPSA), BP4, and other religious institutions, prosecutor's offices, courts, Women Crisis Centers (WCC), and other similar institutions.

Article 17
Letter a What is meant by "swift" is immediate action taken without complications or with simplified procedures.
Letter b What is meant by "safe and comfortable" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, undisturbed, and served in a friendly manner, with respect and appreciation.
Letter c What is meant by "empathy" is action that appreciates, respects, cares for, befriends, and brings happiness with the aim of pleasing and comforting the hearts of victims.
Letter d What is meant by "non-discrimination" is service to women and child victims of violence without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
Letter e What is meant by "easily accessible" is the provision of services and assistance for all people without regard to their social status, so that such services are affordable for the underprivileged or relatively adequate for the privileged.
Letter f What is meant by "not charged" is that service and assistance activities carried out by PPT are not charged to victims.
Letter g What is meant by "guaranteed confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical care and legal handling will not be disseminated.

Article 18
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b What is meant by "informed consent" is consent given by the Victim or their family based on an explanation regarding the services to be provided to the Victim.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Point a sufficiently clear.
Point b - What is meant by "medicolegal" is medical services to provide optimal professional assistance in utilizing medical science for the purposes of law enforcement and justice. Medicolegal services include, among others: visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum.
- What is meant by "visum et repertum" is a written statement made by a doctor in forensic medical science at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of a medical examination of the victim based on their scientific knowledge and under oath, for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
- What is meant by "visum et psikiatrikum" is a statement given by a Psychiatric Specialist regarding the mental health condition of the victim that is required to clarify a case and for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Point e Sufficiently clear.
Point f Sufficiently clear.
Point g Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (7) Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLORA REGENCY NUMBER 3