COPY
REGENT OF WONOGIRI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOGIRI REGENCY NUMBER 2 YEAR 2013
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WONOGIRI,

Considering : a. that based on Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government together with the community is obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children;

b. that to realize the provision of protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children as well as to provide legal certainty particularly in the implementation of child protection in Wonogiri Regency, it is necessary to regulate this in a Regional Regulation;

c. that based on the considerations as referred to in point a and point b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children.

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 13 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas Within Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 42);

3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

5. Law Number 4 Year 1997 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 9, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3670);

6. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of the ILO Convention Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);

7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

8. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of the ILO Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

9. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

10. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

11. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

12. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

13. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

14. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

15. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

16. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

17. Government Regulation Number 2 Year 1988 concerning Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3367);

18. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

19. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

20. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

21. Presidential Regulation Number 1 Year 2007 concerning Ratification, Promulgation, and Dissemination of Legislation;

22. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

23. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;

24. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 Year 2009 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children;

With Mutual Approval
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WONOGIRI REGENCY
And

REGENT OF WONOGIRI
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

GENDER-BASED AND CHILD-BASED
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. Region is Wonogiri Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as the administrator of Regional Government.
3. Regent is the Regent of Wonogiri.
4. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, mental, sexual, and economic.
5. Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights, the consequences of which are in the form of and not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
6. Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children, the consequences of which are in the form of and not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
7. Domestic Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty within the scope of the household.
8. Physical Violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.
9. Psychological Violence is any act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering in a person.
10. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes
11. Economic Violence is any act that neglects members in the form of not providing a proper living, care or maintenance.
12. Victim is a person who experiences violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household.
13. Victim of Gender-Based Violence is a person who due to their gender experiences physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and or threats of violence within the scope of the household and society.
14. Child Victim of Violence is a child who receives harsh treatment whether physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and society.
15. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court orders.
16. Temporary Protection is protection directly provided by the police and/or social institutions or other parties, before the issuance of a protection order from the court.
17. Protection Order is an order issued by the Court to provide protection to victims.
18. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including children still in the womb.
19. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate, optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
20. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
21. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
22. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
23. Child Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, society, government, and the state.
24. Society is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
25. Accompaniment is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the empowerment of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to resolve the problems they face.
26. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution providing services to child victims of violence, which is managed jointly between the Regional Government and the community in the form of medical care (including medico-legal), psychosocial and legal services.
27. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
28. Safe house (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined operational standards.
29. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
30. Paralegal is an individual, group, association, organization/institution that does not have a legal background who provides assistance to fight for rights and justice in society.
31. Counseling is the process of providing assistance carried out by an expert to individuals experiencing a problem that leads to the resolution of the problem faced by the client.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children is carried out based on the principles of respect and recognition of equal human rights and dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of human rights and the best interests of victims.

Article 3
The Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children aims to provide protection and services to victims of gender-based violence and children as well as to guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, the best interests of the child and receive protection from violence and discrimination, for the realization of quality Indonesian children who are noble in character and prosperous.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 4
(1) The Scope of gender-based violence includes: a. husband, wife, and child;
b. people who have family relations with the persons as referred to in letter a due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, foster care, and guardianship, who reside in the household, and/or
c. people who work assisting the household and reside in that household.
(2) People who work assisting the household and reside in the household as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c are considered as family members for the duration of time while being in the household concerned.

CHAPTER IV
PROHIBITION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Article 5
Every person is prohibited from committing domestic violence against persons within the scope of their household, by means of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. economic violence;
d. sexual violence; or
e. household neglect.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 6
(1) Victims of gender-based violence and child victims of violence have the right to obtain:
a. protection from family, police, prosecution, courts, advocates, social institutions or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
b. obtain protection for personal security, family, and property, and freedom from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
c. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
d. freedom from ensnaring questions;
e. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
f. obtain services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and according to needs.
g. health services in accordance with medical needs;
h. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
i. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations and spiritual guidance services;
j. recovery and social reintegration;
k. obtain legal, psychological, spiritual, economic, and social assistance.
(2) The rights of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
(1) The obligations of the Regional Government include:
a. preventing the occurrence of violence;
b. providing protection for victims of violence; c. providing recovery services and social reintegration; d. encouraging and increasing community participation; e. conducting cooperation with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect and recover victims of violence; and
f. supervising the implementation of services for victims with service standards that involve the community;
(2) To carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of gender-based and child violence;
b. establish and facilitate the implementation of integrated services;
c. provide facilities and infrastructure;
d. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
e. conduct coordination and cooperation in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based and child violence;
f. encourage community participation; and
g. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
(3) The Regional Government in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF GENDER-BASED PROTECTION AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

First Part
Institutional Arrangements

Article 8
(1) The Regent through the Regional Apparatus establishes a public service work unit that functions as PPT.
(2) The Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in implementing the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence may coordinate with other Regional Apparatuses.

Second Part
Integrated Service Center

Article 9
(1) The PPT as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) shall be established by the Regional Government in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
(2) The establishment of the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of members from elements of regional government, non-governmental institutions, health service institutions, law enforcement officials, professional personnel, volunteer companions, social workers, religious leaders, and managers of safe houses (shelters), and social rehabilitation centers.

Article 10
The duties of PPT are to pursue prevention, recovery and social reintegration, provide legal protection, conduct coordination and pursue increased community participation, as well as monitoring and reporting.

Article 11
Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 10 include:
a. conducting communication, information, and education about gender-based and child violence;
b. socialization of laws and regulations related to gender-based and child violence;

Article 12
Recovery and social reintegration efforts as referred to in Article 10 include:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions; b. assisting the repatriation of victims;
c. providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters); d. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance; e. providing spiritual guidance services;
f. conducting family and community preparation, economic empowerment, and return to school and/or other educational institutions.

Article 13
Legal Protection as referred to in Article 10 includes:
a. providing protection in a safe house (shelter);
b. providing assistance in the legal process at the police, prosecutor's office and district court levels;
c. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence which can be carried out through the appointment of guardianship in accordance with applicable regulations.

Article 14
Coordination and Cooperation as referred to in Article 10 includes:
a. conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated services;
b. conducting coordination and cooperation with integrated services between regencies/cities;
c. conducting coordination and cooperation with institutions providing services for victims of gender-based violence and children;
d. conducting coordination and consultation with Regional Government.

Article 15
Enhancement of Community Participation as referred to in Article 10 includes:
a. fostering community awareness of cases of gender-based and child violence;
b. encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting the occurrence of gender-based and child violence;
c. fostering local wisdom in handling gender-based and child violence;
d. organizing the strengthening of community groups in handling gender-based and child violence;
e. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to gender-based and child violence.

Article 16
Monitoring and Reporting as referred to in Article 10, includes monitoring, documentation and reporting of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children.

Article 17
The implementation of integrated services shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus Work Unit responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Third Part
Cooperation

Article 18
(1) In providing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government may cooperate with the Government, Provincial Government, Regency/City Government and other institutions.
(2) The cooperation of the Regional Government with the Government and Provincial Government includes consultation, coordination and reporting.
(3) Cooperation between other Regency/City Governments includes coordination, advocacy, referral, repatriation, social reintegration and facilitation of Integrated Service System development, monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

CHAPTER VIII
HANDLING AND MECHANISM
Article 19
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework.
(2) PPT in handling medical, legal, psychological, and economic protection in its implementation may conduct partnerships with regional apparatus and social community institutions engaged in the field of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children.
(3) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) must take into account religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands/other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(4) Provisions regarding the mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FORMS OF PROTECTION
Article 20
(1) Every victim of gender-based violence and children must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
(2) Protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided to Wonogiri residents, both those occurring within the Wonogiri Regency area and outside the Wonogiri Regency area.
(3) Protection for victims of gender-based violence and children in addition to being provided to Wonogiri residents as referred to in paragraph (2), shall also be provided to non-Wonogiri residents occurring within the Wonogiri Regency area.

Article 21
(1) Forms of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children consist of medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), economic, and psychological protection.
(2) The form of medical protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics free of charge.
(3) The form of legal protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
(4) The form of medicolegal protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field.
(5) The form of economic protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(6) The form of psychological protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and providing psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving problems.

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 22
(1) The community can participate in assisting prevention efforts and handling of victims of gender-based violence and child violence.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be realized through:
a. providing information and/or reporting any violence that comes to their knowledge;
b. providing protection for victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing advocacy for victims and/or the community regarding the handling of gender-based violence and child violence cases;
e. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders;
f. assisting in the repatriation and reintegration process.
(3) Community participation may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(4) Social community organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and child violence as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be provided guidance by the Wonogiri Regency Government through regional apparatus in accordance with their main duties and functions.
(5) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (4) may be in the form of counseling guidance, skills guidance, paralegal training and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER XI
ASSISTANCE
Article 23
Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with PPT.

Article 24
(1) Assistance includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims, carried out by the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts, Advocates, Social Workers, and Women's or Social Organizations that care for women and children.
(2) Assistance by the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts and Advocates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION Article 25 (1) Control, guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children shall be carried out by the Regent.
(2) The implementation of control, guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out on a daily basis by the Regional Apparatus in charge of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

CHAPTER XIII
FINANCING
Article 26
All activities related to the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIV
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 27
Criminal acts in the field of child protection are subject to criminal punishment as regulated in Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.

CHAPTER XV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 28
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all implementing regulations related to the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children are declared to remain valid insofar as they do not conflict with and/or have not been replaced by new regulations.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Wonogiri Regency Enacted in Wonogiri on the date of October 28, 2013

# BUPATI WONOGIRI
Cap. ttd.

DANAR RAHMANTO
Promulgated in Wonogiri on the date of October 28, 2013 Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF WONOGIRI REGENCY HEAD OF BAPPEDA Seal. sgd.

SUHARNO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOGIRI REGENCY YEAR 2013 NUMBER 2
Copy in accordance with the original, Head of Legal Division WIYANTO, SH, M. Si.

NIP. 19700904 199803 1 009
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOGIRI REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2013
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

I GENERAL
Gender-based violence and violence against children is a social phenomenon that has existed since ancient times and has become increasingly prevalent recently. In fact, gender-based violence and violence against children continues to increase, both in number as well as in the forms and modus operandi which are becoming increasingly diverse. Rape, sexual harassment, trafficking of women and children, domestic violence, sexual exploitation, violence against domestic workers, pornography, exploitation of migrant workers, and neglect, will apparently continue to be encountered in daily life, both in the domestic sphere (household) and public sphere.
The causal factors of gender-based violence and violence against children are very complex and interrelated with one another. These factors include, among others, legal instruments that have not been able to provide protection to victims, the concept that women and children are family property (assets), media that do not adequately support reporting on violence against women and children, public services that are not yet optimal, customs that sometimes legalize violence, poverty issues, erroneous interpretations of religious teachings, all of which are wrapped in a patriarchal culture.
The handling of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children occurring in Wonogiri, in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 of Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection and Article 13 of Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, states that Regional Governments are obligated to establish and develop a system and mechanism of cooperation for handling violence. Furthermore, based on the provisions of Article 26 paragraph (1) letter b of Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government, it states that the Deputy Regional Head has the duty to assist the Regional Head in coordinating the activities of vertical agencies in the region, following up on reports and/or findings from supervisory apparatus oversight, implementing women's and youth empowerment, as well as endeavoring to develop and preserve socio-culture and the environment. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children.

II ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
- What is meant by "non-discrimination" is protection for all victims of gender-based violence and children without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic culture and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
- What is meant by "gender justice" is fair treatment given to women and men.
- What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition and position that describes harmonious, compatible and balanced relations between men and women in obtaining opportunities/chances in access, participation, control and benefits in the implementation of development as well as enjoying the results of development in family life, as well as in society, nationhood and statehood.
- What is meant by "best interests of the victim" is all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, then the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
- What is meant by being able to live is the right to survival of the child as stipulated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, encompassing the right to identity and the right to enjoy the highest attainable standard of health.
- What is meant by "grow and develop" of the child is as stipulated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, encompassing the right to education, the right to play, the right to create and recreate.

Article 4
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Paragraph (1) Point a Sufficiently clear Point b Sufficiently clear Point c Sufficiently clear Point d What is meant by "free from ensnaring questions" are questions that are detrimental (cornering, demeaning, harassing, blaming, and judging) to the victim.
Point e Sufficiently clear Point f Sufficiently clear Point g Sufficiently clear Point h Sufficiently clear Point i Sufficiently clear Point j Sufficiently clear Point k Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOGIRI REGENCY NUMBER 123