REGENT OF KUBU RAYA
PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUBU RAYA REGENCY NUMBER 9 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY REGENT OF KUBU RAYA, • • Considering Bearing in Mind

a. that violence against women constitutes a violation of human rights so that women need to be protected in their dignity and honor and their right to life must be guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny;

b. that to overcome violence against women in Kubu Raya Regency, prevention efforts and optimization of overcoming violence against women are needed through policies to guarantee legal protection for women;

c. that to provide legal protection for women, the regulation of protection of women from acts of violence needs to be regulated in a Regional Regulation;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women From Acts of Violence;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 35 of 2007 concerning the Establishment of Kubu Raya Regency in West Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 101, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4751);

3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

• • With Mutual Approval REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KUBU RAYA REGENCY and

REGENT OF KUBU RAYA
DECIDES:
To establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Kubu Raya Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government Administrator who leads the Implementation of Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Autonomous Region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Kubu Raya.
4. Regional Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is an Organization or institution in the regional government that is responsible to the Regent.
5. Women are humans who are female starting from infants, adolescents, adults up to the elderly.
6. Women with Disabilities are women who have limitations, which can be physical, cognitive, mental, sensory, emotional, developmental or some combination of these.
7. Elderly Women are women who are 60 years of age and above.
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
9. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including certain threats, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
10. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
11. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the regional government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
12. Service/handling is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
13. Assistance is a person or marriage from an institution that has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and/or advocacy.
14. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution or functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
15. Safe House is a residence for victims during the assistance process for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and danger.
16. Minimum Service Standards, hereinafter abbreviated as SPM, is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing 5 (five) types of services for women and children victims of violence, namely (1) Complaint Handling, (2) Health Services, (3) Social Rehabilitation, (4) Law Enforcement and Legal Aid, and (5) Repatriation and Social Reintegration.
17. Complaint Handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women submitted by victims, families and the community.
18. Health Services are efforts that include promotive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
19. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
20. Law Enforcement is action by officials authorized by the State to implement laws and regulations.
21. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocacy to conduct the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women that is gender sensitive.
22. Repatriation is an effort to return women victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
23. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment for victims.
24. Integrated Service Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UPT, is a unified unit that organizes integrated service functions for women victims of violence.
25. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in one straight line upward or downward.
26. Household is husband, wife and children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care and guardianship and/or domestic workers who reside in that household.

Article 2
Protection of Women from acts of violence is based on:
a. respect for and fulfillment of the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of victims.

Article 3
The protection of women from acts of violence aims to:
a. prevent violence against women;
•  •
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women; c. protect and provide a sense of security for women; d. facilitate and conduct mediation on domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; e. provide services and/or handling to victims; and f. conduct empowerment for women victims of violence and vulnerable groups.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE OF PROTECTION
Article 4
The scope of protection of women from acts of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. services and/or handling; and
c. empowerment.

CHAPTER III
PREVENTION, SERVICE AND/OR HANDLING
AND EMPOWERMENT
Part One
Prevention

Article 5
(1) Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 4 letter a shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:
a. establishing a working network;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a violence prevention system;
d. disseminating laws and regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence, including raising awareness among families and communities;
e. providing education for women victims of violence including access to employment opportunities; and
f. through complete and easily accessible communication, information and education media.
(3) In addition to prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention efforts shall also be carried out by family and/or closest relatives, community, educational institutions and customary institutions.

Second Part
Service and/or Handling

Article 6
(1) Services and/or handling as referred to in Article 4 letter b shall be conducted in an integrated manner by PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from and/or to other service units in a networked manner.
(3) Further provisions regarding the development, mechanism, and working relations of integrated PPT networks as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 7
(1) (2) • Forms of services and/or handling for victims include:
a. complaint handling including identification;
b. health/medical rehabilitation services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. law enforcement and legal aid services;
e. repatriation and social reintegration services; and
f. psychological services.
Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the Minimum Service Standards established by legislation and carried out by regional apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 8
• Services and/or handling of victims shall be carried out with:  a. speed and accuracy;
b. safety and comfort;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charges imposed; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Third Part
Empowerment

Article 9
Empowerment as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes:
a. forming communities for women victims of violence;
b. job training;
c. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
d. capital assistance.

Article 10
(1) Job training as referred to in Article 9 letter b includes:  a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.
(2) The implementation of job training as referred to in paragraph (1) may be facilitated by the SKPD handling Women's Empowerment and technical Agencies in accordance with their main duties and functions.

Article 11
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 9 letter c include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; and
b. business implementation assistance.
•  •

Article 12
(1) Capital assistance as referred to in Article 9 letter d includes:
a. facilities and infrastructure assistance; and
b. working capital/business capital assistance facilities.
(2) Capital assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be obtained through the budget of SKPD or assistance from other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE
Article 13
Violence against women consists of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 14
Physical violence as referred to in Article 13 letter a includes acts that result in pain, wounds, injury or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting, and/or death.

Article 15
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 13 letter b includes acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering.

Article 16
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 13 letter c includes:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
c. coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.

Article 17
Neglect as referred to in Article 13 letter d includes: a. acts that neglect women within the scope of their household; and/or
b. acts that result in economic dependence. Article 18 Exploitation as referred to in Article 13 letter e includes: a. actions that exploit women economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others.
• •
b. actions with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 19
Other violence as referred to in Article 13 letter f includes: a. any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
b. a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something against their own will.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 20
Every woman victim of violence has the right to:
a. have her dignity and honor as a human being respected;
b. obtain physical and psychological health recovery from the suffering experienced;
c. determine her own decisions;
d. obtain information;
e. have her identity kept confidential;
f. obtain compensation;
g. obtain social rehabilitation;
h. obtain spiritual guidance;
i. obtain complaint handling;
j. obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
k. obtain assistance; and l. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a member of society.

CHAPTER VI
GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
Regional Government

Article 21
(1) Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility in implementing victim protection efforts by:
a. establishing PPT;
b. formulating policies;
c. preparing planning and implementing programs and activities;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure; and
e. supervising the implementation of services to victims with minimum service standards.
(2) In the implementation of obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 22
The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 21 paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the SKPD that oversees matters of women's empowerment.

Second Part
Society and Family

Pasal 23
The community and family have the obligation and responsibility to:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence against women;
b. report if violence occurs;
c. protect victims; and
d. provide emergency assistance.

Third Part
Coordination of Women's Protection

Article 24
(1) Services and/or handling for victims shall be carried out in a networked manner.
(2) The network as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize the handling of PPT services;
b. develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on violence.
(3) The network as referred to in paragraph (1) shall carry out its duties and functions in accordance with the forms of services as referred to in Article 7.

CHAPTER VI
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER
Article 25
(1) In providing services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house (shelter) for victims, it is necessary to establish an PPT.
(2) PPT may be established by vertical agencies in the Region, Regional Government, and/or community institutions.
(3) PPT established by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of elements of the Regional Police, SKPD in charge of Health, Education, Social Affairs, Community Empowerment, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as well as Community Social Institutions that have the function of providing protection to women from acts of violence carried out in a networked manner.
(4) In the event that PPT does not have a safe house (shelter) as referred to in paragraph (1), then the victim shall be referred to a PPT that has a safe house.
(5) PPT as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of several counseling fields including:
a. legal field;
b. health field;
c. spiritual field; and
d. psychology field.
(6) PPT as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be determined by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VII
INFORMATION SYSTEM AND REPORTING
Article 26
(1) The SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment implements the information system and submits reports on the implementation of women's protection to the Regent.
(2) Further provisions regarding the information system and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 27
Funding for women's protection activities carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or other legitimate sources in accordance with the laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 28
(1) The community participates in the implementation of women's protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. establishing women's protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's rights;
d. undertaking preventive measures if indications of violence against women are found in the community;
e. providing first aid to victims; and
f. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against women occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and/or mass media.
• •

BABX
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPERVISION
Article 29
(1) Regional Government conducts development and supervision of the implementation of women's protection.
(2) Development and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a covers planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b covers planning, implementation, governance, financing, quality, control, and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted based on laws and regulations periodically every 6 (six) months.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Kubu Raya Regency.
Enacted in Sungai Raya on date 2. ()e.s07,ber 2016 tREGENT OF KUBU RAYA, ---   ==- c-.....   ------ _::;, ----

RUSMAN ALI
Enacted ., •• On date..3-   '.2.0l'­ Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF REGENCY  u ,.
11 a.NG PRASETYO

LFM (AH
"' KUBU RAYA REGENCY .2.01, Kl .9 _ _ REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUBU RAYA REGENCY, WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (9/2016) • •

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUBU RAYA REGENCY
NUMBER YEAR 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL.
Acts of violence against women constitute a violation of human rights therefore, their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.
In order to prevent and overcome violence against women in Kubu Raya Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades their degree and human dignity, it is necessary to establish a regional regulation concerning the protection of women.
Protection of women constitutes all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention.
Existing laws and regulations or those related to the protection of women victims of violence have not yet regulated efforts for the protection of women in the regions, therefore institutional support and regulations at the regional level are needed to guarantee their implementation.
This Regional Regulation regulates efforts for the protection of women specifically in the form of prevention, services / handling, and empowerment of women in Kubu Raya Regency.

11. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Number 1 Sufficiently clear Number 2 Sufficiently clear.
Number 3 Sufficiently clear.
Number 4 Sufficiently clear.
Number 5 Sufficiently clear.
Number 6 Sufficiently clear.
Number 7 Sufficiently clear.
•  • Number 8 Sufficiently clear.
Number 9 Sufficiently clear.
Number 10 Sufficiently clear.
Number 11 Sufficiently clear.
Number 12 Sufficiently clear.
Number 13 Sufficiently clear.
Number 14 Sufficiently clear.
Number 15 Sufficiently clear.
Number 16 Sufficiently clear.
Number 17 Sufficiently clear.
Number 18 What is meant by efforts from the Promotive aspect is the effort to promote / socialize about acts of violence to the community, with the aim of increasing public awareness and sensitivity to the danger of violence that threatens women.
What is meant by efforts from the Preventive aspect is efforts that prioritize the prevention aspect targeting communities vulnerable to becoming victims of violence and experiencing its impact. Preventive efforts can be carried out through community empowerment in the form of training activities and others.
What is meant by efforts from the Curative aspect is efforts carried out in the form of handling victims of violence who require handling according to their needs, namely health rehabilitation handling if the victim suffers the impact of violence physically or psychologically, provision of assistance and law enforcement for victims who require assistance and law enforcement, and so forth.
What is meant by the Rehabilitative aspect is efforts carried out as an attempt to restore victims of violence both physically, psychologically and psychosocially.
Number 19 Sufficiently clear.
Number 20 Sufficiently clear.
Number 21 Sufficiently clear.
Number 22 Sufficiently clear.
Number 23 Sufficiently clear.
•  • Number 24 Sufficiently clear.
Number 25 Sufficiently clear.
Number 26 Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Paragraph a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of victims' rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of victims' basic rights.
Paragraph b What is meant by "justice" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access and welfare.
What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Paragraph c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Paragraph d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, regional government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, must prioritize the best interests of victims.

Article 3
Paragraph a Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph b Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph c What is meant by women as vulnerable groups are the elderly, persons with disabilities, the homeless, home-based workers, domestic workers, female heads of households, Indonesian migrant workers, former inmates of correctional institutions, and victims of disasters/conflicts.
Paragraph d Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph e Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph f Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
• Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.
• Article 16 Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Paragraph a Threat of violence is any act against the law either directly or indirectly including through social media networks and communication devices.
Paragraph b Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Paragraph a What is meant by "the right to be respected for one's dignity as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Paragraph b Sufficiently clear.
• Paragraph c Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, questions, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning and messages whether data, facts or their explanations that can be seen, heard and read presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Paragraph e Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph f Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph g Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph h Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph i Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph j Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph k What is meant by "the right to obtain assistance" includes among others: psychologists, psychiatrists and health experts, religious counselors, advocates and family members.
Paragraph l Sufficiently clear.
• Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24   Sufficiently clear. tt Article 25  Sufficiently clear.
Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.
•  •

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.
Article 30 Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KUBU RAYA REGENCY NUMBER '15