# I'm ready to translate the text, but I don't see any text provided after the words "Menimbang Mengingat". 

Could you please provide the complete text you'd like me to translate?

REGENT OF KUTAI TIMUR
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KUTAI TIMUR REGENCY NUMBER 3 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF KUTAI TIMUR,

a. that every woman has the right to protection of her person, family, honor, dignity, and property under her control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which is a basic human right;

b. that to provide one guideline or reference for local government and related stakeholders regarding the improvement of women's quality of life and protection of women, especially for women victims of violence;

c. that to provide direction, foundation and legal certainty to all parties involved in the empowerment of women and children, it is necessary to regulate the establishment of an Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a through c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law ...

REGENT OF KUTAI TIMUR
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
- 2-
2. Law Number 47 Year 1999 concerning the Establishment of Nunukan Regency, Malinau Regency, West Kutai Regency, East Kutai Regency and Bontang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3896) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 3 Year 2022 concerning the State Capital (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6766);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 Concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
5. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children.
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KUTAI TIMUR REGENCY and

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
DECIDES...
REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 3-

DECIDES:
To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is East Kutai Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region of East Kutai Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Kutai.
4. Agency is the Agency for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of East Kutai Regency.
5. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries with the authority to regulate and manage government affairs, the interests of the local community based on community initiative, rights of origin and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
6. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a direct line upward or downward and in a collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman.
7. Protection . . .

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 4-
7. Protection of Women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
8. Services are all efforts and actions to fulfill the rights of victims which include complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance.
9. Violence Against Women is any action that violates, obstructs, eliminates enjoyment, and disregards the human rights of women.
10. Women Victims of Violence are women who experience acts of violence and discrimination whose rights are not fulfilled.
11. Health Rehabilitation is the recovery of Women Victims of violence from health disorders they suffer.
12. Social Rehabilitation is all efforts to restore and develop the capabilities of Women Victims of Violence so that they can carry out their social roles and functions both in family life and/or society.
13. Repatriation is an effort to return Women Victims of Violence to their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
14. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Women Victims of Violence with their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
15. Bantuan ...

REGENT OF KUTAI TIMUR
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 5-
15. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or Women Victims of Violence.
16. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for Women Victims of Violence.
17. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to provide Services to Women Victims of Violence and children comprehensively including complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal aid.
18. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for UPTD PPA services in providing complaint services, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal aid for Women Victims of Violence and children.
19. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to Women Victims of Violence in accordance with predetermined standards.
Article 2 This Regional Regulation is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. Non ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
- 6-
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of women.
Article 3 This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. prevent all forms of Violence against Women;
c. provide protection and a sense of security for women victims of violence and discrimination;
d. ensure the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women by the region in a systematic, comprehensive, continuous, and integrated manner;
e. increase the commitment of the Regional Government in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women; and
f. encourage institutions that handle the duties and functions of women's empowerment in the Regional Government as well as community institutions in the region to improve performance in efforts to protect women.
Article 4 The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. the rights of women victims of violence;
b. the authority of the Regional Government;
c. planning;
d. Implementation ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 7-
d. implementation;
e. monitoring and evaluation;
f. reporting;
g. guidance and supervision;
h. community participation; and
i. funding.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5 Every woman victim of violence has the right:
a. to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. to obtain protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on the determination of a protection order from the court;
c. to physical, psychological and sexual health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by the Woman Victim of Violence;
d. to special handling related to the confidentiality of the Woman Victim of Violence;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to determine her own decisions.

CHAPTER III ...
REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 8-

CHAPTER III
AUTHORITY OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 6 (1) Regional Government has authority in the Protection of Women. (2) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. prevention of violence against women involving parties within the Regional scope;
b. provision of services for women Victims of violence requiring coordination at the Regional level; and
c. strengthening and development of institutions providing women's protection services.

CHAPTER IV
PLANNING
Article 7
The Regent is obligated to integrate policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women into the Regional development planning.
Article 8 (1) The integration of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the Region shall be incorporated into planning and budget documents which include:
a. Regional Long-Term Development Plan;
b. Regional Medium-Term Development Plan;
c. Plan ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 9-
c. Strategic Plan of Regional Apparatus Work Units;
d. Regional Government Work Plan; and
e. Work Plan and Budget of Regional Apparatus Work Units.
(2) The preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be harmonized between levels and structures of government.
(3) The Agency shall facilitate the integration of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Protection into the preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (1).
(4) In carrying out the facilitation as referred to in paragraph (3), the Agency shall coordinate with the Regional Development Planning Agency of East Kutai Regency.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION
Part One
General Article 9 (1) The Regent is obligated to implement policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women, to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against women in the region.
(2) The implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Vice Regent.
(3) The implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the region as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by establishing, developing, strengthening, or utilizing institutions in the Region.

Second Part ...
REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-10-

Part Two
Prevention

Article 10
Prevention of acts of violence against women as referred to in article 6 paragraph (2) letter a, the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. conduct counseling and socialization regarding matters relating to violence against women;
b. conduct socialization on women's rights;
c. endeavor to improve education for women;
d. open skills courses for women to support the economic needs of families;
e. create employment opportunities for women;
f. provide counseling to immediately report to local authorities if violence against women occurs;
g. empower social community organizations and women's organizations to increase women's knowledge and insight;
h. establish Women's Protection Complaint Posts; and i. form networks in efforts to prevent violence.

Third Part
Protection Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 11
(1) The provision of Services for women victims of violence includes, among others:
a. providing ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
-11-
a. provide Services and handling as quickly as possible to Women Victims of Violence;
b. provide ease, comfort, safety, and free of charge for Women Victims of Violence;
c. maintain confidentiality of Women Victims of Violence; and
d. guarantee justice and legal certainty for Women Victims of Violence.

Part Four
Institutional Arrangements

Paragraph 1
Article 12
(1) In supporting the implementation of Women's Protection, the Regent establishes PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. UPTD PPA;
b. hospital-based PPT;
c. sub-district PPT; and
d. Village/Kelurahan PPT.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures for establishing PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Article 13 (1) PPT services include:
a. providing Services and handling as quickly as possible to Women Victims of Violence;
b. providing ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-12-
b. provide ease, comfort, safety, and free of charge for Women Victims of Violence;
c. maintain confidentiality of Women Victims of Violence; and
d. guarantee justice and legal certainty for Women Victims of Violence.
(2) Further provisions regarding the procedures for PPT Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Article 14 The implementation of PPT requires:
a. adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure;
b. implementing officers; and
c. functional officers.

Article 15
(1) The procedures and mechanisms of integrated Services, include:
a. complaint services;
b. Health Rehabilitation;
c. Social Rehabilitation;
d. Repatriation;
e. Social Reintegration, and
f. Legal Aid.
(2) The implementation of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with SPM.

Fifth Section ...
REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-13-

Part Five
Article 16
(1) SPM in the field of integrated services for women and children victims of violence aims to ensure that Women Victims of violence receive the minimum services needed.
(2) SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of violence, includes services:
a. handling of complaints/reports of Victims of Violence Against Women;
b. health services for women Victims of violence; c. social rehabilitation for women Victims of violence;
d. law enforcement and Legal Aid for women Victims of violence;
e. Repatriation and Social Reintegration for women Victims of violence; and
f. in the event that Women Victims of Violence experience trauma or illness that endangers themselves as a result of acts of violence so as to require immediate assistance, the Regional Government is obligated to provide first aid no later than 7 (seven) days after the complaint is filed.
Article 17 (1) SPM as referred to in Article 16 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers within integrated Service units;
b. coverage ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-14-

b. coverage of Women Victims of violence who receive indicator services by trained indicator personnel at community health centers and hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for indicator Victims of violence within integrated Service units;
d. coverage of ndica guidance services provided by trained ndica guidance officers for Women Victims of Violence within integrated Service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of Violence Against Women;
f. coverage of Women Victims of Violence who receive Legal Aid services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women Victims of Violence; and h. coverage of Social Reintegration services for Women Victims of Violence.
(2) The determination of performance indicators for SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes minimum targets that must be achieved by integrated service units in stages.

Sixth Part
Social Protection House Article 18 (1) Regional Governments are obligated to establish social protection houses and / or Safe Houses or other designations.
(2) Social protection houses and /or Safe Houses as referred to in paragraph (1) guarantee the implementation of Health Rehabilitation Services, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, and Social Reintegration.
(3)For ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-15- (3) For the implementation of Services as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may utilize social Protection houses and/or Safe Houses owned by the community or other social service institutions.

CHAPTER VI
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 19
(1) Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the Region.
Article 20 (1) Monitoring is conducted through coordination and direct monitoring of related Regional apparatus on a regular basis.
(2) Monitoring is conducted from planning through implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the current year.
Article 21 (1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women is conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
(2) Results ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
-16- (2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the following year.
(3) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
REPORTING
Article 22 (1) The Regent is responsible for preparing a report on the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for women and submitting it to the Governor with a copy submitted to the Minister who administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection and the Minister who administers domestic government affairs.
(2) Reporting on implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted annually.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures and form of reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 23 (1) The Regent conducts guidance on the development of PPT. (2) The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision of ...

BUPATIKUTAITIMUR
PROVINS! KALIMANTAN TIMUR
-17-
a. provision of implementation guidance;
b. coaching;
c. supervision; and
d. monitoring and evaluation of service implementation for women victims of violence, apparatus and community.
Article 24 The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for Women Victims of Violence in the Region.

CHAPTER IX
ROLE OF THE COMMUNITY
Article 25 (1) In implementing the Protection of Women, the community may: a. establish family partners at the kelurahan / village level;
b. establish women's protection units within community organizations;
c. conduct independent socialization of Women's rights;
d. provide first aid to Women Victims of Violence;
e. report to the competent authority if violence against Women occurs in their environment.
f. prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women.
g. provide information and/or report acts of violence against women to the competent authorities; and
h. form ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
-18-
h. the form and role of the community shall be carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Individuals;
b. social community institutions;
c. non-governmental organizations;
d. educational institutions;
e. religious institutions;
f. private sector; and
g. mass media.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 26 Funding for the implementation of women's protection is sourced from: a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
PROVISIONS ON SANCTIONS
Article 27 (1) Officials who are appointed, who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 13, shall be subject to administrative action and/or sanctions.
(2) Action ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
PROVINCE OF EAST KALIMANTAN
-19- (2) Administrative actions and/or sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) UPTD PPA managers who carry out service duties that violate service principles as referred to in article 16, shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the norms and provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 28 This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Kutai Regency.
Enacted in Sangatta on the date of 22 May 2023

HEAD OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY,
/

RIZALI HADI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 3 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY, EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE : (64.08/1/30/2/2023)

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 20-

EXPLANATION
EXPLANATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST KUTAI REGENCY
NUMBER 3 OF 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN

1. GENERAL
Protection of women is important to implement because women are a vulnerable or subordinated group, particularly in connection with the numerous cases of violence against women who become victims.

Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence against Women of 1999, it is stated that women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by God Almighty, therefore they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.

Although efforts have been made to protect women and there are also government policies through laws and regulations that have firmly formulated efforts for the protection of women, including efforts to protect women victims of violence, in reality the intensity or number of violence against women in East Kutai Regency is still high while services and protection for women in East Kutai Regency have not been implemented optimally. Empirically in East Kutai Regency, an important factor that influences the process of prevention and protection of women so far is that in existing laws and regulations, procedures and mechanisms for prevention and protection are not firmly regulated.

As well as ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE - 21- As well as taking into account the conditions of community population growth development along with its legal problems and with encouragement from various regulations that provide umbrella protection for women, particularly for women victims of violence.

ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a what is meant by "respect for human rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of basic Human Rights.
Letter b what is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c what is meant by "non-discrimination" is attitude and treatment toward women by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d what is meant by "the best interests of women" is all best actions concerning women carried out by regional government and society, then the best interests of women must be the primary consideration.
Article 3 Sufficiently clear.
Article 4 ...
Article 4 Sufficiently clear.
Article 5 Sufficiently clear Article 6 Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear Article 8 Sufficiently clear Article 9 Sufficiently clear Article 10 Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear Article 12 Sufficiently clear Article 13 Sufficiently clear Article 14 Paragraph a

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 22- Which ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 23- What is meant by "adequate supporting facilities and infrastructure" is adjusted to the minimum service standards and standard operating procedures for repatriation and social reintegration that apply.
Letter b What is meant by "implementing officers or functional officers" includes health workers, psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers provided by relevant agencies or institutions.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Article 15 Sufficiently clear.
Article 16 Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.
Article 19 Sufficiently clear.
Article 20 Sufficiently clear.
Article 21 Sufficiently clear.
Article 22 Sufficiently clear.
Article 23 ...

REGENT OF EAST KUTAI
EAST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
- 24- Article 23 Sufficiently clear.
Article 24 Sufficiently clear Article 25 Sufficiently clear Article 26 Sufficiently clear Article 27 Sufficiently clear Article 28 Sufficiently clear