Whereas

REGENT OF MELAWI
PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MELAWI REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF MELAWI,
a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of acts of violence against women constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected, and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
c. that violence against women continues to increase, therefore protection efforts are required;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women from Acts of Violence;
Considering 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women)(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law...
4. Law Number 34 of 2003 concerning the Establishment of Melawi Regency and Sekadau Regency in West Kalimantan Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4344);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic Number 4976);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
10. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
11. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 44);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 56);
13. Regulation...
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Children Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 446);
With Mutual Approval REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF MELAWI REGENCY
And

REGENT OF MELAWI
DECIDES:
To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Melawi Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as the Element of Regional Government Organizer who leads the Implementation of Government Affairs that are the Authority of the Autonomous Region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Melawi.
4. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Melawi Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Women are human beings of female sex starting from babies, adolescents, adults up to the elderly.
7. Women with Disabilities are women who have self-limitations, which can be physical, cognitive, mental, sensory, emotional, developmental or some combination of these.
8. Elderly Women are women who have reached 60 years of age and above.
9. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social and psychological to the victim.
10. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
11. Victim...
women who experience misery and/or
11. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
12. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the regional government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women is about to occur or has occurred.
13. Service/handling is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that violence against the victim is occurring or has occurred.
14. Companion is a person or representative of an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling/therapy and/or advocacy.
15. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an institution or functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
16. Safe House is a residence for victims during the assistance process for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers.
17. Minimum Service Standards, hereinafter abbreviated as SPM, is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing 5 (five) types of services for women and children victims of violence, namely (1) Complaint Handling (2) Health Services (3) Social Rehabilitation (4) Law Enforcement and Legal Aid, and (5) Repatriation and Social Reintegration.
18. Complaint Handling is a series of actions taken by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women submitted by victims, families and the community.
19. Health Services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
20. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.
21. Law Enforcement is an action by officials authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
22. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal companions and advocacy to conduct the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return women victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
24. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment for victims.
25. Integrated Service Unit or abbreviated as UPT is a unified unit that organizes integrated service functions for women victims of violence.
26. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward.
27. Household...
actions that have
27. Household is husband, wife and children, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, care and guardianship and/or domestic workers who reside in that household.

BAB II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of Protection for Women victims of violence is based on: a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment

Article 3
The implementation of Protection for Women victims of violence aims to: a. prevent violence against women;
b. provide services/handling to victims; and
c. carry out empowerment for women victims of violence and vulnerable groups;
d. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE OF PROTECTION
Article 4
The Scope of Implementation of Protection for Women victims of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. service/handling;
c. empowerment;

Part One
Prevention

Article 5
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment;
(2) Prevention Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by means of;
a. establishing a working network;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a violence prevention system;
d. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence;
•• .i
e. providing education for women victims of violence;
f. through Communication, Information and Education (KIE) media.

Article 6
In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 5, prevention efforts are also carried out by family and/or closest relatives, community, educational institutions and customary institutions.

Second Part
Service/Handling

Article 7
(1) The Implementation of Services/Handling of victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from and/or to other service units in a networked manner.
(3) Further provisions regarding the development, mechanisms, and working relationships of integrated PPT networks as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Paragraph Service Forms

Article 8
Forms of service/handling for victims include:
a. complaint handling;
b. health/medical rehabilitation services;
c. social rehabilitation services;
d. law enforcement and legal aid services; and repatriation and social reintegration services;

Paragraph 2
Service Principles

Article 9
The implementation of Services/handling for victims is carried out with:
a. fast and precise;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. a sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality;

Third Part
Empowerment

Article 10
Forms of empowerment for women victims of violence include:
a. forming communities for women victims of violence;
b. job training;
c. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups;
d. capital assistance.

Article 11
Job training as referred to in Article 10 letter b includes: a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 12
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 10 letter c include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; and
b. business implementation assistance.

Article 13
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 10 letter d includes:
a. assistance for facilities and infrastructure; and
b. working capital/business capital assistance facilities

CHAPTER IV
VIOLENCE
Article 14
Violence against women consists of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;exploitation; and/or
e. other violence;

Article 15
Physical violence as referred to in Article 14 letter a includes acts that result in pain, wounds, injury or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting, and/or death.

Article 16
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 14 letter b includes acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering.

Article 17...
Article 17
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 14 letter c includes:
a. acts that are inappropriate or unwanted sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual relations with and/or others for commercial purposes
c. forced sexual relations with persons and/or for certain purposes.

Article 18
Neglect as referred to in Article 14 letter d includes:
a. acts that neglect women within the scope of their household, and/or
b. acts that result in economic dependence.

Article 19
Exploitation as referred to in Article 14 letter e includes:
a. actions that exploit women economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others.
b. actions with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 20
Other violence as referred to in Article 14 letter f includes: a. any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.
b. a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something against their own will.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 21
Every woman victim of violence has the right:
a. to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. to obtain physical, psychological and social health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by the victim of violence;
c. to obtain protection from family, community, Government and/or Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on the Determination of the Court for Protection and Guardianship;
d. to special handling accompanied by confidentiality of the victim;
e. to accompaniment by social workers and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services;
g. to determine her own decision;

BAB VI
RESPONSIBILITY OF GOVERNMENT AND INSTITUTIONS
First Section
Regional Government

Article 22
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to implement and provide and be responsible for protection efforts for women victims of violence in the form of:
a. establishing PPT;
b. policy formulation;
c. preparing planning and implementing programs and activities;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure; and
e. supervising the implementation of services to victims with minimum service standards.
(2) In the implementation of the obligations and responsibilities of Regional Governments as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Governments shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 23
The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment matters.

Second Part
Society and Family

Article 24
The community and family have the obligation and responsibility to:
a. prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women;
b. provide information and/or report acts of violence against women to the competent authorities;
c. provide protection to victims;
d. provide emergency assistance;
e. participate in the handling of victims of violence:

Third Part
Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 25
(1) Efforts to provide and organize Services/handling for victims are carried out in a networked manner.
(2) The network as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to: a. coordinate and synchronize the handling of PPT services; b. develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on violence. (3) The network as referred to in paragraph (2) carries out its duties and functions in accordance with the form of services as referred to in Article 8.

CHAPTER VII
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER
Article 26
(1) The PPT may be established by vertical agencies in the regional government, district/city government, and/or community institutions.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements from the Regional Police, SKPD responsible for Health, Education, Social Affairs, Community Empowerment, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as well as Community Social Institutions, which function to provide protection to women from acts of violence carried out in a networked manner.
(3) temporary services and protection in the form of a safe house (shelter) for victims.
(4) In the event that the PPT does not have a safe house as referred to in paragraph (3), then the victim shall be referred to a PPT that has a safe house.
(5) Further provisions regarding the Organizational Structure of the PPT shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
INFORMATION SYSTEM AND REPORTING
Article 27
(1) The SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment implements the information system and submits Reports on the implementation of women's protection to the Regent.
(2) Further provisions regarding the information system and reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 28
Funding for women's protection activities carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or other legitimate sources in accordance with the laws and regulations. & CHAPTER X...

CHAPTER X
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Z.am«pre"?:.I"hzz.,

Article 29
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection by:
a. forming family partners at the community level; in organizations
b. forming community-based women's protection units;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's rights;
d. undertaking preventive measures if indications of violence against women are found in the community;
e. providing first aid to victims; and
f. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against women occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and/or mass media.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 30
(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of women's protection.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a encompasses planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b encompasses planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control, and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted based on the provisions of laws and regulations periodically every 6 (six) months.

CHAPTER XII ...
.,.   ' . (

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Melawi Regency.
-@deKd/- Enacted in Nanga Pinoh on the date z,,pember 2014 }

REGENT OF MELAWI,
ly' PA.n Promulgated in Nanga Pinoh on date ?) December 2013 \ REGIONAL SECRETARY OF MELAWI REGENCY, Ivo TIt's MULYONO

MELAWI REGENCY YEAR 224J7 NUMBER I5
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION
WEST KALIMANTAN:(19) /(2o17) MELAWI REGENCY, PROVINCE

I. GENERAL
ELUCIDATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MELAWI REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Acts of violence against women constitute a violation of human rights therefore, their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women in Melawi Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades their degree and human dignity, it is necessary to establish a regional regulation on the protection of women.

The protection of women constitutes all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by giving consistent and systematic attention.

Existing laws and regulations or those related to the protection of women victims of violence have not yet regulated efforts to protect women in the regions, therefore institutional support and regulations at the regional level are needed that can guarantee its implementation.

This Regional Regulation regulates efforts to protect women specifically in the form of prevention, services/handling, and empowerment of women in Melawi Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article I
Number I Sufficiently clear Number 2 Number 3 Number 4 Number 5 Number 6 Number 7 Number 8 Number 9 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 10 ...
Number 10 Sufficiently clear Number 11 Sufficiently clear Number 12 Number 13 Number 14 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 15 Sufficiently clear Number 16 Sufficiently clear Number 17 Number 18 Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Number 19 . What is meant by efforts from the Promotive aspect is the effort to promote/socialize about acts of violence to the community, with the aim of increasing public awareness and sensitivity to the danger of violence that threatens women.
What is meant by efforts from the Preventive aspect is efforts that prioritize the prevention aspect with targets being communities that are vulnerable to becoming victims of violence and receiving its impact. Preventive efforts can be carried out through community empowerment in the form of training activities and others.
What is meant by efforts from the Curative aspect is efforts carried out in the form of handling victims of violence who require handling according to their needs, namely health rehabilitation handling if the victim suffers the impact of violence physically or psychologically, providing assistance and law enforcement for victims who require assistance and law enforcement and so forth.
What is meant by the Rehabilitative aspect is efforts carried out as an attempt to restore victims of violence both physically, psychologically and psychosocially.
Number 20 Sufficiently clear Number 21 Sufficiently clear Number 22 Sufficiently clear Number 23 Number 24 Number 25 Number 26 Number 27 Number 28 Number 29

Article 2
Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Paragraph a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of victims' rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of victims' basic rights.
Paragraph b What is meant by "justice" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access and welfare.
What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Paragraph c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Paragraph d What is meant by "best interests of victims" is all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, regional government, community, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, must prioritize the best interests of victims.
Paragraph e What is meant by "empowerment" is strengthening victims of violence to be able to work and operate independently after they have been restored and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3 ...
Article 3
Paragraph a Paragraph b Paragraph c Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear What is meant by women as a vulnerable group

Article 4
Article 5
Article 6
Article 7
Article 8
Article 9
Article 10  Article 11  Article 12  Article 13
Article 14  Article 15  Article 16  Article 17  Article 18
Article 19  Article 20
namely the elderly, persons with disabilities, the homeless, home-based workers, domestic workers, female heads of household, Indonesian migrant workers, former inmates of correctional institutions, and victims of disaster/conflict.
Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Letter a Threat of violence is any act unlawfully either directly or indirectly including through social media networks and communication devices. Letter b...

Article 21
Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity respected as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, questions, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning and messages whether data, facts or their explanations that can be seen, heard and read which are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f What is meant by "the right to obtain compensation" includes; repatriation, skills guarantee.
Letter g economic empowerment, health and education costs or What is meant by "the right to obtain social rehabilitation" includes; access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.
Letter h What is meant by "the right to obtain complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter i Letter j Sufficiently clear What is meant by "the right to obtain assistance" is among others; psychology, psychiatry and health experts

Article 22  Article 23  Article 24
clergy, lawyers and family members.
' Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear Sufficiently clear

Article 25  Article 26  Article 27  Article 28  Article 29  Article 30  Article 31  Article 32
Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear  Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MELAWI REGENCY NUMBER 183