REGIONAL REGULATION OF BONTANG CITY
NUMBER 9 OF 2012
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF BONTANG,
Considering : a. that women and children biologically and philosophically constitute a group vulnerable to acts of violence, both violence occurring within the household and that committed outside the household;
b. that protection of women and children victims of acts of violence is one aspect of the duties and responsibilities of the government in providing protection and services to the community;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Protection of Women and Children Victims of Acts of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 47 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Nunukan Regency, Malinau Regency, West Kutai Regency, East Kutai Regency and Bontang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3839) as amended by Law Number 7 of 2000 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 74 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3962);
3. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as last amended by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BONTANG CITY and

MAYOR OF BONTANG
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Bontang.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Head of Region is the Mayor of Bontang.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the Regional Apparatus of the Bontang City Government.
5. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
7. General Hospital is a service facility that provides basic and specialist medical services, medical support services, installation services and care services on an outpatient and inpatient basis.
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, or psychological to the victim.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
10. Service is an action that must be immediately taken to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or completed occurrence of violence against the victim.
11. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy in order to provide strengthening and recovery for victims of violence as stipulated in a decision of an authorized official.
12. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance for the self-strengthening of domestic violence victims to resolve the problems they face.
13. Victim Recovery is all actions to strengthen domestic violence victims to be more empowered, both physically and psychologically.
14. Recovery Implementation is all actions that include services and assistance to domestic violence victims.
15. Cooperation is a systematic and integrated method among recovery implementers in providing services to recover domestic violence victims.
16. Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
18. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
19. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so forth) and non-relatives (domestic helpers, drivers and so forth) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.
20. Household Scope is people who have family relations with persons as referred to in number 19 due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding relations, foster care, guardianship who reside in the household as well as people who work to assist the household and reside in that household.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of acts of violence is carried out based on:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. shelter;
d. non-discrimination;
e. respect and recognition of human rights;
f. best interests of women and children; and
g. victim protection.

Article 3
The purpose of protection for women and children victims of acts of violence is to provide protection and services for the best interests of victims that occur in the household and or public.

CHAPTER III
FORMS AND SCOPE OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Forms of Acts of Violence

Pasal 4
Forms of acts of violence against women and children consist of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence; or
d. domestic neglect.

Article 5
Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes acts that result in:
a. pain according to medical experts;
b. injury;
c. wounds or defects on a person's body;
d. miscarriage;
e. unconsciousness; and/or
f. causing death.

Article 6
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b includes acts that among others result in:
a. fear;
b. loss of self-confidence;
c. loss of ability to act; and/or d. feeling of helplessness.

Pasal 7
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes acts in the form of:
a. sexual harassment; and/or
b. forced sexual relations, in an unnatural manner or unwanted by one of the parties, for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8
(1) Household neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d constitutes an act of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household;
(2) Neglect as referred to in paragraph (1) also applies to any person who causes economic dependence such that the victim is under the control of that person, by means of:
a. limiting and/or prohibiting from engaging in decent work inside or outside the home;
b. not providing maintenance; or
c. eliminating access and control as well as participation with regard to economic resources.

Second Part
Scope of Acts of Violence

Article 9
(1) The scope of acts of violence against women and children includes:
a. acts of violence that occur within the household; and
b. acts of violence that occur outside the household.
(2) Acts of violence that occur within the household as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a occur within the household committed by:
a. husband or wife within a marriage;
b. those having blood family relations, marriage, customary relations, adoption; or
c. those working for others or living and residing with others.
(3) Acts of violence that occur outside the household as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b occur outside the household including:
a. harassment;
b. discrimination and violence in the workplace;
c. violence in conflict areas;
d. violence in mass media; and
e. human trafficking.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 10
Women and children victims of violence shall receive the following rights:
a. respect for their dignity as human beings;
b. health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced;
c. to determine their own decisions;
d. guarantee of their rights related to their status as wife, mother or child and member of the household as well as member of the community;
e. compensation;
f. complaint handling;
g. to receive protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling whether from individuals, groups or institutions both government and non-government;
h. to receive access and services at Government and private health service facilities;
i. to receive facilitation in the judicial process; and j. psychological and legal assistance.

Article 11
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 10, also obtain the following special rights:
a. respect and full utilization for survival, growth and development;
b. basic services, especially 12-year compulsory education;
c. equal protection;
d. freedom from various stigma; and
e. obtaining freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 12
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children victims of acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community; and
c. Family and/or parents.

Article 13
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 12 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the Government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing integrated services for women and children victims of acts of violence;
e. guaranteeing the implementation of protection for women and children victims of acts of violence by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victims;
f. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
g. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity;
h. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence;
i. opening the widest possible access to information for women and children victims of acts of violence.
(2) The implementation of obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be set forth in a Regional Action Plan containing programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of acts of violence;
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall become part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan to be subsequently used as a basis for SKPD in implementing protection for women and children victims of acts of violence;
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Article 14
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b shall be implemented in the form of community participation through:
a. prevention of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to the competent authorities;
c. assistance and aid in handling women and children victims of acts of violence;
d. efforts to provide protection and moral and/or material support to women and children victims of acts of violence.
(2) Provisions regarding the procedures for implementing community participation shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Article 15
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of acts of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 16
(1) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling;
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. increase the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. open accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, and improvement of social services;
c. open employment opportunities for women;
d. build community participation and concern towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. build and provide a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. build networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. open complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 17
In implementing efforts to prevent acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 16, shall be implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the field of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual matters; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

CHAPTER VII
SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Forms of Services

Article 19
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence include:
a. health/medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of the victim's physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico legal services constitute a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in the context of recovery from the victim's traumatic condition, by providing safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation;
d. provision of moral/mental support to restore self-confidence, strength of mental attitude and independence in facing and resolving problems befalling them;
e. provision of services and legal assistance to help victims undergo legal processes related to the violence cases they face; and
f. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Government;
(3) Provisions regarding procedures for services to women and children victims of acts of violence shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Article 20
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to provide complaint services for victims of acts of violence;
(2) The Regional Government must establish recovery houses or safe houses;
(3) Provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Second Part
Service Institutions

Article 21
(1) Services for victims of acts of violence shall be implemented by service institutions established by the Regional Government as well as non-governmental institutions;
(2) The provision of services by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by regional apparatus that have the main duties and functions of providing services in the fields of health and social welfare;
(3) The provision of services other than by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (2) may also be carried out by police agencies;
(4) The provision of services by non-governmental institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by community organizations engaged in advocacy and services for women and children victims of acts of violence.

Article 22
(1) Regional Government in providing protection services to women and children victims of violence through P2TP2A;
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.

Article 23
(1) The provision of services implemented by Regional Government as well as non-governmental institutions includes receiving complaints and providing assistance;
(2) In carrying out its duties, non-governmental service institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall coordinate and cooperate with P2TP2A established by the Regional Government.

Article 24
(1) The Regional Government facilitates temporary protection, legal protection and support directly or channels to third parties, whether the police, foundations, non-governmental organizations, or individuals for women and children victims of acts of violence;
(2) Protection and support as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out from the time a report is received, either from the victim or other parties or from the time it becomes known that an act of violence against women and children has occurred.

Article 25
The Regional Government is obligated to facilitate the provision of legal assistance both inside and outside the court, to undertake legal remedies at the request of victims.

Article 26
(1) Medical services provided to victims include the provision of visum et repertum, DNA examination, health examination, inpatient and outpatient care, as well as psychosocial and spiritual services;
(2) Services organized by P2TP2A must be carried out promptly in accordance with the needs of victims;
(3) The provision of medical services, counseling and reporting by P2TP2A is conducted free of charge.

Article 27
(1) Regional Government and or integrated service institutions for women and children victims of violence and community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations are obligated to conduct handling in a confidential manner;
(2) Confidential handling of cases of women and children victims of violence is conducted upon request of the applicant, companion and/or counselor;
(3) Handling of cases of women and children victims of violence may be reported by the Regional Government and/or service institutions for women and children victims of violence, and community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations if the victim and/or companion has given written permission.

Article 28
(1) The Regional Government provides a safe house that is kept confidential with all its facilities, the financing of which is charged to the APBD;
(2) Services at the safe house are provided to victims by fulfilling the following requirements:
a. filling out an identity form and fulfillment of victim needs;
b. signing an agreement letter on the confidentiality of the safe house location; and
c. complying with the provisions in place at the safe house.
(3) Services provided at the safe house include counseling, empowerment activities and victim independence;
(4) Service facilities at the safe house are also provided for child victims according to their needs;
(5) Further provisions regarding services at the safe house are stipulated in the Safe House Standard Operating Procedures.

Article 29
(1) The Regional Government facilitates alternative confidential accommodation needed for victims who cannot be accommodated in safe houses or victims who feel psychologically uncomfortable staying in safe houses with all their facilities;
(2) The alternative accommodation for victims must be clear and can be monitored by the Regional Government and companions.

Third Part
Service Mechanism

Article 30
(1) Integrated services for women and children victims of acts of violence are carried out based on:
a. the initiative of the Regional Government itself or technically by related SKPD either directly or indirectly; or
b. upon request and complaint of the victim, applicant family companion, other persons, community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations who have knowledge.
(2) Integrated services carried out by P2TP2A are conducted based on referrals from service institutions or based on complaints from victims or their families;
(3) Provisions regarding procedures and procedures for obtaining P2TP2A services are set forth in the Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
REHABILITATION AND REINTEGRATION
Article 31
(1) Every woman and child victim of acts of violence has the right to obtain rehabilitation both physical and psychological;
(2) Rehabilitation facilitation services include counseling services, medical psychological, legal assistance and skills training or alternative education;
(3) Every woman and child victim of acts of violence who has recovered both physically and psychologically has the right to be integrated or returned to their family, community and educational institutions for those still having student status;
(4) Fulfillment of the integration rights of women and child victims of acts of violence is carried out through cooperation and coordination among all related SKPD, vertical agencies in the region, community organizations, non-governmental organizations and family parties;
(5) Further provisions regarding the implementation of rehabilitation and reintegration are regulated in the Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF ASSISTANCE
Article 32
(1) Assistance shall be carried out by persons or institutions that have the expertise to conduct counseling, therapy, and advocacy for the purpose of strengthening and recovery of victims of violence;
(2) Assistance carried out by persons or institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) must coordinate with P2TP2A.

CHAPTER X
HANDLING OF CHILDREN IN CONTACT WITH THE LAW
Article 33
Handling of children in contact with the law includes: a. children as perpetrators;
b. children as victims; and
c. children as witnesses of criminal acts.

Article 34
Treatment of children as perpetrators of criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter a, is as follows:
a. investigators undertake efforts to handle cases of children in conflict with the law with a restorative justice approach for the best interests of the child and must involve the Correctional Center, parents and/or families of victims and perpetrators of criminal acts as well as local community figures;
b. the correctional center must prepare a correctional research report;
c. in the event that a child is detained, their placement shall be separated from adult detainees or placed in a detention house specifically for children;
d. the investigation process and submission of case files to the Public Prosecutor shall be carried out immediately by including the Community Supervisor of the Correctional Center;
e. in the event that the Public Prosecutor is of the opinion that based on the results of the investigation and the results of community research, prosecution can be carried out by means of a restorative justice approach, then the Public Prosecutor shall immediately submit the case files to the District Court;
f. after receiving the submission from the Public Prosecutor, the Judge shall immediately conduct a child trial with restorative justice approach proceedings;
g. if the court decision is in the form of an action, then the Correctional Center must conduct guidance and supervision;
h. guidance, coaching and care at the Correctional Center, Detention House and Correctional Institution shall be carried out in an integrated manner by involving relevant agencies; and
i. in the event that the court decision hands over the child in conflict with the law to the Social Service, then the Social Service must accept and prepare facilities and infrastructure in the context of recovery and social rehabilitation of the child.

Article 35
Treatment of children as victims of criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter b, is as follows:
a. immediately after receiving a report from the victim of a criminal act, the investigator conducts an initial interview;
b. in conducting the interview, the investigator pays attention to the situation and condition of the victim;
c. if the victim requires further treatment, after the initial interview the victim may be treated or placed in a special (temporary) room for other necessary services such as medical care, psychological care or examination in the context of the inquiry and investigation process; and
d. after the victim has recovered and all services including the legal process are completed, the victim may be returned home or placed in a children's social protection home, safe house, trauma center, for social and mental rehabilitation.

Article 36
Treatment of children as witnesses to criminal acts as referred to in Article 33 letter c, is as follows:
a. in the event that a child reports as a witness, the police shall immediately contact the parents or guardian of the child, unless the parents or guardian of the child in question are involved or suspected as perpetrators;
b. make a record of the identity of the referring party, data concerning the child, chronology of events;
c. request the parent or guardian trusted by the child, to accompany the child when the child provides testimony;
d. in the event that a child provides testimony in the investigation process, it shall be conducted in a special and closed room accompanied by the parent/guardian with due regard to the age, intellectual level, and importance of the child's testimony;
e. the child has the right to obtain protection from witness and victim protection institutions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. if medical treatment is required, the child shall be referred to the nearest hospital;
g. at every stage of examination up to examination in court, the child as a witness must be provided with an accompanying person.

CHAPTER XI
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 37
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. other Regency/City Governments; and/or
d. non-governmental institutions.
(2) The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be followed up in accordance with applicable law, covering:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. provision of evidence and witnesses;
c. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence; and
d. repatriation and social reintegration.
(3) The cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement.

Second Part
Partnership

Article 38
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for children victims of acts of violence; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER XII
FUNDING
Article 39
(1) Funds for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence managed by P2TP2A must be allocated in the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
(2) In addition to the budget source as referred to in paragraph (1), funds for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence may also be sourced from other legitimate and non-binding budgets.

CHAPTER XIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 40
(1) Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. service guidelines and standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of protection for women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/P2TP2A and the community.

Article 41
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of acts of violence;
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with the principles of professionalism, transparency and accountability.

Article 42
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence organized by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 43
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the regional gazette Enacted in Bontang on the date of 28 June 2012

MAYOR OF BONTANG,
ADI DARMA
Promulgated in Bontang on the date of June 28, 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BONTANG CITY
ASMUDIN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BONTANG CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 9