MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI
PROVINCE OF WEST SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI,

Considering : a. that in order to guarantee and protect the rights of women and children so that they can participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence, discrimination and violations, protection efforts need to be undertaken;
b. that in order for protection efforts for women and children to obtain optimal results, concrete action from the regional government and community participation is necessary;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 9 Year 1956 concerning the Establishment of Large City Autonomous Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 20);
3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);
5. Law Number 8 Year 1981 concerning Criminal Procedure Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209);
6. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29);
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
9. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 11, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
14. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Improvement of Women's Quality of Life;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 15 Year 2010 concerning General Guidelines for Handling Children in Conflict with the Law;
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Handling of Child Victims of Violence;
21. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);
22. Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 6 Year 2000 concerning Civil Servant Investigators (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2000 Number 7);
23. Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 11 Year 2008 concerning Establishment of Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions of Bukittinggi City (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2008 Number 11), as amended by Regional Regulation of Bukittinggi City Number 9 Year 2013 (Regional Gazette of Bukittinggi City Year 2013 Number 9).

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
And

MAYOR OF BUKITTINGGI
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. Region is the City of Bukittinggi.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the regional government and the regional house of representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance duties with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Bukittinggi.
5. Regional House of Representatives of the City of Bukittinggi, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration.
6. Regional Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is one that has authority in the field of women's empowerment and family planning.
7. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
8. Customs are eternal patterns of behavior passed down from one generation to another generation as heritage so that they are strongly integrated with community behavior patterns.
9. Non-Governmental Organization, hereinafter abbreviated as LSM, is an organization/institution formed by citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily of their own will and interested in and engaged in the field of social welfare business as a manifestation of community participation in improving the standard of living and welfare of the community with emphasis on voluntary service.
10. Social Organization is an institution/foundation/social association formed by the community, whether legally incorporated or not, which functions as a means of community participation in implementing social welfare efforts.
11. Empowerment is a process, method and action of providing power and strength so that a person is able to explore potential and positive energy and provide an impact on a better quality of life.
12. Woman is every person who is born, recognized by society and registered as a woman or female.
13. Protection of Women is all efforts to guarantee and protect women's rights so that they can live healthily, develop themselves and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from neglect, violence and discrimination whether in the form of preventive, repressive or post-remedial protection (assistance and treatment).
14. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
15. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their child(ren), or father and his child(ren), or mother and her child(ren).
17. Household Scope is husband, wife and child(ren), people who have family relations with the husband, wife and child(ren), whether due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, foster care, and guardianship who reside in the household, and/or people who work to help the household and reside in that household.
18. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
19. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent toward a child.
20. Neglected Child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
21. Child with Disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles that disrupt his/her growth and development naturally.
22. Toddler is a child aged 1 (one) to 5 (five) years, in the early stage of human development.
23. School-Age Child is a child aged 6 (six) to 18 (eighteen) years.
24. Delinquent Child is a child who behaves deviating from community norms, harming/endangering his/her own health/safety, disturbing the peace and order of the community and family and community life, but still below the category that can be prosecuted by law/court.
25. Child Who is a Victim of Violence is a child who receives mistreatment such as being abused, humiliated physically, mentally and socially as a child.
26. Child in Conflict with the Law is a child who is in conflict with the law and a child who is a victim of a criminal act.
27. Economically Exploited Child is a child who is forced and deceived to be employed by parents or other people without being paid or being paid.
28. Child Who is a Victim of Narcotics Abuse is a child who suffers from dependence on narcotics caused by narcotics abuse either by his/her own will or due to encouragement or coercion by others.
29. Child Trafficking is a criminal act or action that meets one or more elements of recruitment, transfer, handover of a child using violence or threat of violence, fraud, kidnapping, confinement, abuse of power, exploitation of a position of vulnerability or debt bondage for the purpose of and/or resulting in exploiting the child.
30. Social Work Profession is a profession based on a framework of knowledge, values and technical skills and can be used as a vehicle in implementing social welfare efforts.
31. Child Care Center, hereinafter abbreviated as TPA, is a forum for guidance and welfare services for children aged 0-5 years whose parents do not have the ability and opportunity in child care, which is possible for playgroup services.
32. Playgroup is a forum for child welfare efforts prioritizing play activities and organizing pre-school education for children aged 3 years until entering basic education.
33. Marriage is a physical and spiritual bond between a man and a woman as husband and wife with the aim of forming a happy and eternal family (household) based on Belief in the One and Only God.
34. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
35. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
36. Violence Against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women, physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
37. Violence Against Children is acts of physical violence, sexual violence, emotional abuse and neglect of children as well as acts of exploitation and discrimination against children that make children become physically and/or psychologically ill, depressed, emotionally underdeveloped, feel excluded and lose self-confidence.
38. Acts of Domestic Violence are any actions against a person, especially women, that result in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the household scope.
39. Victim of Domestic Violence is a person who experiences violence and/or threat of violence within the household scope.
40. Divorce is the release of the marriage bond from the husband's side by uttering a specific phrase such as "I divorce you".
41. Integrated Service Center for Women and Child Empowerment Saayun Salangkah, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A Saayun Salangkah, is one form of service facility for women and children in efforts to fulfill information and needs in the fields of education, health, economy, politics and law, protection and prevention of acts of violence and trafficking against women and children in the City of Bukittinggi.
42. Child-Friendly City, hereinafter abbreviated as KLA, is a city that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of government, community and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
43. Child-Friendly City Task Force, hereinafter abbreviated as Gugus Tugas KLA, is a coordinative institution at the city level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize KLA.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of Protection of Women and Children is based on: (1) Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
(2) Basic principles of children's rights, including non-discrimination, the best interests of the child, the right to life, survival and development, and respect for the views of the child.
(3) Universal teachings which state that women and children are a very important part in the context of the sustainability of a nation, not only viewed in religious principles, but in their implementation constitute human resources in the development of a nation.
(4) The outlook on life and philosophy of Minangkabau customs as set forth in the teachings of Adat Basandi Syarak, Syarak Basandi Kitabullah; Syarak Mangato Adat Mamakai, Alam Takambang Jadi Guru, and Anak dipangku kamanakan dibimbiang, urang kampuang dipatenggangkan.

Article 3
The objectives of this Regional Regulation are:
a. To protect women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate human rights.
b. To provide clear responsibility for the government, community, family, ninik mamak and parents towards the rights of children and women.
c. To provide clear boundaries regarding the role of mamak towards kemenakan and parents towards children.
d. To protect women and children from acts of violence, neglect, exploitation, and human trafficking as well as the rights of women in the event of divorce.
e. To contribute to the realization of gender equality and justice in various activities as well as to improve the welfare of women and children in the Region.
f. To organize the structure and institutions of government and customary institutions in efforts to protect women and children.
g. As a guideline in making policies for the Regional Government and social institutions in matters related to the protection of women and children in the Region.
h. To protect women and children domiciled in the Region from actions that violate their human rights.
i. To provide guidance on the role of the Regional Government, community, parents and other parties involved with the interests of women and children.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
Rights and Obligations of Women

Article 4
Every woman has the right to:
a. Obtain protection from discrimination, exploitation (economic and social), neglect, cruelty, violence, abuse (physical, psychological, and sexual), injustice and other wrongful treatment.
b. Obtain equal opportunities and rights with men as human beings, in order to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of development.
c. For women workers:
1. obtain leave/rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months before the time of childbirth and 1.5 (one and a half) months after childbirth according to the calculation of an obstetrician or midwife, while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
2. obtain leave/rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months in the event of a miscarriage while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations;
3. obtain appropriate opportunities to provide breast milk to her child if this must be done during working hours, while still receiving wages or salary in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
d. Every woman who is married has the right to receive material support and spiritual support from her husband.
e. Every woman who is left by her husband due to a divorce process must be given material support by her husband until there is a court decision in accordance with laws and regulations.
f. Every woman has the right to obtain decent work in accordance with her dignity, honor and nature.
g. Obtain knowledge and skills that are useful for improving self-quality and family welfare.

Article 5
Every woman has the obligation to:
a. Mutually respect, mutually love and help each other with all family members and relatives.
b. Manage the household especially as a good housewife in accordance with local customs and her capabilities.
c. Respect her husband and obey her husband insofar as it does not conflict with religious values and customs.
d. Care for and educate children in accordance with religious values and customary norms.
e. Increase knowledge and skills that are beneficial for the family and society.
f. Comply with religious values and customary norms.

Second Part
Rights and Obligations of the Child

Article 6
Every child has the right:
a. To live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and worth, and to receive protection from acts of violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect.
b. To a name as personal identity and citizenship status.
c. To worship according to their religion, to think and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age, under the guidance of parents.
d. To know their parents, to be cared for and raised by their own parents.
e. In the event that for any reason the parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development, or the child is in a state of neglect, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by other persons in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.
f. To obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs.
g. To obtain education and instruction in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents.
h. To receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.
i. To receive special and extraordinary education for children with disabilities and children who have excellence.
j. To express and have their opinions heard, to receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with the values of decency and propriety.
k. To rest and utilize leisure time, to associate with peers, to play, to recreate, and to create in accordance with their interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development.
l. To obtain rehabilitation, social assistance and restoration of social welfare standards for children with disabilities.
m. To receive protection from treatment during the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care, from discriminatory treatment, exploitation, whether economic or sexual, neglect, cruelty, violence, and abuse, injustice and other mistreatment.
n. To be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules showing that the separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration.
o. In the event of separation between the child and their parents, the child still has the right to:
1. meet directly and maintain personal contact regularly with both parents;
2. receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both parents in accordance with their abilities, talents and interests;
3. obtain financial support for living from both parents; and
4. obtain other children's rights.
p. To obtain protection from abuse in political activities, involvement in armed conflicts, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence, involvement in warfare and sexual crimes.
q. To obtain protection from being targets of persecution, torture or imposition of punishment or inhuman sanctions.
r. To obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
s. Every child who is deprived of their freedom has the right to:
1. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
2. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal remedies; and
3. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a closed session to the public.
t. Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.
u. To receive legal assistance and other assistance if they become a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act.

Article 7
Every child has the obligation to:
a. Respect parents, guardians and teachers.
b. Love family, society and care for friends. c. Love the Homeland, Nation, and State.
d. Perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their respective religion.
e. Practice noble ethics and morals.
f. Comply with all provisions that are considered capable of damaging themselves and their future.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN Article 8 The Regional Government is responsible for the implementation of protection of women and children actively.

Article 9
Protection of women includes:
a. Conducting socialization, education and anti-violence against women campaigns by actively involving all Regional Work Unit Apparatus, work partners and the community.
b. Ensuring gender mainstreaming programs in every Regional Work Unit Apparatus, to guarantee equality between men and women, which is reflected in the Budget Plan of the Regional Work Unit Apparatus.
c. Conducting early detection of cases of violence against women.
d. Providing service facilities for victims of violence against women, both services for physical victims and psychological services for victims, through improvement of special facilities and infrastructure at Hospitals and at P2TP2A.
e. Requiring all Hospitals to be willing to accept women victims of violence for visum and to undergo health care.
f. Granting women's rights in accordance with their dignity and worth as women.
g. Protecting women workers from acts of discrimination, exploitation and violence.
h. Requiring the provision of special infrastructure for women according to criteria, in every government building, private office and other public facilities.
i. Requiring the provision of lactation room facilities for government buildings that provide public services and other public facility places such as malls, supermarkets, doctor's practice places and the like.

Article 10
(1) Protection of children starts from the womb until the age of 18 (eighteen) years.
(2) Protection of children in the womb, infants and toddlers includes:
a. protection of children in the womb, including ensuring children are born in a healthy condition, to reduce maternal mortality rates and reduce child mortality rates;
b. ensuring every child is born with medical processes in accordance with SOPs from the Ministry of Health;
c. ensuring every child after birth, is conducted with religious guidance processes adhered to by their parents;
d. provision of complete immunization facilities both at posyandu, puskesmas or government hospitals;
e. improvement of quality and competence of cadres at Posyandu, to ensure correct procedures in order to guarantee the health of mothers and children including the immunization process;
f. provision of proper facilities for every posyandu and Bina Keluarga Balita (BKB) in every kelurahan;
g. ensuring the quality of knowledge of posyandu cadres and bina keluarga balita cadres in accordance with government standards;
h. provision of education to the community about becoming great parents, to ensure child health, both at posyandu, bina keluarga balita together with government and community work partners;
i. provision of playgrounds and childcare facilities managed by local government or organizations under the auspices of the Regional Government;
j. provision of Breastfeeding Corners in offices that have female workers; and
k. provision of attention and affection from the family.
(3) Protection for school-age children:
a. prohibiting acts of bullying against children at school;
b. ensuring there are no acts of oppression (bullying) between children, teachers to children, parents to children and community to children whether at school, at home or in the midst of the community;
c. providing education to schools, families and the community about child-friendly schools;
d. requiring every school at all levels to meet child-friendly school criteria;
e. receiving full attention and affection from family and community;
f. receiving religious guidance and local customs/culture including sumbang 12 (dua baleh);
g. receiving compulsory education of twelve years;
h. providing scholarship programs for underprivileged children and children with achievements;
i. providing supporting facilities for extracurricular activities such as for sports subjects, arts and other local content as well as activity supervising teachers; and
j. prohibiting school children from being at internet cafes during school hours and after 18.00 WIB.
(4) Every person and/or any party is obligated to protect school-age children from acts of violence in the family, school and community environment.
(5) Protection of neglected children:
a. local government, NGOs/Social organizations and the community are obligated to provide protection for neglected children domiciled in the Region in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. local government ensures children do not live on the streets;
c. protection for neglected children whose parents do not have the ability and/or commit neglect as well as children who do not have parents, which is implemented through institutional and non-institutional services by local government and the community;
d. the form of institutional services as referred to in letter (c), is implemented in a family atmosphere and in the child's nearest environment managed by the community and in the form of an institution;
e. the form of non-institutional services as referred to in letter (c) is implemented in a family atmosphere managed by the community and not in the form of an institution; and
f. community-owned institutions as referred to in letter (d) must meet requirements in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN Article 11 The Regional Government together with the community is obligated and responsible to provide support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of protection of women and children.

Article 12
The Regional Government guarantees the protection, care, and welfare of children by taking into account their rights and obligations.

Article 13
Regional Government together with the community and business sector shall fulfill facilities and infrastructure in accordance with child-friendly city indicators.

Article 14
Family, caregivers, institutions, and customary institutions have the right to take action toward women and children in the context of implementing education, embracing religion, skills development, moral and ethical development, as well as entrepreneurship development for women and children in accordance with religious and customary norms.

Article 15
Families, caregivers, institutions and customary institutions are obligated to play an active role in providing the rights of women and children in accordance with religious and customary norms as well as applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
SYSTEM FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN Article 16 (1) The protection of women and children shall be implemented by upholding the universal values set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(2) Bureaucratic limitations shall not obstruct efforts to protect women and children.
(3) Every parent, adoptive parent, guardian, teaching/educational personnel, expert personnel, caregiver at orphanages, and leader members of customary law communities shall be obligated to fulfill their obligations regarding the rights of children under their care and guidance.
(4) Every head of family, head of clan, head of tribe, community leader, or other designation for leaders of customary law communities shall be obligated to fulfill their obligations toward the women within their family, clan and tribe.

Article 17
(1) Protection of women and children is carried out in the form of:
a. preventive;
b. repressive; and
c. postremedial protection.
(2) Preventive protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is implemented through socialization and guidance to parents, heads of families, housewives, guardians, teaching/educational staff, experts, caregivers (owners and officers of orphanages) and customary law communities regarding their obligations in the protection of women and children.
(3) Repressive protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is implemented through law enforcement by law enforcers to establish and implement legal sanctions against persons who commit violations of the rights of certain children and women.
(4) Postremedial protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is implemented through efforts of assistance in law enforcement by lawyers, psychological guidance by psychologists and or religious counselors, and placement of victims in safe houses.

Article 18
Protection of women and children must be carried out by parents, family, relatives, guardians, caregivers, teachers, Regional Government, and customary law communities in the Region.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIALIZATION ON THE PROTECTION
OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 19
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct socialization and education regarding the protection of women and children by involving all elements of customary stakeholders, as well as universities and other community organizations in the Region.
(2) Socialization and education as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted through the implementation of legal counseling, either through lecture methods, discussions, pamphlets, films, drama, randai, saluang, rabab, and other traditional arts.
(3) Financing of programs and activities for socialization and education on the protection of women and children shall be budgeted in the Regional Budget annually in accordance with the regional financial capacity and laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION AGAINST
VIOLATIONS OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Article 20
(1) Violations of women's rights, whether in the form of physical, psychological, discriminatory treatment, and exploitation must receive legal protection and be prosecuted legally.
(2) In addition to the application of state law as referred to in paragraph (1), perpetrators of violations of women's rights may be subject to sanctions according to customary law that lives and develops in the midst of society.

Article 21
(1) If parents or guardians feel unable or neglect their obligations in child care, blood relatives, clan members or tribe members may submit an application to the court in their legal jurisdiction covering the area of the child's residence to revoke custody rights from the parents or former guardian and establish the applicant as the new guardian, either as foster parents or as adoptive parents.
(2) If parents, relatives, clan, tribe, paruik or guardians neglect their obligations in the care and protection of a child, upon report from the community, an orphanage may submit an application to the court whose legal jurisdiction covers the child's place of residence to revoke the custody authority of the former parents or guardian and appoint the orphanage concerned as the foster guardian or new adoptive parents.
(3) The new guardian or parents, whether in the form of individuals or an orphanage that is appointed must have a religion that corresponds with the religion of the child's parents.
(4) If an abandoned child's parents' religion is not known, then the child shall be cared for by a person or social institution based on the religion of the majority of the local population.
(5) The appointment of new foster parents or adoptive parents does not sever legal relations with the biological parents and all their relatives.
(6) Parents whose custody authority has been revoked over a child, still have the obligation to bear the costs of their child's care.

Article 22
(1) Violations of children's rights, whether in physical form, psychological, discriminatory treatment, and exploitation must receive legal protection and be prosecuted legally.
(2) In addition to the enforcement of state law as referred to in paragraph (1), perpetrators of violations of women's rights may be subject to sanctions according to customary law that lives and develops in the midst of society.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF HANDLING VICTIMS OF VIOLATIONS OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS

Article 23
(1) Services for Handling Complaints of violations of women's and children's rights are implemented by P2TP2A, PPA Units at Polres, Puskesmas, Government Hospitals, and Legal Aid Institutions.
(2) P2TP2A is established by the Regional Government.
(3) The Management of P2TP2A is formed by Decree of the Mayor with a management period of 2 (two) years.
(4) In carrying out its main duties and functions, P2TP2A is financed by APBD or other legitimate sources.
(5) Complaint Handling Services are conducted in the form of:
a. the reporter (victim or family, community and/or institution) comes directly, through telephone and/or letter to report acts of violence;
b. the reporter is referred by NGOs, social organizations, the community or mass media; and
c. in certain cases officers may visit the victim (reporter) directly.

Article 24
(1) Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violations of women's and children's rights shall be accompanied by a lawyer provided by the regional government in the context of case handling.
(2) The costs of accompaniment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be budgeted in the APBD.

Article 25
Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violations of women's and children's rights shall receive free medical services at Community Health Centers, government hospitals.

Article 26
Every woman or child who becomes a victim of violation of women's and children's rights in the context of rehabilitation shall be accompanied by a psychologist and/or religious counselor at the expense of the government.

Article 27
(1) Every person who knows that a violation of the rights of women and children has occurred is obligated to report to law enforcement authorities regarding the occurrence of such violation.
(2) Every person, blood relatives, sekaum, saparuik, sesuku, sekampung, or se-nagari is obligated to report to law enforcement authorities if they know that a violation of the rights of women and children has occurred.

CHAPTER X
CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY
Article 28
(1) To realize the fulfillment of children's rights in an integrated and systematic manner from all sectors on a sustainable basis, it shall be carried out through the CFC development policy.
(2) The fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 29
(1) The policy for the development of KLA contains:
a. the concept of KLA;
b. children's rights; and
c. the approach to KLA development.
(2) The concept of KLA as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, includes:
a. definition;
b. objectives;
c. strategy; and
d. the role of the parties.
(3) The approach to KLA development as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c and paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 30
(1) The policy for the development of KLA is directed towards the fulfillment of children's rights which are divided into 5 (five) groups.
(2) The fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education and child-friendly schools, use of leisure time, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.
(3) The fulfillment of children's rights as referred to in paragraph (2), its mechanism and implementation shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 31
(1) In order to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of CFC policy in the Region, a CFC Task Force shall be established.
(2) The implementation of CFC policy as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Mayor's Decree.
(3) The CFC Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall have the following main duties:
a. coordinating the implementation of policy and development of CFC;
b. determining the tasks of the Task Force members;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication of information and education on CFC policy;
d. collecting baseline data;
e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
f. disseminating baseline data;
g. determining the focus and priority of programs in realizing CFC, which are adjusted to regional potential;
h. formulating a 5 (five) year regional action plan for CFC and work mechanisms; and
i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once every 1 (one) year.
(4) The membership of the CFC Task Force shall be stipulated by Mayor's Decree.

Article 32
(1) To assist the smooth implementation of the tasks of the KLA Task Force, a Secretariat is established.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1), has the duty to provide technical and administrative support to the KLA Task Force.
(3) The KLA Task Force is domiciled in the SKPD that oversees the affairs of women's empowerment, family planning and child protection.
(4) The establishment and membership of the KLA Task Force shall be determined by Mayor's Decree.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 33
The Mayor Regulation which constitutes the implementation of this Regional Regulation, shall be stipulated no later than 3 (three) months calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 34
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of the City of Bukittinggi.
Enacted in Bukittinggi on 30 May 2015

HEAD OF THE REGIONAL CIVIL SERVICE AGENCY
BUKITTINGGI CITY,

signed,

ISMET AMZIS
Promulgated in Bukittinggi on the date of 1 June 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BUKITTINGGI CITY,
sgd,

# YUEN KARNOVA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUKITTINGGI CITY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 4
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE: (4/2015)

ELUCIDATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUKITTINGGI CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The protection of women and children, until now, remains something that is widely discussed globally. There are still many, even in the most developed countries, violations of the rights of women and children continue to occur to this very moment. The understanding or view of some communities that see women and children as parties of lower status, or under the domination of men, until now still cannot be completely eliminated.

Recognizing this, in line with national development priorities, the Regional Government of Bukittinggi strives to produce local policies formulated within the framework of regional regulations, a guideline or reference for the empowerment and protection of women and children in a more institutionalized manner.

The objectives of formulating this Draft Regional Regulation are as follows:
1. To protect women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate basic human rights.
2. To provide clear responsibility for the government, community, family, ninik mamak, and parents toward the rights of children and women.
3. To provide clear boundaries regarding the role of mamak toward kemenakan and parents toward children.
4. To protect women and children from acts of violence, neglect, exploitation, and human trafficking as well as the rights of women in the event of divorce.
5. To contribute to the realization of gender equality and justice in various activities and to improve the welfare of women and children in Bukittinggi City.
6. To organize the structure and institutions of government and customary institutions in efforts to protect women and children.
7. As a guideline in making policies for the Regional Government and social institutions in matters related to the protection of women and children in Bukittinggi City.
8. To protect women and children domiciled in Bukittinggi City from actions that violate their basic rights.
9. To provide guidance on the role of the Regional Government, community, parents and other parties concerned with the interests of women and children.

With the presence of this Regional Regulation as a part of the national legal system concerning the protection and empowerment of women and children, all forms of violations of their rights such as being neglected, exploited, discriminated against and even frequently experiencing domestic violence (KDRT), low quality of life, inability to contribute to the progress of development, can be institutionally eliminated and eradicated in our region.

It can be affirmed that this Regional Regulation will later establish the basic rules regarding the authority, rights and obligations of the government, community and elements concerned with children and women, by making local wisdom, customary values and the Minangkabau cultural worldview toward women and children as the foundation of the main philosophy, which can simply be expressed through customary sayings or expressions such as "bundo kanduang limpapeh rumah nan gadang", and "anak dipangku kemenakan dibimbing".

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE CITY OF BUKITTINGGI NUMBER 4