SUBULUSSALAM CITY
QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY NUMBER 20 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
BISMILLAHIRRAHMANIRRAHIM
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MOST GRACIOUS, THE MOST MERCIFUL
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY ALLAH
THE MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM,

Considering : a. that women have a strategic role in development so that the improvement of women's quality of life needs to receive recognition in accordance with local wisdom and the guidance of Islamic Sharia;

b. that based on the mandate of Qanun Number 6 Year 2009 concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection Article 4 and 5 which regulates the scope of empowerment and protection, the protection of women becomes the authority of the District City Government;

c. that in reality, the quality of life of women is still low and vulnerable to threats of violence, persecution, torture, domestic violence, trafficking in women, exploitation and discrimination against women which need to be immediately stopped by providing protection in accordance with human dignity and worth;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, it is necessary to establish a Qanun of Subulussalam City concerning Women's Empowerment;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 23 Year 2002 Concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

3. Law Number 11 Year 2006 concerning the Governance of Aceh (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 62, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4633);

4. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 Year 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 927).

With Mutual Approval

CITY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SUBULUSSALAM
MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM
DECIDES:
To Establish : QANUN

CITY
OF SUBULUSSALAM
REGARDING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Qanun, what is meant by: 1. City is the City of Subulussalam.
2. City Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Subulussalam.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRK in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Revenue and Expenditure Budget of the City of Subulussalam hereinafter referred to as the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget abbreviated as APBK is the annual financial plan of the City Government which is discussed and jointly approved by the Mayor and DPRK and stipulated by Qanun.
6. Medium-Term Development Plan of the City hereinafter abbreviated as RPJMK is a planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
7. Women are adult humans of female sex and persons recognized by law as women.
8. Women with disabilities are persons who have not been able to accommodate with their surrounding environment due to having disorders, activity limitations resulting in participation restrictions.
9. Women's rights are all rights possessed by every woman which are human rights. 10. Empowerment is an effort to increase the ability of women to obtain access and control over all resources in all aspects of life.
11. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and guarantees for women's rights in all aspects of life.
12. Victims are women who experience threats of violence and or violence inside and or outside the household and or become objects of trafficking/exploitation, and or discrimination in all forms and aspects.
13. Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty, whether within or outside the scope of the household.
14. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or other fields by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
15. Society is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and / or community organizations. 16. Community Participation is the involvement of the community in the process of identifying problems and potentials that exist in the community, selection and decision-making about alternative solutions to address problems, implementation of efforts to overcome problems, involvement in the process of evaluating changes that occur.
17. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and / or child.
18. Public sphere is in the area or region of the community or women who play a role outside the home.
19. Services are immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
22. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women's and Children's Empowerment, Safe House, Children's Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
23. UPTD PPA is a technical and integrated service unit in handling women and children victims of violence.

Article 2
Women's empowerment is implemented based on the principles of
a. respect for the values of Islamic sharia and Acehnese customs;
b. legal certainty;
c. public interest;
d. orderly governance administration;
e. respect for human rights;
f. justice and gender equality as well as inclusion; g. professionalism, accountability and transparency; h. non-discrimination; and
i. protection and fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 3
Women's empowerment has the following objectives:
a. to recognize the existence of equal rights under the law so as to increase women's participation in development stages;
b. to improve the quality of life of women so that they are able to play a balanced role with men in various relevant aspects of life;
c. to provide guarantees to women to be able to fulfill their rights as human beings in all aspects of life;
d. to provide a sense of security to women in all aspects of life; and
e. to serve as a guideline for the Government of Subulussalam City in carrying out empowerment
f. and protection of women.

Article 4
(1) Activities for the empowerment and protection of women are carried out and coordinated by the Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Coordination as referred to in is implemented together with agencies, offices, verse (1) educational institutions, the business sector and community organizations related to the empowerment and protection of women.

Article 5
(1) For the implementation of women's empowerment and protection, planning and supervision are provided with a budget in the Subulussalam City Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBK).
(2) All budgets for women's empowerment and protection are coordinated by the Regional Apparatus Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of women's empowerment and protection.

Article 6
The empowerment of women is based on two pillars consisting of:
a. Protection
b. Empowerment

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 7
(1) Every woman has basic rights as a human being that must be protected, advanced, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Matters related to reproduction and nature, do not prevent women from obtaining their rights in the empowerment and protection of women.

Article 8
The rights of women as referred to in article 7 paragraph (1) include:
a. Women obtain equal rights and obligations in life within marriage and family, both as parents to their children, and as husband-wife partners and there shall be no coercion in marriage.
b. Women obtain the right to education and teaching in all types, levels, and pathways of education, without any obstacles and pressure whatsoever in order to improve their skills and quality of life. c. Women obtain the right to work and positions in all institutions both governmental and non-governmental institutions and at all levels for the purpose of increasing income and family welfare. d. Women obtain the right to special protection in the implementation of their work or profession both in the public and domestic realms against matters that threaten their safety and/or health in relation to reproductive function.
e. Women receive access to optimal and quality health information and services.

Article 9
(1) Women have the right to hold political office positions, both in the executive and legislative branches proportionally.
(2) Women have the right to conduct various political activities in accordance with statutory regulations.
(3) Women have the right to be actively involved in social community organizations, culture and customs for the development of their self and intellectual capabilities.
(4) Women have the right to be nominated as legislative members by national political parties as well as local political parties in accordance with their capabilities.

Article 10
(1) Women have the right to participate fully in every process of planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation in the stages of development.
(2) To fulfill the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), women have the right to obtain capacity building.

# BAB III
PROTECTION
Section 1
Intent and Purpose

Article 11
(1) Protection as intended is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing guarantees in the fulfillment of basic rights as well as improving access and quality of various services needed by women in the form of:
a. Providing complaint/report handling services for victims of violence against women;
b. Providing special services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
c. Providing health services for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters from the basic level to advanced referral.;
d. Providing social rehabilitation for women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
e. Conducting law enforcement and legal assistance for women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
f. Conducting repatriation and social reintegration by building social safety networks starting from the gampong, sub-district and city levels;
g. Providing fulfillment of basic needs and specific needs of women;
h. Opening information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women, including the use of information technology, social media;
i. Providing protection in the implementation of their work or profession against matters that may threaten their safety and or health in relation to women's reproductive function;
j. Providing protection for women to practice their religious sharia as well as rights that are binding in the implementation of sharia; and
k. In the implementation of religious sharia activities as referred to in paragraph k is for women who embrace Islam and other religions.

Section 2
Responsibility of the City Government (1) The Government

Article 12
The City is obligated to provide support for the development of service institutions for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters, whether organized by the government or private sector. (2) The City Government is obligated to:
a. Establish Integrated Crisis Centers (PKT) and/or Integrated Service Centers (PPT) in Regional General Hospitals, Police Hospitals, Private Hospitals for the provision of services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence and women victims of conflict and natural disasters; b. Establish Integrated Service Centers for Women and Children Empowerment or UPTD PPA as Technical Implementation Units under the City Office of Women Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning; and
c. Establish Shelters and Trauma Centers (RPTC) as facilities to provide protection and assist women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters in psychosocial and traumatic recovery.

Article 13
The City Government is obligated to prepare guidelines in the implementation of protection for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters not limited to:
a. Preparation of service guidelines at Hospitals and other service units;
b. Preparation of referral guidelines for both government and private sectors;
c. Preparation of prevention and handling guidelines at the basic service level; and
d. Preparation of Guidelines for Development of Community Health Centers Capable of Managing cases of violence against women

Article 14
(1) Every service provider institution is obligated to conduct disaggregated data collection on women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are handled in accordance with the documentation format that has been established.
(2) The case handling mechanism can be through non-litigation and litigation channels (3) The non-litigation channel as referred to in paragraph (2) is an effort to resolve cases of violence against women outside the court channel.
(4) The litigation channel as referred to in paragraph (2) is an effort to resolve cases of violence against women using the court channel.

Article 15
(1) Non-litigation channels in handling cases of violence against women can be carried out through restorative justice mechanisms and customary court mechanisms.
(2) Gampong apparatus and other government apparatus are obligated to involve women in the process of resolving violence cases through non-litigation.

Article 16
(1) The city government is obligated to provide information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women.
(2) The forms of protection as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of fulfillment of basic rights, security, consultation and legal assistance, psychosocial accompaniment, social reintegration and other actions as needed.
(3) The City Government is obligated to provide free legal assistance to women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are unable to afford it and are facing legal problems.
(4) Legal assistance as referred to in paragraph (3) must be carried out in accordance with human dignity and worth.

Article 17
(1) The City Government is responsible for providing guarantees to accompanying officers to obtain access to information and assistance to women victims for the legal process being undertaken.
(2) The guarantee as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided through a Mayor's Decree regarding Accompanying Personnel for Women Victims.

CHAPTER IV
EMPOWERMENT
Part 1
Purpose and Objectives (1) Empowerment

Article 18
women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is intended to create conditions that enable women's potential to develop and engage in economic, political, social and cultural activities as well as have a strategic role in decision-making.
(2) Empowerment of women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is adjusted to capacity building programs through: a. Strengthening independence, namely efforts to increase knowledge, skills and work competencies to more easily obtain employment;
b. The City Government conducts development of small industries and home industries managed by women;
c. Productive Economic Enterprises, namely efforts to cultivate entrepreneurial spirit and skills; d. Opening access to capital, marketing, networking and maintaining local production results both at national and international levels;
e. The Government guarantees and protects licenses of local products as referred to in paragraph (d) from piracy; imitation and other actions that harm local products in accordance with laws and regulations; and
f. Improving expertise, knowledge and leadership so that there are opportunities for women to be actively involved in strategic positions at village, sub-district and city levels.

Article 19
(1) In order to improve the quality of life of women, the City Government is responsible for:
a. Respecting and guaranteeing the rights of women without discrimination in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. Implementing gender mainstreaming Establishing a gender mainstreaming working group;
d. Enhancing the empowerment of women in terms of role, quality and capacity in the fields of:
1. Religion;
2. politics;
3. law;
4. social; and economy
e. Strengthening and developing institutions providing women's empowerment services in the region.
(2) The responsibility of the City Government in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the Regional Government which administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part 2
Government Obligations Toward Women

Article 20
(1) The City Government is obligated to improve the quality of life of women starting from the kampong, sub-district and city levels. (2) The City Government is obligated to provide equal opportunities to women and men in improving their quality of life proportionally.
(3) The City Government is obligated to establish special education and training institutions or productive skills institutions for women as preparation for entering the workforce or creating independent businesses.
(4) The City Government is obligated towards the realization of a level of social welfare for women.
(5) The City Government is obligated to provide facilities and infrastructure for accelerating the improvement of social welfare for women.
(6) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) is the fulfillment of needs for clothing, food, shelter, education, health, employment and peace/tranquility of the environment.

Article 21
• (1) The city government provides adequate employment opportunities based on the level of education and skills possessed by women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
(2) The city government coordinates with agencies/institutions/business entities and employment providers to ensure partiality towards women in employment opportunities.
(3) Job information and job seeker selection are conducted in an accountable, fair, transparent and inclusive manner. (4) The City Government may take temporary special measures by prioritizing women with disabilities, women with HIV/Aids, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
(5) Women as referred to in paragraph (4) in obtaining employment according to their knowledge or skills by developing policy mechanisms for private companies and government as well as State-Owned Enterprises.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND COORDINATION
(1) Mayor

Article 22
conducting control, guidance, and supervision of the implementation of the program for the Fulfillment of women's rights.
(2) control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the SKPK responsible for women's affairs.

Article 23
(1) The Mayor shall establish a city-level Coordination Team in the implementation of the program for the Fulfillment of women's rights and women's empowerment.
(2) The coordination team as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Mayor's Decree.

Article 24
The City Government organizes and facilitates capacity building activities for human resources regarding guidance, supervision of the implementation of programs for the Fulfillment of women's rights and women's empowerment for all SKPK, Community Institutions, Business Sector, Women's Forums and Media on a regular basis, in stages according to needs.

CHAPTER VI
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Article 25
(1) The Mayor conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection. (2) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out at each SKPK and in a tiered manner between levels of government.
(4) Monitoring and evaluation is carried out before the preparation of programs or activities for the following year. (5) The implementation of monitoring and evaluation is carried out in cooperation with sub-district and village governments as well as civil society organizations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Pasal 26
(1) Walikota bertanggungjawab untuk membuat laporan tahunan pelaksanaan pemberdayaan dan perlindungan perempuan.
(2) Pelaporan terhadap pelaksanaan pemberdayaan dan perlindungan perempuan dilakukan secara berjenjang mulai dari tingkat kampong.
(3) Keuchik menyampaikan laporan secara berkala kepada Camat setiap tiga bulan.
(4) Camat menyampaikan laporan secara berkala kepada Walikota melalui ketua Bappeda setiap enam bulan.
(5) Kepala Bappeda Kota menyampaikan laporan kepada Walikota secara berkala setiap enam bulan termasuk di dalamnya pelaporan tentang Pokja PUG Kota.
(6) BAPPEDA Kota juga melakukan evaluasi secara umum terhadap pelaksanaan pemberdayaan dan perlindungan perempuan berdasarkan RPJMK dan Renja SKPK.
(7) Walikota menyampaikan laporan pelaksanaan pemberdayaan dan Perlindungan perempuan secara berkala kepada Gubernur Aceh setiap tahun.
(8) Laporan disampaikan kepada Gubernur Aceh dengan tembusan kepada DPRK
(9) Laporan sebagaimana dimaksud pada ayat (1) juga ditembuskan kepada Menteri Negara Pemberdayaan Perempuan dan Perlindungan Anak dan Menteri Dalam Negeri.

Article 26
(1) The Mayor is responsible for preparing annual reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) Reporting on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is conducted in a tiered manner starting from the kampong level.
(3) The Keuchik submits reports periodically to the Camat every three months.
(4) The Camat submits reports periodically to the Mayor through the head of Bappeda every six months.
(5) The Head of City Bappeda submits reports to the Mayor periodically every six months including therein reporting on the City PUG Working Group.
(6) City BAPPEDA also conducts general evaluations of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection based on the RPJMK and SKPK Renja.
(7) The Mayor submits reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection periodically to the Governor of Aceh every year.
(8) Reports are submitted to the Governor of Aceh with copies to the DPRK
(9) Reports as referred to in paragraph (1) are also copied to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.

Article 27
(1) The Mayor may establish a special team to conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) The establishment of the monitoring and evaluation team as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through cooperation with Universities, Women's/Gender Study Centers or Non-Governmental Organizations.
(3) The Monitoring and Evaluation Team shall be under the coordination of or led by the City BAPPEDA with members consisting of the Head of the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning as vice chairman, one representative from each sub-district and civil society groups.
(4) The Monitoring and Evaluation Team in carrying out its duties and responsibilities shall be supported by the City Bappeda.

Article 28
The Monitoring and Evaluation Team as stipulated in Article 27 has the following duties: carrying out monitoring and evaluation of the process and results of annual planning;
b. providing input to SKPK in all matters related to Gender Mainstreaming;
c. providing input and suggestions regarding gender-responsive work programs;
d. ensuring a minimum involvement of 30% women in every development process starting from planning, implementation and reporting;
e. supporting the integration of Musrembang proposals related to women's empowerment and protection into the SKPK Work Plan;
f. evaluating SKPK programs that are gender-based;
g. ensuring women receive benefits from development implementation;
h. preparing annual reports to the Mayor/Vice Mayor; and
i. providing recommendations for planning, budgeting and implementation of gender-perspective development at the next stage.

Article 29
(1) The City Government provides a mechanism (channel) for public complaints regarding the achievements of women's empowerment and protection as well as the level of public service satisfaction.
(2) The facilities and infrastructure as well as the public complaint mechanism shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 30
(1) Every member of the community has the right to obtain opportunities to participate in the empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Every member of the community has the right to obtain or provide information on violations of women's rights. (3) The community has the right to convey suggestions and opinions in efforts to empower and protect women.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 31
(1) Funding for the empowerment and protection of women in the City is sourced from the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(2) Funding for the empowerment and protection of women in the City can also be sourced from the Aceh Revenue and Expenditure Budget, the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(3) Funding for the empowerment and protection of women in the City can be sourced from religious funds collected through Baitul Mal and other legitimate sources.
(4) The use of religious funds as referred to in paragraph (3) is further regulated through Mayor regulations.

Article 32
(1) In the preparation of APBK and APBG, funds must be allocated for the purpose of enhancing the empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Special autonomy funds that are part of the City must be partially allocated to finance activities as referred to in this qanun.

CHAPTER IX
OTHER PROVISIONS
Article 33
To accelerate efforts for the empowerment and protection of women, the Government of Subulussalam City is obligated to implement special policies.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 34
Matters not yet regulated in this qanun shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation, after obtaining consideration from the Ulama Consultative Assembly (MPU).

Article 35
This Qanun shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this qanun is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Subulussalam.
Enacted in Subulussalam On the date of November 20, 2023 CE 6 Jumadil Awal 1445 AH

MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM
иб

AFFAN ALFIAN
Promulgated in Subulussalam On the date of 21 November 2023M 7 Jumadil Awal 1445 H Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY

SUBULUSSALAM CITY,
Yawneer

COPY
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 20. REGISTRATION NUMBER OF QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY ACEH PROVINCE :