REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY
NUMBER 3 OF 2012
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF SOUTH TANGERANG,

Considering : a. that women and children biologically and philosophically constitute vulnerable groups who are susceptible to becoming victims of violence, both violence occurring within the household and violence committed outside the household;
b. that violence against women and children constitutes a violation of human rights and a crime against human dignity as well as a form of discrimination that must be eliminated;
c. that protection of women and children victims of violence is one aspect of the duties and responsibilities of regional government in providing protection and services to the community;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is deemed necessary to establish the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence through a Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City;
- 2 - In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention of Elimination of All Forms of Discriminations Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
6. Law Number 5 of 1998 Concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);46 - 3 -
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 23 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of Banten Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 182, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4010);
9. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
10. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
11. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
12. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
- 4 -
13. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as amended by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
14. Law Number 23 of 2006 concerning Population Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 124, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4674);
15. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
16. Law Number 44 of 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
17. Law Number 51 of 2008 concerning the Establishment of South Tangerang City in Banten Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 188, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4935);
- 5 -
18. Law Number 14 of 2009 concerning Ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4990);
19. Law Number 35 of 2009 concerning Narcotics (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 143, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5062);
20. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
21. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
22. Government Regulation Number 9 of 1975 concerning the Implementation of Law Number 1 of 1974 Concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1975 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3050);
- 6 -
23. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
24. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Provincial Regional Government and the Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
25. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 182 of 1998 concerning the National Commission on Violence Against Women;
26. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 12 of 2001 concerning the National Action Committee for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor;
27. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 87 of 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children;
28. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 88 of 2002 Concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
29. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 02 of 2009 Concerning Child-Friendly Regency/City Policy;
30. Decree of the Minister of Home Affairs and Regional Autonomy Number 5 of 2001 concerning the Prevention of Child Labor;
- 7 -
31. Regional Regulation of Banten Province Number 10 of 2005 concerning Gender Mainstreaming in Regional Development (Regional Gazette of Banten Province of 2005 Number 45 Series E);
32. Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City Number 6 of 2010 concerning the Regional Apparatus Organization of South Tangerang City (Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City of 2010 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Number 0610);
33. Regional Regulation of South Tangerang City Number 8 of 2011 concerning Regional Government Affairs of South Tangerang City (Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City of 2011 Number 8, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City Number 0811);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SOUTH TANGERANG CITY
MAYOR OF SOUTH TANGERANG
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this regional regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Mayor, and regional apparatus as elements of the Regional Government of South Tangerang City.
- 8 -
2. Mayor is the Mayor of South Tangerang.
3. Implementation is the form of execution of protection for women and child victims of violence.
4. Woman is a person who has female genitalia, can experience menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and includes a person who has obtained legal status as a Woman.
5. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
6. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
7. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
8. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death.
9. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
10. Economic violence is any act that neglects family members in the form of not providing a proper living, care or maintenance.
11. Psychological violence is any act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
- 9 -
13. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
14. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
15. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an institution that provides services and protection for women and children especially those who have problems due to acts of violence, discrimination, human trafficking and other social problems in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social, public facility services and legal protection and assistance.
16. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and or other Community Organizations.
17. Population is Citizens of South Tangerang and foreigners who enter legally and reside in the area of South Tangerang City.
18. Service is an action that must be immediately taken for victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
19. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy in order to provide strengthening and recovery for victims of violence as determined in a decision of an authorized official.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance for self-strengthening of victims of violence especially victims of domestic violence to resolve the problems they face.
- 10 -
21. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and child victims of violence, based in hospitals, Community Health Centers, P2TP2A and other similar institutions that are managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on respect and recognition of equal rights and human dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of the basic rights of women and children and the best interests of victims.

Article 3
The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to provide prevention, protection, and services for women and children against gender-based violence and the best interests of children that occur in households or public spaces.

Article 4
The prevention activities of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 3, include:
a. Socialization;
b. Dissemination; and
c. Training.

Article 5
The activities of protection and services for victims as referred to in Article 3, include:
a. Health services;
b. Victim assistance;
c. Counseling;
- 11 -
d. Spiritual guidance;
e. Resocialization; and
f. Empowerment.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 6
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to: a. Protection;
b. Obtain information;
c. Optimal services;
d. Continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. Confidential handling;
f. Psychological and legal assistance;
g. Guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a member of society.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
(1) Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement prevention and mitigation efforts against the occurrence of violence toward women and children.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in the form of:
a. Collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. Conducting education about anti-violence values toward women and children;
c. Conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. Training for PPT members;
e. Conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
- 12 - (3) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence toward women and children, Regional Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving relevant community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.

Article 8
In carrying out its obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 9
(1) In the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence which includes prevention and response activities, an Integrated Service Center (PPT) shall be established.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), shall consist of elements from the Regional Government and elements from related institutions outside the Regional Government.
(3) Further provisions regarding the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.
(4) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), in implementing the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence may conduct coordination with institutions and or organizations in South Tangerang City and other regions.
- 13 - (5) In the Implementation of Protection for women and children victims of violence which includes prevention and response activities, Integrated Service Posts may be established at the sub-district and village levels.

CHAPTER VI
HANDLING AND MECHANISM
Article 10
(1) The implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner in medical handling, legal protection, medicolegal, psychological and economic aspects, the implementation of which can be conducted through partnerships with social community institutions engaged in the protection of women and children.
(2) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), must take into account religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(3) Principles of Service and Assistance:
a. Fast, safe and empathetic;
b. Guarantee of confidentiality;
c. Easily accessible;
d. Free of charge.
(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION
Article 11
(1) Forms of violence against Women and Children include physical, sexual, economic and psychological.
(2) Forms of physical violence are any acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or cause death.
- 14 - (3) Forms of sexual violence are sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.
(4) Forms of economic violence are neglect of family members in the form of not providing a proper living, care or maintenance.
(5) Forms of psychological violence are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 12
(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
(2) Protection of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be provided to residents of South Tangerang City whether it occurs in South Tangerang City or outside South Tangerang City.
(3) Protection of women and children victims of violence as an initial action shall also be provided to non-residents of South Tangerang City where the incident occurs within the territory of South Tangerang City, followed by coordination with the region of origin of said residents.

Article 13
(1) Forms of protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence consist of medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), economic and psychological protection.
(2) The form of medical protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
- 15 - (3) The form of legal protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
(4) The form of medicolegal protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of medical services for the purpose of evidence in the legal field.
(5) The form of psychological protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and providing psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving problems.
(6) The form of economic protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 14
(1) Regional Government in implementing protection for Women and Children Victims of violence, may involve community participation. (2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.

Article 15
(1) Social Community Organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (2), shall be given guidance by the Regional Government through Regional Work Units related to the duties of protection and empowerment of women and children.
- 16 - (2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER IX
SOURCES OF FUNDS AND REPORTING
Article 16
(1) The source of funds for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence carried out by the regional apparatus of South Tangerang City shall be from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of South Tangerang City.
(2) The source of funds as referred to in paragraph (1), may also come from other legal and non-binding sources.
(3) The source of funds for implementation from other legal sources as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be subject to supervision in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) PPT is obligated to report the implementation of protection activities for women and children victims of violence periodically to the Mayor in accordance with applicable regulations.

CHAPTER X
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 17
(1) Institutions or bodies designated by the Mayor to carry out service duties that violate the service principles as stipulated in Article 10 paragraph (3), may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Perpetrators of acts of violence shall be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with the applicable laws.
(3) Any person who deliberately fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, fails to report and fails to provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as regulated in the applicable laws and regulations.
- 17 -

CHAPTER XI
C L O S I N G
Article 18
This Regional Regulation shall come into force as of the date it is enacted.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of South Tangerang City.
Enacted in South Tangerang on the date

MAYOR
OF SOUTH TANGERANG, AIRIN RACHMI DIANY
Promulgated in South Tangerang on the date of

REGIONAL SECRETARY
CITY OF SOUTH TANGERANG,
DUDUNG E. DIREDJA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY YEAR 2012 NUMBER
- 18 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER YEAR
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The State holds the view that all forms of violence, especially domestic violence, constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination.

The State's view is based on Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, including its amendments. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person shall have the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under his/her control, and shall have the right to a sense of security and protection from the threat of fear to do or not do something which is a basic right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person shall have the right to obtain facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in order to achieve equality and justice".

Current developments show that acts of physical, psychological, sexual violence, and domestic neglect do in fact occur, thus requiring adequate legal instruments to eliminate violence, particularly domestic violence. Legal reform that favors vulnerable or subordinated groups, especially women and children, has become very necessary in connection with the many cases of violence, especially domestic violence. This also occurs in South Tangerang City. In 2010, violence cases reported to the Tangerang Police totaled 143 cases, 56 cases were recorded at the South Jakarta Metro Police, 23 cases at the Tigaraksa Police - 19 - Tangerang Regency, and in 2011, 70 cases were recorded at the South Jakarta Metro Police and 28 cases at the Tigaraksa Police Tangerang Regency. This does not yet reflect the actual conditions in society, because cases of violence, especially those occurring within the household, are still considered shameful in the view of society, and the courage of the community to report incidents still needs to be increased. Therefore, a regional regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence needs to be owned by South Tangerang City.

The emergence of cases of violence against children and women is often caused by factors that develop within society, such as low economic levels, education, social environment, and others. Therefore, victims of such violence need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality, and upholding human rights. From the above framework, the Regional Government is responsible for taking actions, whether legal, political, economic, or social, to suppress, prevent, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against children and women.

In conducting guidance, development, and protection of women and children, the role of society is needed, whether through women and children protection institutions, religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations, social organizations, the business sector, mass media, or educational institutions.

This Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children from violence is closely related to several other laws and regulations already in force, including, among others, Law Number 1 of 1946 concerning the Criminal Code and its Amendments, Law Number 8 of 1981 concerning the Criminal Procedure Code, Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage, Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights - 20 - and most importantly Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence and Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.

This Regional Regulation, in addition to regulating matters of prevention and protection as well as recovery for victims of violence, also regulates matters of obligations for law enforcement officers, health workers, social workers, volunteer companions, or spiritual counselors to protect victims so that they are more sensitive and responsive. To carry out violence prevention, the Agency or Office that has duties and responsibilities related to the field of women's empowerment and child protection implements preventive actions, among others, organizing communication, information, and education regarding violence prevention, protection of women and children.

Based on this thinking, it is time to establish a Regional Regulation in South Tangerang City concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence, especially Domestic Violence, which is regulated comprehensively, clearly, and firmly to protect and side with victims, while simultaneously providing education and awareness to the community and authorities that all acts of violence constitute crimes against human dignity.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Rights in this provision are intended to guarantee their life in accordance with human dignity, increase self-confidence, and the ability to participate in community, national, and state life. What is meant by discriminatory treatment, for example, treatment that differentiates ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status, birth order of children, and physical and/or mental condition.
What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition where women and men enjoy equal status and - 21 - have the same conditions to fully realize their basic rights and potential for integrity and survival proportionally.

Article 3
What is meant by prevention is all activities carried out to prevent, reduce and even eliminate acts of violence, among others by organizing communication, information and education. What is meant by services and protection for women and children victims of gender-based violence is that in all service and protection actions, gender equality must be taken into account. What is meant by the best interests of the child is that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.

Article 4
Letter a What is meant by socialization is a process of instilling or transferring habits or values and rules from one generation to another generation in a group or society regarding the prevention of violence.
Letter b What is meant by dissemination is an activity aimed at target groups or individuals so that they obtain information, develop awareness, accept, and ultimately utilize that information.
Letter c What is meant by Training is a series of activities designed to improve the skills, knowledge, experience, or attitude changes of an individual. Training relates to the acquisition of certain skills or knowledge. Socialization, dissemination and training activities regarding violence prevention can be carried out by related Regional Work Units, related Agencies, - 22 - individuals, groups or Social Community Organizations.

Article 5
Letter a What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
Letter b What is meant by receiving psychological assistance is assistance provided by psychologists to victims suffering from trauma/other mental problems to restore the victim's mental condition. Meanwhile, legal assistance is assistance efforts provided by persons and/or legal aid institutions to victims at every level of examination and throughout the legal process.
Letter c What is meant by counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert or a person trained in such a way that the victim's self-understanding and psychological capacity increases in solving the problems faced.
Letter d What is meant by spiritual guidance is counseling provided by clergy.
Letter e What is meant by resocialization is that victims can resume life in society including the restoration of their good name.
Letter f What is meant by empowerment is Empowerment means making something become empowered or have power or have strength.
- 23 -

Article 6
Letter a What is meant by Protection is that victims receive protection from family, police, prosecution, courts, advocates, social institutions or other parties, either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court.
Letter b What is meant by obtaining information is the right of victims to obtain information related to prevention, complaints, medical services and protection.
Letter c What is meant by Optimal service is service that can be provided to victims in accordance with the capacity of those providing it.
Letter d What is meant by Continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage is handling provided up to the recovery of victims in society.
Letter e What is meant by confidential handling is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.
Letter f What is meant by Psychological and legal assistance is the right of victims to obtain psychological and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
Letter g What is meant by Guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and member of society.
- 24 -

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) What is meant by Integrated Service Center (PPT) is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence, which is based in hospitals, Puskesmas, P2TP2A and other similar institutions that are managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services such as the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A), Integrated Crisis Center, Trauma Center Shelter, Children's Social Shelter, BP4, Women Crisis Center and other similar institutions.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Paragraph (1) What is meant by medicolegal protection handling is legal proof through medical means.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
- 25 - Paragraph (3) Empathy is a capability with various different definitions that encompasses a broad spectrum, ranging from concern for others that creates a desire to help, experiencing emotions similar to the emotions of others, knowing what others feel and think, blurring the line between self and others.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) What is meant by forms of economic violence in the form of neglect of family members in the form of not providing a decent livelihood, care or maintenance includes all areas that support life ranging from health, education, social and religion.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.
- 26 -

Article 17
Paragraph (1) What is meant by administrative sanctions is that the institution or body that implements protection services for women and children is no longer established and or recognized by the Regional Government.
Paragraph (2) Criminal sanctions for perpetrators of violence are regulated by Law number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence article 44 through article 50; Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection Article 77 through article 90, and Law Number 1 of 1946 concerning the Criminal Code and its Amendments, Law Number 8 of 1981 concerning the Criminal Procedure Code Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH TANGERANG CITY NUMBER 03