REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG
BENGKULU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
PREVENTION AND MITIGATION OF VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG,

Considering : a. that in order to guarantee the rights of women and children to participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and to receive protection from violence, discrimination and other violations of the rights of women and children, it is necessary to undertake efforts to prevent and mitigate violence against women and children.
b. that in order for the efforts to prevent and mitigate violence against women and children to obtain optimal results, and to be implemented quickly, in a planned, integrated, comprehensive and organized manner by involving all relevant elements in the region, it is necessary to have regulations concerning the prevention and mitigation of violence against women and children victims of violence.
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Prevention and Mitigation of Violence Against Women and Children.

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 Year 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 55), Emergency Law Number 5 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 56) And Emergency Law Number 6 Year 1956 (State Gazette Year 1956 Number 57) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Including Municipalities, Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra, As Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 9 Year 1967 concerning the Establishment of Bengkulu Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1967 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2828);
4. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
5. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
6. Law Number 5 Year 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
7. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
8. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
14. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2016, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 58);
15. Government Regulation Number 20 Year 1968 Concerning the Enactment of Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9 Year 1967 and the Implementation of Government in Bengkulu Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968 Number 34, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2854);
16. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
17. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
18. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses And/Or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
19. Presidential Decree Number 181 year 1998 concerning the National Commission on Anti-Violence Against Women;
20. Presidential Decree Number 36 Year 1990 Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
21. Presidential Decree Number 59 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor;
22. Presidential Decree Number 87 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children;
23. Presidential Decree Number 88 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
24. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
25. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);
26. Regional Regulation of Rejang Lebong Regency Number 3 Year 2008 concerning the Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Apparatus of Rejang Lebong Regency as amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation Number 3 Year 2014 (Regional Gazette of Rejang Lebong Regency Year 2014 Number 94).

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY and

REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON PREVENTION AND HANDLING OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Rejang Lebong Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the regional government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administrator who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regent is the Regent of Rejang Lebong.
5. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional House of Representatives of Rejang Lebong Regency.
6. Regional Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the Regional Work Unit of Rejang Lebong Regency.
7. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent in the administration of regional government consisting of regional secretariat, DPRD secretariat, regional agencies, regional technical institutions, sub-districts, and urban villages.
8. Regional Population and Family Planning Agency, hereinafter abbreviated as BKKBD, is the Regional Population and Family Planning Agency of Rejang Lebong Regency.
9. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
10. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person recognized by law as a woman.
11. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
12. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
13. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
14. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
15. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, disbelief or severe psychological suffering to a person.
16. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
17. Exploitation is an action with or without the victim's consent which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
18. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
19. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
20. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
21. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
22. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to their family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
24. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
25. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
26. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that provide assistance.
27. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service unit established by the regional government to provide services in the context of empowerment of Women and Children victims of acts of violence.
28. Regional Action Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RAD, is a foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in carrying out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of acts of violence.
29. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
30. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
31. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral lines up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
32. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
33. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD, is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and established by Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, INTENT AND OBJECTIVES
Part One
Principles

Article 2
The implementation of prevention and handling of violence against women and children, is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. gender justice and equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children; d. the best interests of women and children; and e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience acts of violence or neglect.

Second Part
Purpose

Article 3
The regulation of the implementation of prevention and handling of violence against women and children is intended to provide protection and services for women and children victims of acts of violence.

Third Part
Objectives

Article 4
The objectives of organizing the prevention and handling of violence against women and children, include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing a sense of security for women and children; d. providing services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitating and conducting mediation of household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; and
f. seeking to obtain compensation for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE
Article 5
(1) Forms of violence against women and children include: a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.
(2) Physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death.
(3) Psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
(4) Sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
(5) Neglect as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
(6) Exploitation as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. any form of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.
(7) Other violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter f is caused by:
a. threats of violence include: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 6
(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical violence, exploitation or human trafficking has the right to obtain protection and services.
(2) Protection and services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. complaint or request for protection from the person concerned; b. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose whereabouts are kept confidential to avoid intimidation and threats;
c. medical services/health treatment in the form of care and recovery from injuries or physical condition of victims by medical personnel and paramedics;
d. medicolegal services for evidence in the legal field; e. protection by law enforcement officials;
f. provision of information regarding legal rights and obligations to victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;
g. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
h. psychological assistance to restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore the self-confidence of victims;
i. assistance support for legal processes and obtaining the right to compensation or restitution;
j. guarantee of rights related to status as family members and community members (social reintegration); and k. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(3) In the event the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), also obtains special rights including:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma;
e. the right to obtain freedom; and
f. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
Obligations and responsibilities in conducting prevention and mitigation in the form of protection and services for women and children from acts of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 letter a, include:
a. implementing the obligations for protection of women and children from acts of violence as stipulated by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing shelters for women and children victims of violence;
f. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The implementation of obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be technically implemented in an integrated manner by related SKPD.

Article 9
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation. (2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community; b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights; d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.
(4) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 10
The obligations and responsibilities of family and parents toward children as referred to in Article 7 letter c and letter d are in the form of: a. caring for, maintaining, educating and protecting children; b. preventing the occurrence of marriage at an early age;
c. ensuring the continuity of children's education according to the children's abilities, talents and interests; and
d. in the event that parents do not exist or their whereabouts are unknown or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family as the child's guardian, which shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
Organization

Article 11
(1) In order to implement activities for the prevention and handling of violence against women and children, the regional government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center for women and children victims of violence.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is established on joint initiative between the Regional Government, NGOs, Higher Education Institutions, professional organizations, organizations and the community.
(3) The institutional structure of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (2) is determined by Regent's Decree.
(4) Further provisions regarding the organization of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Article 12
P2TP2A establishes functional networks with:
a. police;
b. prosecution service;
c. courts;
d. hospitals/community health centers;
e. psychiatrists; and
f. other institutions that have similar objectives.

Article 13
P2TP2A as an independent institution in the region must be in one coordination together with BKKBD whose scope of duties and responsibilities include, among others, the field of protection of women, children and gender mainstreaming.

Second Part
Financing of P2TP2A

Article 14
(1) The regional government assists the operational activities of P2TP2A by budgeting in the APBD in accordance with the capacity and financial condition of the region. (2) The budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) is through BKKBD. (3) For administrative order and financial use, P2TP2A is obligated to prepare a work program and accountability for the use of regional finances.

Article 15
(1) Financing of P2TP2A in addition to being obtained from APBD funds can be through obtaining assistance receipts from individuals, bodies, or official institutions whose existence is legally recognized.
(2) P2TP2A is obligated to submit annual reports for performance and financial acquisition from APBD to the Regent through BKKBD.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION AND COUNTERMEASURES, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 16
The Regional Government through P2TP2A, implements prevention and mitigation efforts for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of women and children up to the empowerment of victims to be able to return to living their lives in accordance with the dignity and worth they possess.

Part Two
Prevention and Countermeasures of Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect of Women and Children

Article 17
(1) The form of prevention as referred to in Article 16 is carried out through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children to the wider community in the region;
b. dissemination activities of the existence of P2TP2A to be known by everyone in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or notice boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the worst level;
c. training for members who are able to disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;
d. opening of public complaint channels by the Regional Government or P2TP2A in each area through community networks;
e. strengthening coordination channels with sub-district, urban village/village level governments;
f. immediate handling of public complaints in all areas of the region and securing subjects of acts of violence, exploitation, human trafficking or neglect; and/or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of raising awareness of the wider community down to the smallest community groups (families), especially parents, to protect women and children.
(2) The Regional Government through P2TP2A conducts data collection on areas of violence based on incident rates and conducts research and studies on the level of vulnerability of areas to find solutions for reducing to stopping the occurrence of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.

Third Part
Services for Women and Children Who Experience Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 18
The form of services provided to women and children victims of violence, exploitation, human trafficking or neglect shall be implemented in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 6.

Article 19
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A as referred to in Article 18, include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery for physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psycho-social services constitute services provided by companions in the context of traumatic recovery of the victim's condition, including provision of shelter and safe houses for victims to protect victims from threats and intimidation;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent; and
f. other services in accordance with the rights of women and children who are victims of violence.

Article 20
The Regional Government or P2TP2A is obligated to formulate operational standards for assistance services to victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect in every stage of fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 21
The provision of assistance services to victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. fast, safe, and empathetic;
c. coordination between government agencies;
d. guarantee of confidentiality;
e. easily accessible; and
f. free of charge.

Article 22
Further provisions regarding the procedures for service delivery in handling the protection of women and children victims of violence as well as operational standards as referred to in Article 18 and Article 20, shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four
Empowerment of Women and Children Victims of Violence Article 23 (1) The Regional Government through P2TP2A is obligated to conduct empowerment in the economic field for women and children victims of violence, exploitation and/or trafficking or neglect.
(2) Forms of empowerment of victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. providing the necessary requirements for entrepreneurship training for victims of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitude, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of victims of violence;
e. endeavoring to provide capital for victims of violence; and f. expanding access to information and promoting the products of victims of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 24
(1) Cooperation is conducted to strengthen the role of P2TP2A in achieving the objectives of protection of women and children in the regional area. (2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted with: a. the government;
b. the provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. non-governmental institutions; and
e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), includes: a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Second Part
Partnership

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector for support in implementing protection for women and children in the regional area.
(2) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through: a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence; c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of violence.
(3) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER IX
REGIONAL ACTION PLAN
Article 26
(1) In order to implement obligations and responsibilities, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as the basis for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
(3) Further provisions regarding RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 27
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), are in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/UKPD and the community.
(5) The Regent may appoint BKKBD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes protection of women and children to conduct guidance and supervision.

Article 28
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence organized by the regional government, through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or DPRD.

CHAPTER XI
REPORTING
Article 29
(1) P2TP2A submits reports on the implementation of prevention and protection services for women and children victims of violence to the Regent through the SKPD responsible for women and children empowerment programs.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of reports as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted in writing and implemented at least 1 (one) time every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION
Article 30
(1) In addition to general investigation officials, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation may also be conducted by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with the laws and regulations.
(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. receive reports or complaints from a person regarding the existence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take initial action at that time at the scene and conduct examination;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identification;
d. seize objects and/or documents;
e. take fingerprints and photograph a person;
f. summon persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in expert witnesses required in connection with the examination of the case;
h. terminate the investigation after receiving instruction from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident does not constitute a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this matter to the public prosecutor, the suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.
(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (2), shall notify the commencement of investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Investigator Official of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Law.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 31
(1) Every person who intentionally fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the Laws and Regulations.
(2) Officials appointed to administer protection who fail to carry out their obligations and responsibilities shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.
(3) P2TP2A administrators who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence and violate service principles may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal mechanisms of the P2TP2A organization.

CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Article 32
(1) The handling of legal cases in the investigation process by law enforcement officials must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.
(2) Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are: a. in investigation cases for women or female children victims of violence must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in point a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardian together with the advocacy and psychology team from P2TP2A who have the same gender;
c. in investigation cases for male children victims of violence may be conducted by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and implemented as referred to in point b; and d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 33
In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be required at the trial, except in circumstances that are absolutely necessary while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in trial proceedings at different times.

Article 34
In the event that the perpetrator of a criminal offense is a child, the following matters shall apply:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by considering that the child still has hope for their future;
b. The Investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases;
c. The investigation is conducted in a closed room and only attended by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardian;
d. during the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but rather entrusted to their family under supervision and guard;
e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court courtroom; and
f. the child's punishment process is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that may be accompanied by their parents.

Article 35
News media are not permitted to expose news coverage for cases concerning child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and their future life prospects, except when the victim has lost their life as a result of such violence.

CHAPTER XV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 36
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Rejang Lebong Regency.
Enacted in Curup On the date of 21 December 2015 Acting REGENT OF REJANG LEBONG,

ANDI ROSLINSYAH
Promulgated in Curup On the date of January 13, 2016

PLT. REGIONAL SECRETARY
REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
ASSISTANT FOR GENERAL ADMINISTRATION,
ZULKARNAIN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY
YEAR 2016 NUMBER 103
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY, BENGKULU PROVINCE: (4/2015) Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL ADMINISTRATION SECTION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF REJANG LEBONG REGENCY,
PRANOTO, SH.M.Si Pembina Tk.I / IV.b

# NIP. 19651201 199603 1 004