REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION
PROVINCE OF JAKARTA
NUMBER 8 OF 2011
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA,

Considering a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights, and crimes against humanity, and are not in accordance with the position of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children and to improve the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that is the duty, authority, and responsibility of the Regional Government;

c. that discrimination and violence against women and children in the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta continues to increase and spread, causing community members to be unsafe in carrying out their lives, thus requiring integrated protection efforts;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

Considering : 1. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1971 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3019);

2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3143);

3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 19 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 105 Concerning The Abolition of Forced Labour (ILO Convention concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 55, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3824);

5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3886);

6. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning the Prohibition of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941) and U.N Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000;

7. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4235);

8. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4279);

9. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4301);

10. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

11. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4437) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4844);

12. Law Number 39 of 2004 concerning the Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers Abroad (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 133, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4445);

13. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4635);

14. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

15. Law Number 29 of 2007 concerning the Government of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 93, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4744);

16. Law Number 14 of 2008 concerning Public Information Disclosure (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 61, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4846);

17. Law Number 40 of 2008 concerning the Elimination of Racial and Ethnic Discrimination (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 170, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4919);

18. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 11, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

19. Law Number 25 of 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038); '

20. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health. (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

21. Law Number 44 of 2009 concerning Hospitals (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5072);

22. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

23. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

24. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Governmental Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

25. Government Regulation Number 50 of 2007 concerning Procedures for the Implementation of Regional Cooperation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4761);

26. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

27. Government Regulation Number 83 of 2008 concerning Requirements and Procedures for Providing Legal Aid Free of Charge (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 214, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4955);

28. Presidential Regulation Number 69 of 2008 concerning the Task Force for the Prevention and Handling of Trafficking in Persons;

29. Regulation of the Minister of Social Affairs Number 102 /HUK/2007 concerning the Establishment and Operation of Shelters and Trauma Centers;

30. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 02 of 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;

31. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 03 of 2008 Concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;

32. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2009 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons;

33. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

34. Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2004 concerning Manpower (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2004 Number 60);

35. Regional Regulation Number 8 of 2006 concerning the Education System (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2006 Number 8);

36. Regional Regulation Number 8 of 2007 concerning Public Order (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2007 Number 8);

37. Regional Regulation Number 10 of 2008 concerning Regional Apparatus Organization (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2008 Number 10);

38. Regional Regulation Number 4 of 2009 concerning the Regional Health System (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2009 Number 4);

39. Regional Regulation Number 2 of 2010 concerning the Formulation of Regional Regulations (Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta of 2010 Number 2, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta Number 1).

With the Joint Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA

GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN

AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta, hereinafter referred to as DKI Jakarta Province.
2. Regional Government is the Governor and Regional Apparatus of DKI Jakarta Province as elements of the administration of DKI Jakarta Province government.
3. Regional House of Representatives of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta, hereinafter referred to as DPRD, is a regional representative institution of the people as an element of regional government administration.
4. Governor is the Regional Head of DKI Jakarta Province who by virtue of his position also serves as the representative of the Government in the DKI Jakarta Province region.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the Apparatus of DKI Jakarta Province.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of DKI Jakarta Province.
7. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion, whether direct or indirect, based on human differentiation on the grounds of religion, tribe, race, ethnicity, group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life, both individual and collective, in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
8. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
9. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering or distress to women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic or social exploitation, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom arbitrarily, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
10. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in suffering or distress physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, economic or social exploitation, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
11. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in suffering or distress physically, sexually, psychologically and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
12. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring, or receipt of persons by means of threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits to obtain the consent of a person having control over another person, whether conducted within a country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
13. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.
14. Woman is a person (human being) who has a vagina, can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth to children, and breastfeed.
15. Victim of violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals, including victims are their heirs.
16. Protection is a series of fulfillment of the rights of women and children victims of violence and discrimination starting from prevention efforts, handling and empowerment.
17. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
18. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services to women and children victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
19. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts of criminal acts of trafficking in persons in DKI Jakarta Province.
20. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
21. Family are people who have blood relations in direct lineage upward or downward and collateral lineage up to the third degree, or who have marital relations, or people who are dependents of women and/or children.
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
and children from acts of violence against women is organized based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children; and
e. non-discrimination.

Article 3
The objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence, are to:
a. prevent acts of violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. facilitate and conduct mediation of domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Women and children victims of acts of violence receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and
j. the right to assistance.

Article 5
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 4, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom;

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community;
c. Family; and
d. Parents.

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 6 letter a, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Governor shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD and UKPD in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 9
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letters c and d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 10
(1) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows: a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern towards the prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 11
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 10, shall be implemented by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual matters; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD and UKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

CHAPTER VI
SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 12
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence, are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal assistance;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by SKPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection;
d. mental and spiritual;
(3) In the implementation of duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, and the community.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for handling services for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 13
Regional Governments are obligated to provide complaint services for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 14
Regional Government and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses.

Article 15
Further provisions regarding complaint services and social services as referred to in Article 13 and Article 14, shall be regulated by Governor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 16
(1) In the context of providing protection services to women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A as an integrated service center for the protection of women and children from acts of violence including victims of acts of violence.
(2) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Working Procedures of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 17
In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 16, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Governor shall establish:
a. a task force on human trafficking;
b. a regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 18
(1) The task force as referred to in Article 17 letter a, shall consist of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes a coordinative body tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of trafficking in persons.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Governor Regulation.

Article 19
(1) The Committee as referred to in Article 17 letter b, shall consist of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Governor's Decree.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One Cooperation
Article 20
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the Government;
b. other Provinces;
c. Regencies/Cities; and
d. non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.
e. followed up in accordance with applicable law (3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be set forth in the form of a Joint Agreement.

Part Two Partnership
Article 21
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and enhancing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), is set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 22
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is in order to realize the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD/UKPD and the community.

Article 23
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted with the principles of professionalism, transparency, and accountability.

Article 24
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Governor or to the DPRD.

BAB X
FINANCING
Article 25
Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 26
(1) Regional Governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity, and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 27
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta.
Enacted in Jakarta on the date of 14 November 2011

GOVERNOR OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA,
FAUZI BOWO
Promulgated in Jakarta on the 15th of November 2011

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION
PROVINCE OF JAKARTA,
FADJAR PANJAITAN
NIP. 195508261978011001
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA YEAR 2011 NUMBER 8

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA
NUMBER 8 OF 2011
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

The position of DKI Jakarta Province as the national capital as stipulated in Law Number 29 of 2007 concerning the Government of the Special Capital Region Province of Jakarta as the Capital of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, makes the city of Jakarta an attraction for some members of the community from various regions, thus giving rise to various social problems, including acts of violence against women and children both within the household and outside the household, such as torture or treatment that can degrade human dignity and honor.

Various acts of violence both against women and children both within the household and outside the household will destroy family life, society, government, nation, and state, therefore the Provincial Government of DKI Jakarta is obligated to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence which is an implementation of several laws and regulations, including Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is one of the obligations of Regional Government as regulated in Article 22 letter a of Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government. On that basis, the Provincial Government of DKI Jakarta has made various efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence, however it has not been able to provide protection to women and children from various acts of violence, among others caused by the still low understanding of the community regarding the rights of women and children, handling has not been well coordinated, implementation has not been sustainable, and so forth. Therefore, a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is needed to provide legal certainty in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

The Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence, gives responsibility to the Regional Government starting from the prevention of acts of violence to the handling of victims of acts of violence. In its implementation the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, and the community. In addition, adequate funding support both from the Government, Regional Government, as well as participation of the business world and community, it is expected that violence against women and children can be eliminated.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Article 2
Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
Letter a the principle of humanity becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence which is respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila) Letter b the principle of justice and gender equality, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, governmental activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
Letter c protection is a principle that functions to provide protection to women and children in order to provide peace in family and community life Letter d the principle of the best interests of women and children, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities, and Regional Governments to fulfill the rights of women and children as regulated in laws and regulations.
Letter e the principle of non-discrimination, that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence there shall be no differentiation on the basis of age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.
Letter a

Article 4
What is meant by trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by means of the threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery of documents or identity, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of a person having control over another person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
Point b What is meant by exploitation is an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical sexual reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring/utilizing power or transplanting organs and or body tissues or utilizing the power or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d What is meant by witness is a person who sees, hears and experiences events of violence and violations of human rights Point e Point a Point b Point c Point d Mediation is conducted for cases of domestic violence that fall into the category of complaint offenses as regulated in Law No. 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence.
What is meant by the right to have one's dignity respected is upholding human rights.
Sufficiently clear.
Sufficiently clear.
What is meant by the right to information is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Point e Point f Point g Point h Point i Point j

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.
What is meant by the right to compensation includes economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health insurance, and education or skills What is meant by the victim's right to rehabilitation includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship What is meant by the right to complaint handling is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers Sufficiently clear What is meant by the right to assistance includes among others psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious counselors, advocates, and family members.
What is meant by companion is an individual who works as a volunteer to provide protection and support to women and children who are victims of violence during the judicial process, these companions can come from family members, friends or independent organizations that provide attention to witnesses and victims or advocates.
Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b the basic rights referred to include the right to education and access to parents during the handling process.
Point c What is meant by the right to equal protection relates to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinions, ethnicity or social life, property, disability, birth or other status.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Point e What is meant by the right to obtain freedom is the freedom to express one's views on all matters, including those

Article 6
Article 7
related to legal processes, temporary care and protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2)

Article 8
What is meant by Regional Action Plan is the stages of programs and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence including the worst forms of child labor that must be carried out by SKPD and UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Article 12
Sufficiently clear Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by complaint services is a series of actions carried out by the organizers of integrated service institutions to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community Letter b What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative aspects Letter c What is meant by social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
Letter d What is meant by spiritual guidance is religious guidance in accordance with one's faith.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Article 18
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b What is meant by the worst forms of work for children, among others:
a. children who are prostituted;
b. children who work in the construction sector;
c. children who work as scavengers;
d. children who conduct activities on the street;
e. children who work as domestic workers;
f. children who work in home industries;
g. children who work as beggars;
h. children who work as vehicle washers;
i. children who conduct activities as street vendors, newspaper sellers, shoe shiners, and street buskers;
j. children who work in the industrial sector and types of activities that use hazardous chemicals;
k. children who work on jermal; and
1. children who work in the entertainment sector.
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Article 22
Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (1) What is meant by guidance on the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is the effort undertaken by the Regional Government and the Community to realize the achievement of the objectives of prevention the objectives of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence.
What is meant by supervision of the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is the process of activities aimed at ensuring that the efforts undertaken by the Regional Government and the Community run efficiently and effectively in accordance with the plans and provisions of laws and regulations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Point a The source of financing for the implementation of protection of women and children from violence is sourced from the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBN), among others in the form of assistance tasks Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE SPECIAL CAPITAL REGION PROVINCE OF JAKARTA

NUMBER 22