REGENT OF BANDUNG WEST JAVA PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 21 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BANDUNG,
Considering : a. that in order to improve the position, role and quality of women is an effort to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national and state life;
b. that all forms of violence against women constitute a violation of human rights so that women need to be protected in their dignity and honor and guaranteed their right to life in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c. that in order to protect the community, realize equity, and justice as an obligation of the regional government to provide protection and welfare for women, a legal foundation is needed in the implementation of women's protection;
d. based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Protection of Women;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions Within the Province of West Java (State Gazette of 1950) as amended by Law Number 4 of 1968 concerning the Establishment of Purwakarta Regency and Subang Regency by amending Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions Within the Province of West Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1968 Number 31, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
7. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446).
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANDUNG REGENCY and

HEAD OF BANDUNG REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Enact : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Bandung Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Bandung.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Women are human beings of female sex starting from infants, adolescents, adults up to the elderly, who have been recognized by law.
6. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against Women.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily.
8. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women will or has occurred.
9. Victim is a Woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and life vulnerability.
10. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social and psychological to the victim.
11. Victim of Violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights violations or criminal acts as well as acts of Violence committed either by state apparatus, Regional Government apparatus, or individuals.
12. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering to Women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
13. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of the Woman.
14. Parents are biological father and/or mother, step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother. 15. Discrimination Against Women is any distinction, exclusion, or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil, or any other field by Women, regardless of their marital status on the basis of equality between men and Women. 16. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and Women that occurs as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
17. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of Victims including physical, psychological, and sexual health so that Victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
18. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return Victims of Violence to their region of origin.
20. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for Victims.
21. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main tasks of integrated services for Women and children Victims of Violence, including complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and legal assistance.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General

Article 2
Every Woman has the right:
a. to life;
b. to form a family and continue descendants; c. to self-development;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to personal freedom;
f. to security;
g. to welfare; and
h. to participate in government.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 3
Every Woman with disability has the right to obtain:
a. education in all units, pathways, types, and levels of education;
b. work and decent livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education, and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. accessibility in the context of independence;
e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life.

Third Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 4
Every Female Victim of Violence has the right: a. to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. to Health Rehabilitation;
c. to determine her own decisions;
d. to obtain information;
e. to confidentiality;
f. to compensation;
g. to Social Rehabilitation;
h. to complaint handling;
i. to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
j. to assistance;
k. to health and psychological recovery; and l. to protection from family, community, Regional Government, and social institutions.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Article 5
Forms of Violence Against Women include: a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Domestic Neglect;
e. trafficking of Women;
f. exploitation; and
g. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
General

Article 6
Protection of Women in the Region is a shared obligation and responsibility among:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community;
c. Family; and
d. Parents.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government Article 7 (1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 6 letter a include:
a. implementing policies for the Protection of Women from all forms of Discrimination Against Women and acts of Violence;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women;
c. collecting data and information about Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women as well as supporting regulations;
d. conducting education on matters related to the Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women;
e. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women;
f. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Protection of Women Victims of Violence and Discrimination Against Women; and
g. providing support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of the Protection of Women. (2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of Violence, the Regional Government:
a. establishes and facilitates the operation of integrated service institutions for Victims by involving community elements;
b. facilitates legal aid assistance and legal services according to the needs of Victims;
c. provides safe houses or alternative residences along with procedures for handling, services, psychosocial, and spiritual matters;
d. conducts continuous handling up to the stage of rehabilitation and Social Reintegration;
e. conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for Victims;
f. encourages public awareness of the importance of Protection for Victims;
g. establishes integrated service posts to receive complaints in every sub-district;
h. facilitates comprehensive health services including visum et repertum services and psychological services; and
i. facilitates protection guarantees needed by victims during assistance to Victims.
(3) In carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), the Regional Government takes into account the rights and obligations of Parents, guardians, husbands, or other persons who are legally responsible for the Victim.
(4) To carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (3), the Regional Government prepares an action plan for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence.
(5) Provisions regarding the action plan for the Protection of Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8
(1) The Regent integrates policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women into the Regional development planning.
(2) The integration of programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be incorporated into planning and budget documents which include:
a. regional long-term development plan; b. regional medium-term development plan; c. strategic plan of Regional Apparatus;
d. work plan of Regional Government; and e. work plan and budget of Regional Apparatus. (3) The Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women shall facilitate the integration of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women into the preparation of planning and budget documents as referred to in paragraph (2).
(4) In carrying out activities as referred to in paragraph (3), the Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women shall coordinate with Regional Apparatus that have direct relevance to the field of Women.

Article 9
(1) The Regent implements policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women to eliminate all forms of Discrimination Against Women and acts of Violence Against Women.
(2) Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women implements policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women that have been established in cooperation and coordination with related Regional Apparatus, law enforcement, community institutions, universities, and the community.
(3) The implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be in the form of:
a. policy analysis;
b. advocacy;
c. coordination and communication;
d. socialization;
e. education;
f. training;
g. facilitation; and
h. provision of services.

Article 10
(1) The Regent in implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women as referred to in Article 9 shall undertake efforts to:
a. coordinate implementation among Regional Apparatus;
b. cooperate with the central government, provincial government, and other regency/city governments in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. strengthen the institutional capacity of Gender;
d. facilitate services for the Protection of Women;
e. provide services for the Protection of Women;
f. implement affirmative action for the Protection of Women; and
g. formulate a data system for the Protection of Women including a data system for Violence Against Women.
(2) The implementation of policies, programs, and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Vice Regent.

Part Three
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community, Family, and Parents

Article 11
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b up to letter d shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. establishing Family partners at the kelurahan and/or village level;
b. establishing Women's Protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of Women's rights;
d. providing first aid to Victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities if Violence Against Women occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and social media.
(4) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12
The Family and/or Parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c and letter d, have full responsibility to prevent all forms of Violence and protect Women as members of the Family.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION, PROTECTION SERVICES, AND RECOVERY OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Part One
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 13
To prevent the occurrence of acts of Violence Against Women, the Regional Government:
a. conducts the preparation and socialization regarding matters related to Violence Against Women;
b. conducts socialization on the rights of Women; c. endeavors to improve education for Women;
d. opens skills courses for Women to support the economic needs of the Family;
e. creates employment opportunities for Women; f. provides counseling related to Violence Against Women;
g. empowers social community organizations and Women's organizations at the Regional, sub-district, urban village, and/or village levels to increase the knowledge and insight of Women;
h. establishes complaint posts for the Protection of Women; and
i. forms a network in efforts to prevent Violence Against Women.

Part Two
Protection Services

Article 14
(1) Protection Services to Women are carried out in the form of:
a. Protection of the personal security of Victims from physical and mental threats;
b. health services according to the needs of victims; c. medical services for the purposes of evidence in the legal field;
d. confidentiality of victim identity;
e. provision of testimony during examination at court hearings without face-to-face contact with the suspect;
f. spiritual guidance services; and/or
g. Protection of Women who work as laborers or workers in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Protection Services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a are carried out by the Family, law enforcement officials, social institutions, and other parties either temporarily or based on the stipulation of a Protection order from the court.

Article 15
(1) In providing Protection services as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1), the Regional Government:
a. provides services and handling as quickly as possible to companions, witnesses and/or Victims;
b. provides ease, comfort, safety, and free of charge for companions, witnesses and/or Victims;
c. maintains confidentiality of witnesses and/or Victims; d. guarantees justice and legal certainty for witnesses and/or Victims;
e. provision of special service rooms at the offices of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia;
f. provision of apparatus, health workers, social workers, and spiritual counselors;
g. creation and development of systems and procedures for cooperation in implementing service programs involving parties easily accessible to Victims;
h. provides protection for companions, witnesses, Families, and friends of Victims;
i. provides decent work and livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education, and ability; and
j. provides protection for female workers or laborers in accordance with the provisions of protection for laborers or workers in accordance with statutory provisions.
(2) The Regional Government in providing Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with the central government, provincial government, other district/city governments, the community, and/or other social institutions.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be set forth in a cooperation agreement.

Article 16
(1) The provision of services for the Protection of Women as referred to in Article 14 consists of identification of Victims, legal aid, medical rehabilitation, psychosocial rehabilitation, Social Reintegration, repatriation assistance.
(2) The provision of services for the Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided for Women Victims of Violence including victims of human trafficking, Women in disaster-prone areas, Women workers, elderly Women, Women with disabilities, and Women Victims of sexual exploitation.

Third Part
Recovery

Article 17
(1) For the purpose of recovery, Victims have the right to obtain:
a. health services;
b. assistance for Victims;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance; and
e. resocialization; and
f. economic empowerment.
(2) For the purpose of recovery as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government is obligated to provide:
a. special service rooms at the offices of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for the recovery of Victims.
(3) Expert and professional personnel as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b consist of:
a. health personnel;
b. social workers;
c. volunteer assistants; and/or
d. spiritual counselors; and/or
e. psychologists.
(4) Health personnel as referred to in paragraph (3) letter a are obligated to examine Victims in accordance with their professional standards, restore, and rehabilitate the health of Victims if Victims require treatment.
(5) Social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors as referred to in paragraph (3) letter b, letter c, and letter d are obligated to provide services to Victims in the form of providing counseling to strengthen and/or provide a sense of security for Victims.
(6) Violations of the provisions as referred to in paragraph (4) and paragraph (5) may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. temporary suspension from activities;
c. termination of cooperation;
d. revocation of registration certificate;
e. revocation of operational permit;
f. withdrawal of facilities; and
g. administrative fine.
(7) Provisions regarding the procedures for implementing administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (6) are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 18
Further provisions regarding the procedures for prevention, protection services, and Recovery of Victims of Violence Against Women as referred to in Article 13 up to Article 17 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 19
(1) The Regional Government establishes P2TP2A in the implementation of Women's Protection services. (2) Women's protection services by P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) involve elements of:
a. health;
b. psychology;
c. law;
d. religious leaders;
e. social; and
f. economic.
(3) Provisions regarding the establishment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20
(1) In addition to establishing P2TP2A as referred to in Article 19, the Regional Government shall establish a task force in the implementation of Women's Protection services.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of elements of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Ministry that administers governmental affairs in the field of religion;
c. State Police of the Republic of Indonesia;
d. Prosecutor's Office;
e. non-governmental organizations; and
f. family welfare development mobilization team.
(3) Provisions regarding the establishment, organizational structure, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 21
(1) Community participation in the Protection of Women may take the form of:
a. provision of counseling regarding the rights of Women;
b. provision of skills training to support the Family economy;
c. establishment of community social institutions to assist Victims of Violence; and
d. reporting to the competent authorities if Violence Against Women occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, community social institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

Article 22
(1) Every person related to the implementation of Protection of Women who knows of the occurrence of acts of Violence against Women but allows it, does not provide Protection to Victims, and/or does not report to related agencies may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning;
c. temporary suspension from activities;
d. termination of cooperation;
e. revocation of registered certificate;
f. revocation of operational permit;
g. withdrawal of facilities; and
h. administrative fine.
(2) Provisions regarding procedures for the application of administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
SUPERVISION, EVALUATION, AND GUIDANCE
Part One
Supervision

Article 23
(1) The Regent shall conduct supervision over the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women.
(2) To ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness in an integrated manner in the implementation of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent shall conduct monitoring through the Regional Apparatus handling the field of Women.
(3) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted from the planning stage up to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women for the current year.
(4) The results of monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be reported to the Regent periodically.

Second Part
Evaluation

Article 24
(1) The Regional Government conducts an evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women in the following year.
(3) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Third Part
Development

Article 25
The Regent conducts guidance on the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women to related Regional Apparatus and sub-districts.

Article 26
Further provisions regarding the supervision, evaluation, and guidance of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women as referred to in Article 21 through Article 23 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING
Article 27
Financing for the implementation of Women's Protection is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and b. other legitimate and non-binding sources of funds

Article 28
(1) Regional Governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement Protection for Women.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided in accordance with the Regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 30
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Bandung Regency.
Enacted in Soreang on the date of 23 December 2016

REGENT OF BANDUNG,
DADANG M. NASER
Promulgated in Soreang on the date of December 23, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY
BANDUNG REGENCY,
SOFIAN NATAPRAWIRA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER 21
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE: (22/340/2016) Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
DICKY ANUGRAH, SH, M.Si Pembina Tk. I

NIP. 19740717 199803 1 003
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 21 OF 2016
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
The position, role and quality of women in current developments have undergone changes in efforts to realize gender equality and justice, both in family life, society, nation and state. Protection of human rights has also become a spotlight, especially related to all forms of violence against women which constitute violations of human rights, so that women need to be protected in their dignity and honor and their right to life must be guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination.
In order to protect the community, realize equity, and justice as an obligation of the regional government to provide protection and welfare for women, the Bandung Regency Government establishes a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women. The implementation of protection of women is carried out based on the principles of Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, which includes:
a. Protection;
b. Respect for human rights;
c. Gender justice and equality;
d. Non-discrimination; and
e. Best interests for women.
The objectives of the establishment of the Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women are:
a. To guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and honor;
b. To provide gender justice and equality;
c. To provide protection and security for women victims of violence and discrimination, as well as criminal acts of trafficking in persons;
d. To eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women;
e. To provide services to women victims of violence and witnesses;
f. To carry out recovery for women victims of violence.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by to live is the right to life and the right to maintain life and livelihood. Letter b What is meant by to have a family and procreate is the right to form a family and procreate through lawful marriage.
Letter c What is meant by to develop oneself is to develop oneself through the fulfillment of basic needs and to obtain education and derive benefits from science and technology, arts and culture, for the purpose of improving quality of life and for the welfare of humankind.
Letter d What is meant by to obtain justice is to receive recognition, guarantee, protection and just legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law. Letter e What is meant by personal freedom is to advance oneself in fighting for one's rights collectively to build society, nation and state.
Letter f What is meant by sense of security is the right to protection of oneself, family, honor, dignity and property under one's authority, as well as the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which constitutes a basic right. Letter g What is meant by welfare is to live prosperously physically and spiritually, to have a place of residence and obtain a good and healthy living environment, as well as the right to obtain health services.
Letter h What is meant by to participate in government is to obtain equal opportunity in government. Article 3 Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a What is meant by physical violence is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or causing death.
Letter b What is meant by psychological violence is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Letter c What is meant by sexual violence as referred to in Article 15 letter c is caused by: a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual relations;
c. forced sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
Letter d What is meant by domestic neglect is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of the needs of women as wives in a reasonable manner, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by the husband, parents, guardian, or other parties;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of women as wives as they should be, committed by the husband, parents, guardian or other parties
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting work
Letter e What is meant by Trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
Letter f What is meant by Exploitation as referred to in Article 15 letter f is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a What is meant by policy analysis is applied social research that is systematically compiled in order to determine the substance of a policy so that information regarding problems answered by the policy and problems that may arise as a result of the implementation of the policy can be clearly known. Letter b What is meant by advocacy is social, political and cultural action carried out in a planned, structured manner, and conducted collectively, involving various tactics including lobbying, campaigns, establishing coalitions, applying pressure through mass action, as well as research used to change policy.
Letter c What is meant by coordination is activities carried out by various parties of equal standing to mutually provide information and jointly arrange or agree upon something, while communication is a process in which a person or several persons, groups, organizations, and society create and use information in order to connect with the environment and other people.
Letter d What is meant by socialization is the process of instilling or transferring habits or values and rules from one generation to another generation within a group or society. Letter e What is meant by education is a learning process conducted either formally or informally that aims to educate, provide knowledge and develop human potential and realize that learning process in a better way.
Letter f What is meant by training is a process where people achieve certain abilities to help achieve organizational goals and constitutes part of education concerning the learning process to acquire and improve skills outside the prevailing education system in a relatively short time with methods that prioritize practice over theory.
Letter g What is meant by facilitation is a conscious process to assist a community group so that they can successfully carry out their tasks while maintaining the existence of that group.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by Monitoring is to determine the developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG REGENCY NUMBER 28.