COPY

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO
EAST JAVA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 YEAR 2019

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO,

Considering: a. that women and children are creatures of God Almighty who have human rights guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, therefore women and children must be protected from all forms of violence and discrimination;

b. that violence against women and children in the Region tends to increase, therefore the Regional Government and/or community need to play an active role optimally to provide protection, so that women and children are prevented and freed from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor;

c. that protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as a basis for implementing comprehensive and integrated protection for women and children;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children.

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette Year 1950 Number 41) as amended by Law Number 2 Year 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);

3. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143) as last amended by Law Number 17 Year 2016 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

9. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

10. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette 5234);

11. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

12. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5512) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 24, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5657);

13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);

14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 446);

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 42);

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 903);

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 903);

20. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 Year 2012 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2013 Number 3 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 23);

21. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 2 Year 2014 concerning Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2014 Number 2 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 38);

22. Regional Regulation of Probolinggo Regency Number 6 Year 2016 concerning Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus.

With Joint Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY
and

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Probolinggo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Probolinggo Regency. 3. Regent is the Regent of Probolinggo.
4. Agency is a Regional Apparatus that has the duties and functions of protection of women and children.
5. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, which is established by the Regional Government or community-based.
6. Protection of Women and Children is all activities to protect the rights of women and children and provide a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights without violence and discrimination in accordance with human dignity.
7. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years or a child who is suspected, charged with a criminal offense and a child who becomes a victim of a criminal offense.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
10. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, ethnicity, religion, race, and skin color that has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights.
11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
13. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems faced.
14. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
15. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
16. Safe House, hereinafter referred to as Shelter, is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
17. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children is based on the principles of: a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of children and women; b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of women and children victims of violence; and e. legal certainty.

Article 3
The implementation of protection for women and children aims to: a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children so they can participate optimally in society in accordance with human dignity and worth; b. provide protection and provide a sense of security to women and children from all forms of violence and discrimination;
c. prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children including human trafficking;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. empower women and children victims of violence.

BAB III
OBLIGATIONS OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 4
The Regional Government is obligated to provide protection for women and children.

Article 5
In the implementation of protection for women and children, the Regional Government shall:
a. establish basic policies for the implementation of protection for women and children in the Regional Action Plan;
b. implement policies for the protection of women and children established by the central government and provincial government;
c. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children among regional apparatus organizations;
d. cooperate with other regions for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children;
e. strengthen institutional Gender mainstreaming and child rights mainstreaming for the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children;
f. establish PPT in the Region;
g. ensure the implementation of excellent service in the protection of women and children, including for women and children victims of violence; and
h. compile a data system for the protection of women and children, including data on violence against women and children;
i. establish and develop Child-Friendly Regencies;

BAB IV
PLANNING
Article 6
The Regent establishes basic policies for the implementation of protection of women and children in the Region.

Article 7
(1) The basic policy as referred to in Article 6 shall be elaborated in the Regional Action Plan.
(2) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be integrated with the Regional Long-Term Development Plan document, Regional Medium-Term Development Plan and Regional Government Work Plan.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall contain at minimum:
a. action programs and activities for the protection of women and children, including women and children victims of violence;
b. regional action programs and activities to prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women and children;
c. action programs and activities for the improvement and enhancement of protection services for women and children victims of violence; and
d. action programs and activities for the empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8
The Regional Action Plan must be used as a guideline for Regional Governments in formulating policies related to the implementation of protection of women and children.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 9
(1) The Regent is obligated to implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children in an integrated manner in order to fulfill the rights of women and children in the Region.
(2) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (1), the Agency coordinates with regional apparatus organizations, law enforcement officials and the community.

Second Part
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Paragraph 1
Forms of Violence

Article 10
Violence against women and children can take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 11
Physical violence as referred to in Article 10 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or cause death.

Article 12
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 13
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.

Article 14
Neglect as referred to in Article 10 letter d is caused by: a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care; b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care; c. acts of neglecting a person within the household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 15
Exploitation as referred to in Article 10 letter e is caused by: a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits either material or immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Paragraph 2
Rights of Victims

Article 16
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to receive:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. excellent service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a community member.

Article 17
In addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 16, child victims of violence also obtain special rights in the form of:
a. the right to respect and full utilization for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 18
(1) In the event that women and children victims of violence require continuous handling, then women and children victims of violence have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage, whether conducted by PPT, individuals, non-governmental organizations, or by the community.

Article 19
(1) Safe houses as referred to in Article 18 paragraph (1) provide temporary safe place and/or shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The organization and/or management of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the relevant Agency.
(3) Provisions regarding the organization of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Rights of Witnesses and Perpetrators

Article 20
(1) Every woman and child who becomes a witness or victim of violence has the right to obtain information, protection, rehabilitation, confidential handling, psychological and legal assistance, as well as the fulfillment of their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.
(2) The fulfillment of rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Scope

Article 21
Protection of women and children victims of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. services; and
c. empowerment.

Article 22
(1) The Regional Government conducts prevention as referred to in Article 21 letter a by means of:
a. socializing laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection of women and children;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education about the dangers of domestic violence;
d. forming cooperation networks in efforts to prevent violence;
e. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
f. collecting data and information as well as establishing a violence prevention system, mapping of locations or areas prone to violence;
g. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of women and children;
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with social norms.
(2) In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention efforts are also carried out by families and/or the community.
(3) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in an integrated manner by PPT

Article 23
(1) Services as referred to in Article 21 letter b are implemented through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and/or
g. repatriation and reintegration.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented with: a. fast and precise;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. free of charge; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(3) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented in an integrated manner by PPT.

Article 24
(1) Empowerment as referred to in Article 21 letter c shall be conducted through:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and c. capital assistance.
(2) Job training as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a includes: a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.
(3) Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; and
b. business actor mentoring.
(4) Capital assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c includes: a. facilities and infrastructure assistance; and
b. working/business capital assistance facilities.
(5) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by PPT.

Third Part
Special Protection of Children

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to provide special protection for children.
(2) Special protection for children as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. children who are victims of sexual crimes;
k. children who are victims of terrorist networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(3) Provisions regarding the procedures for special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four
Assistance

Article 26
(1) Assistance shall be carried out by individuals or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence, perpetrators and witnesses.
(2) Provisions regarding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five
Recovery of Victims, Witnesses, and Perpetrators

Article 27
For the purpose of recovery, women and child victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence may obtain services from:
a. Social institutions (groups or institutions that have a scope on women and children) and or;
b. Social workers (Individuals who have the competence to carry out recovery or rehabilitation) namely:
1. Nurses
2. Health workers

Article 28
(1) Women and children who are victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to receive health examination services by Health Facilities in accordance with professional standards.
(2) In the event that women and children who are victims, witnesses, and perpetrators of violence require treatment, health workers are obligated to provide health recovery and rehabilitation services.
(3) The provision of health recovery and rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29
(1) Women and children who are Victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence have the right to receive counseling services from social workers, volunteer companions, and/or spiritual advisors.
(2) Social workers, volunteer companions, and/or spiritual advisors as referred to in paragraph (1) are obligated to provide services to women and children who are victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence in the form of providing counseling to strengthen, provide a sense of security and rehabilitation.

CHAPTER VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF PPT
Article 30
(1) In the context of implementing protection for women and children, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for women and children.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of regional apparatus that handle affairs of:
a. health;
b. education;
c. youth;
d. social affairs;
e. cooperatives;
f. industry;
g. manpower;
h. trade;
i. population and civil registration;
j. women's empowerment and child protection;
k. public peace and order;
l. regional general hospital;
m. police;
n. non-governmental organizations; and
o. higher education institutions.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by Regent's Decree.
(4) Provisions regarding organizational structure, duties and functions of PPT shall be further regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION
Article 31
(1) In the implementation of protection of women and children, the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with:
a. other regional governments;
b. commissions/agencies/government institutions in the field of protection of women and children;
c. police;
d. advocates;
e. health workers;
f. social workers;
g. volunteer companions;
h. spiritual counselors;
i. non-governmental organizations engaged in the field of protection of women and children; and
j. the community.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance;
h. repatriation and social reintegration;
i. Family Welfare Consultation Institution (LK3).
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 32
(1) The community can participate in the implementation of protection of women and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level;
b. establishing non-governmental organizations whose field of work is in the field of protection of women and children;
c. conducting socialization of women's rights independently;
d. making prevention efforts if finding indications of violence against women and children in the community;
e. providing first aid to women and children victims of violence; and
f. reporting to the competent authority if violence against women and children occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business sector.

Article 33
In implementing the protection of women and children, individuals, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, and the business sector coordinate with PPT.

Article 34
(1) The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of: a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the rights of women and children;
b. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children;
c. providing assistance in the implementation of protection of women and children as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 35
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children, both carried out by PPT and non-governmental organizations.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection of women and children in accordance with the mechanisms and service procedures stipulated in laws and regulations.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the relevant Agency.

Article 36
(1) Supervision as referred to in Article 35 is conducted on: a. the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children; and
b. the fulfillment of guidelines and minimum service standards in the implementation of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence.
(2) Supervision is conducted at the end of each fiscal year and the results are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children for the following year.

Article 37
Provisions regarding the guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
REPORTING
Article 38
(1) PPT is obligated to report the implementation of protection services for women and children to the Regent through the Agency.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING
Article 39
Funds for the implementation of protection of women and children are sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40
(1) Regional Governments may provide funding assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women and children.
(2) Funding assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
PROHIBITIONS
Article 41
Every person is prohibited from:
a. treating women and children in a discriminatory manner which results in women and children experiencing losses, both material and moral, thereby hindering their social function;
b. treating women and children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of maltreatment and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in committing violence against women and children;
e. committing violence or threat of violence to force women and children to engage in sexual intercourse with him/her or with another person;
f. committing violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing deceit, committing a series of lies, or persuading women and children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of women and children;
h. obstructing women and children from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing the teachings of their religion and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of women and children;
j. intentionally placing, allowing, involving women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropic substances and/or
k. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of women and children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

Article 42
Organizers of PPT or safe houses are prohibited from collecting fees in providing services to women and children who are victims, witnesses and perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER XIII
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 43
(1) Health Workers who refuse or are unwilling to provide health examination services as referred to in Article 28 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. suspension of practice license/work permit;
c. practice restrictions for Health Workers in independent practice;
(2) Social workers, volunteer companions, and/or spiritual counselors who refuse or are unwilling to provide counseling services as referred to in Article 29 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. reprimand; or
b. written warning.
(3) Provisions regarding the mechanism for imposing sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XIV
PROVISIONS ON INVESTIGATION
Article 44
(1) Civil Servant Investigators within the Regional Government are granted special authority to conduct investigations of criminal acts as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.
(2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. to receive, search for, collect and examine information or reports concerning criminal acts;
b. to examine, search for and collect information or reports concerning criminal acts;
c. to request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. to examine books, records and other documents concerning criminal acts;
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents as well as to carry out seizures of such evidence;
f. to request the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. to order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving a room or place at the time the examination is taking place and to examine the identity of persons and or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. to photograph persons related to criminal acts;
i. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. to terminate investigations;
k. to take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of criminal investigations according to applicable law and which can be accounted for.
(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), shall notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the public prosecutor through the Investigator of the State Police of the Republic of Indonesia in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XV
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 45
(1) Every person who violates the prohibition as referred to in Article 41 and Article 42 shall be subject to a maximum criminal sentence of 3 (three) months imprisonment or a maximum fine of Rp. 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).
(2) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is a violation.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 46
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this regional regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Probolinggo Regency.
Enacted in Probolinggo On the date of March 1, 2019

REGENT OF PROBOLINGGO
signed.
Hj. P. TANTRIANA SARI, SE Promulgated in Probolinggo On the date of March 1, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY
H. SOEPARWIYONO, SH, MH
Principal Supervisor Young

NIP. 19621225 198508 1 002
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 2 SERIES E REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY NUMBER 24-2/2019 Copy in accordance with the original:
on behalf of REGIONAL SECRETARY Assistant for Government Administration and Public Welfare
represented by

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
P A R J O N O, SH. M.Si Pembina Tingkat I

NIP. 19610607 198102 1 002
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PROBOLINGGO REGENCY
NUMBER : 2 OF 2019
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION
That protection for women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as the basis for implementing protection for women and children that is comprehensive and integrated in a Regional Regulation.

II. ELUCIDATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 2 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 3 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 4 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 5 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 6 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 7 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 8 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 9 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 10 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 11 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 12 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 13 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 14 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 15 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 16 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 17 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 18 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 19 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 20 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 21 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 22 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 23 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 24 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 25 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 26 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 27 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 28 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 29 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 30 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 31 : Sufficiently clear.
Article 32 : Sufficiently clear.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~