GOVERNMENT OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY
NUMBER 10 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,

Considering: a. that the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia guarantees the welfare of each of its citizens, including protection of women's rights and children's rights which are human rights;

b. that in order to improve the position, role, and quality of women is an effort to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life;

c. that every child is a bud, potential, and the next generation of the nation's struggle, and is expected to be able to bear that responsibility in the future, therefore they need to be given the widest possible opportunity to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally and socially, and have noble character, so efforts need to be made to protect and realize child welfare by providing guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and treatment without discrimination;

d. that violence against women and children is a crime against humanity which is a violation of human rights;

- 2 -

e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 90) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);

3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

5. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);

- 3 -

6. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

7. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition And Immediate Action for The Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3941);

8. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

10. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

11. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);

- 4 -

12. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

13. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

14. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

15. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

16. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

17. Government Regulation Number 58 of 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 140, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);

18. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

- 5 -

19. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

20. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

21. Government Regulation Number 44 of 2008 concerning Provision of Compensation, Restitution, and Assistance to Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 84, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4860);

22. Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 Concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of The Child;

23. Presidential Decree Number 23 of 2011 concerning the National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia Year 2011-2014;

24. Joint Decree of 3 (three) Ministers and the Chief of Police Number: 14/MenegPemberdayaan Perempuan/Dep.V/X/2002 Number 1329/MENKES/SKB/X/2002, Number 75/HUK/2002, Number POL.B/3048/2002, concerning Integrated Services for Victims of Violence against Women and Children;

25. Presidential Decree Number 59 of 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour;

26. Presidential Decree Number 52 of 2004 National Commission for the Elderly;

- 6 -

27. Presidential Regulation Number 65 of 2005 concerning the National Commission on Violence Against Women;

28. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 of 2011 (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);

29. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

30. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 53 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 694);

31. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 2 of 2009 concerning Principles of Regional Financial Management (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency Year 2009 Number 1 Series E);

32. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 22 of 2011 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Apparatus of Trenggalek Regency (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency Year 2011 Number 1 Series D);

With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
TRENGGALEK REGENCY
REGENT OF TRENGGALEK
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
- 7 -

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. Region is Trenggalek Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Trenggalek Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Trenggalek.
4. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional House of Representatives of Trenggalek Regency.
5. Implementation is the form of execution of protection of women and children including protection of women and children victims of violence.
6. Protection of Women is all efforts made by family, government and others directed towards women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural circumstances of society.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or threat of violence.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
- 8 -
10. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
12. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza), children victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of mistreatment and neglect.
13. Protection of Women and Children Victims of violence is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, family, advocates, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women and Children will or has occurred.
14. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
15. Child rights mainstreaming is a strategy to integrate child issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of Laws and Regulations, policies, programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.
16. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
- 9 -
17. Child with disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental障碍 that interferes with their growth and development properly.
18. Child with excellence is a child who has extraordinary intelligence, or has exceptional potential and/or talent.
19. Adopted child is a child whose rights are transferred from the environment of parental authority, legal guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the child, into the family environment of adoptive parents based on a court decision or determination.
20. Foster child is a child who is fostered by a person or institution, to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health, because their parents or one of their parents is unable to guarantee the child's proper growth and development.
21. Custody is the power of parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop children in accordance with their religion and abilities, talents, and interests.
22. Child rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, society, government, and the state.
23. Society is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations. 24. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
25. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
26. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
27. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises custody as a parent towards a child.
- 10 -
28. Every person is an individual or corporation. 29. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children (PPTPA) is a cooperative network that carries out the function of integrated services for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
30. Safe House (Shelter) is a protection house for women and children including families and witnesses of violence victims.
31. Social Community Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
32. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
33. Criminal Act of Human Trafficking is any action or series of actions that meet the elements of a criminal act determined in the Law on Human Trafficking.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
(1) The implementation of Protection of Women is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia comprising:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and - 11 -
d. protection of victims.
(2) The implementation of protection of children is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child comprising:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

Article 3
The objectives of implementing the protection of women are: a. to guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. to protect women and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women; and
c. to maintain the integrity of harmonious and prosperous households.

Article 4
The objectives of implementing child protection are: a. to guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. to protect children and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against children; and
c. to realize quality children who are of noble character and prosperous.
- 12 -

BAB III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
Rights and Obligations of Women

Article 5
Every Woman has the right:
a. to live and the right to maintain life and her livelihood;
b. to form a family and continue descendants through legal marriage;
c. to develop herself through the fulfillment of her basic needs;
d. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, for the purpose of improving the quality of her life and for the welfare of humankind;
e. to advance herself in fighting for her rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i. to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
j. to protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property under her control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which constitutes a basic right;
k. to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from another country;
- 13 -
l. to live in prosperity physically and mentally, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m. to social security that enables her full development as a dignified human being;
n. to equality of position in law and government;
o. to work and a livelihood worthy of humanity; p. in efforts to defend the state;
q. to communicate and obtain information to develop her personal and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available channels;
r. to embrace her respective religion and to worship according to that religion and belief; and
s. to obtain education.

Article 6
Every person is obligated to respect the human rights of others in the orderly life of society, nation and state.

Second Part
Obligations of Regional Government

Article 7
Regional Governments are obligated to implement efforts for the protection of women.
- 14 -

Article 8
(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government shall organize gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. organizing the protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
- 15 -
i. facilitating the integration of protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating the protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l. developing a gender-based information system; and
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
(2) Further provisions regarding the forms of protection of women and the mechanism of gender mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Community Participation

Article 9
(1) To carry out the protection of women as referred to in Article 8, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, Community Social Institutions, religious institutions and/or other legitimate institutions.
- 16 -

CHAPTER IV
CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
Rights and Obligations of the Child

Article 10
Every child has the right:
a. to survival, growth, development and to participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence and discrimination;
b. to a name as personal identity and citizenship status;
c. to worship according to their religion, to think, and to express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age, under parental guidance;
d. to know their parents, to be raised, and to be cared for by their own parents;
e. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
f. to obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents;
g. to express and have their opinion heard, to receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with moral values and propriety;
h. to rest and utilize leisure time, to associate with children of the same age, to play, to recreate, and to create in accordance with their interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development;
i. to receive protection from discriminatory treatment, exploitation, whether economic or sexual, neglect, violence, abuse, injustice, other mistreatment, while in the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care;
- 17 -
j. to be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules indicating that such separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration; and
k. to obtain protection from abuse in political activities, involvement in armed conflict, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence and involvement in warfare.

Article 11
(1) Every child has the right to obtain protection from being a target of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhumane punishment.
(2) Every child has the right to obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
(3) Arrest, detention, or criminal imprisonment of a child shall only be carried out if in accordance with applicable law and can only be carried out as a last resort.

Article 12
(1) Every child who is deprived of liberty has the right to: a. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
b. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal remedies; and
c. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a hearing closed to the public.
(2) Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.
- 18 -

Article 13
Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act has the right to obtain legal assistance and other assistance.

Article 14
(1) In the event that due to a certain reason the parents cannot guarantee the growth and development of the child, or the child is in a state of neglect, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.
(2) In the event that the parent, guardian, or caregiver of the child commits any form of treatment as referred to in Article 10 letter j, then the perpetrator shall be subject to aggravated punishment in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.

Article 15
Specifically for children with disabilities, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 10 through Article 12 and Article 14, are also entitled to:
a. obtain special education, while for children who have excellence are also entitled to receive special education; and
b. obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards.

Article 16
Every child is obligated to:
a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, society, and care for friends; c. love the homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and - 19 -
e. implement ethics and noble morals.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities

Paragraph 1
General

Article 17
Regional Government, community, family, and parents are obligated and responsible for the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 2
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 18
Regional Governments have the obligation in child protection efforts.

Article 19
(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 18, the Regional Government shall organize the mainstreaming of children's rights including:
a. establishing the implementation of mainstreaming of children's rights;
b. coordinating and facilitating the mainstreaming of children's rights;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of child mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. coordinating and facilitating child-responsive programs and activities and the development of communication, information, and education regarding the mainstreaming of children's rights;
- 20 -
e. implementing the mainstreaming of children's rights related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. improving the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. integrating development efforts related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
i. endeavoring to protect children especially victims of violence, children with disabilities in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. facilitating the integration of child protection especially protection for victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
k. coordinating child protection especially protection for victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
l. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of mainstreaming of children's rights; and
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for child victims of violence, children with disabilities, and neglected children.
- 21 - (2) Further provisions regarding forms of child protection and mechanisms for mainstreaming children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20
Regional Governments have the obligation and responsibility to respect and guarantee the human rights of every child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, group, gender, ethnic origin, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Article 21
Regional Governments have the obligation and responsibility to provide support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of child protection.

Article 22
(1) The Regional Government guarantees the protection, care, and welfare of children with due regard to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons legally responsible for the child.
(2) The Regional Government supervises the implementation of child protection.

Article 23
The Regional Government guarantees the child to exercise their right to express opinions in accordance with the child's age and level of intelligence.
- 22 -

Paragraph 3
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 24
The obligations and responsibilities of the community toward the protection of children are implemented through community participation activities in the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 4
Obligations and Responsibilities of Family and Parents

Article 25
(1) Parents are obligated and responsible to: a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent the occurrence of marriage at child age. (2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may transfer to the family, which shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Third Part
Status of Children, Custody, Guardianship, Care and Adoption of Children

Article 26
Regarding the status of children, custody, guardianship, care and adoption of children shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
- 23 -

Fourth Part
Implementation of Protection

Paragraph 1
Religion

Article 27
(1) Every child receives protection to worship according to their religion.
(2) Before a child can determine their choice, the religion embraced by the child follows the religion of their parents.

Article 28
(1) Regional Government, community, family, parents, guardians, and social community institutions guarantee the protection of children in embracing their religion.
(2) Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes fostering, guiding, and practicing religious teachings for children.

Paragraph 2
Health

Article 29
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains an optimal degree of health from the time they are in the womb.
(2) The provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be supported by community participation.
(3) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
- 24 - (4) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be organized free of charge for families who are unable to afford them.
(5) The implementation of provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (4) shall be adjusted to the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 30
(1) Parents and family are responsible for maintaining the health of children and caring for children from the time they are in the womb. (2) In the event that parents and family are unable to carry out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), then the Regional Government is obligated to fulfill it. (3) The obligation as referred to in paragraph (2), its implementation shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 31
Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to ensure that children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.

Article 32
(1) Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from attempts to transplant their body organs for other parties.
(2) Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to protect children from acts of:
a. removal of children's body organs and/or children's body tissue without regard to the children's health;
b. buying and selling of children's organs and/or body tissue; and c. health research that uses children as research objects without parental consent and does not prioritize the best interests of the child.
- 25 -

Paragraph 3
Education

Article 33
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide basic education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years for all children.
(2) Parents are obligated to fulfill the rights of children to obtain basic education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years.

Article 34
Regional Government, family, and parents are obligated to provide the widest possible opportunity to children to obtain education.

Article 35
Education as referred to in Article 33 is directed towards:
a. the development of the child's personality, talents, mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential;
b. the development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
c. the development of respect for the child's parents, cultural identity, language and values, the national values of the country in which the child is living, the country from which the child may originate, and civilizations different from the child's own;
d. the preparation of the child for responsible life; and
e. the development of respect and love for the environment.
- 26 -

Article 36
Children with physical and/or mental disabilities shall be given equal opportunities and accessibility to obtain regular education and special education.

Article 37
Children who have exceptional abilities shall be given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.

Article 38
(1) Regional Governments are responsible for providing education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children residing in remote areas.
(2) The responsibility of Regional Governments as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.

Article 39
Children in and around the school must be protected from acts of violence committed by teachers, school administrators or their friends within the school concerned, or other educational institutions.

Paragraph 4
Social

Article 40
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, both within institutions and outside institutions.
- 27 - (2) The organization of maintenance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by community institutions. (3) To organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, government institutions and community institutions, as referred to in paragraph (2), may establish cooperation with various related parties.
(4) In the case of organizing maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (3), supervision shall be conducted by regional apparatus institutions that administer affairs in the social sector in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 41
(1) Regional Government in carrying out maintenance and care is obligated to endeavor and assist children, so that children can:
a. participate;
b. freely express opinions and think in accordance with their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information in accordance with the child's age stage and development;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and engage in cultural arts; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.
(2) Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the age, level of ability of the child, and their environment so as not to hinder and disturb the child's development.
- 28 -

Article 42
In the event a child is neglected because for some reason the parents have failed to fulfill their obligations, then the institution as referred to in Article 40, the family, or the authorized official may submit a request to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 43
(1) The court determination as referred to in Article 42 shall simultaneously determine the place of shelter, maintenance, and care for the abandoned child concerned.
(2) The Regional Government or authorized institution shall be obligated to provide the place as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Five
Special Protection

Article 44
Regional Governments and other state institutions have the obligation and responsibility to provide special protection to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza), children who are victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, children who are victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect.

Article 45
Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 44 consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
- 29 -
b. children victims of riots;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 46
Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 45 letter a shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 47
Special protection for child victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 45 letters b through letter d, shall be implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, shelter, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 48
Every person is prohibited from recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests and leaving children without protection of life.

Article 49
(1) Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 44 includes children in conflict with the law and child victims of criminal acts, and constitutes the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and society.
- 30 - (2) Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. treatment of children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of children;
b. provision of special accompanying officers for children from an early stage; c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the child;
e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of children in conflict with the law; f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
g. protection from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling.
(3) Special protection for children who become victims of criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. rehabilitation efforts, both within institutions and outside institutions;
b. efforts to protect from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling;
c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, whether physical, mental, or social; and
d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Article 50
(1) Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.
- 31 - (2) Every person is prohibited from obstructing children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings, and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Article 51
(1) Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 44 constitutes the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and society.
(2) Special protection for children who are exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through: a. dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of Laws and Regulations related to the protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and c. involvement of various Regional Government agencies, companies, labor unions, Social Community Institutions, and society in the elimination of exploitation of children economically and/or sexually.
(3) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing exploitation of children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 52
(1) Special protection for children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza) abuse as referred to in Article 44, and are involved in their production and distribution, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and society.
- 32 - (2) Every person is prohibited from deliberately placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, production and distribution of napza as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 53
(1) Special protection for child victims of abduction, sale, and trafficking of children as referred to in Article 44 is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing abduction, sale, or trafficking as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 54
(1) Special protection for child victims of violence as referred to in Article 44 covering physical, psychological, and sexual violence shall be carried out through efforts to: a disseminate and socialize the provisions of Laws and Regulations that protect child victims of acts of violence; and b monitor, report, and impose sanctions. (2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of, or participating in committing violence as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 55
(1) Special protection for children with disabilities as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. treat children humanely in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;
- 33 -
b. fulfill special needs; and c. obtain equal treatment with other children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development.
(2) Every person is prohibited from treating children by disregarding their views in a discriminatory manner, including labeling and equalization in education for children with disabilities.

Article 56
(1) Special protection for children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, and rehabilitation by the Regional Government and the community.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of maltreatment, and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

Sixth Part
Community Participation

Article 57
(1) The community has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to participate in child protection.
(2) The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social community institutions, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 58
The role of the community is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
- 34 -

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Rights of Victims

Article 59
Every victim has the right to:
a. obtain protection from family, Regional Government, police, prosecution, court, advocates, social institutions or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the Court;
b. obtain health services in accordance with medical needs;
c. obtain special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. obtain assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
e. obtain spiritual guidance services;
f. obtain protection from threats that endanger self, life and/or property whether before, during or after the case examination process from the Police;
g. obtain health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation and social reintegration if the person concerned experiences suffering both physically and psychologically;
h. obtain restitution for victims of criminal acts of human trafficking or their heirs in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
i. other rights regulated in the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
- 35 -

Article 60
Every victim has the right to report and obtain assistance both psychologically and legally as well as to obtain guarantees for their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

Article 61
The rights as referred to in Article 59 letter c, are also granted to the family of the witness and/or victim up to the second degree, if the family of the witness and/or victim receives threats either physical or psychological from other persons in connection with the testimony of the witness and/or victim.

Second Part
Obligations of Regional Government and Community

Article 62
Regional Governments are obligated to implement prevention of acts of violence, criminal acts of human trafficking, and protection efforts for victims.

Article 63
(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 62, the Regional Government:
a. formulates policies regarding efforts to prevent violence and prevent criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
b. formulates policies regarding the elimination of violence;
- 36 -
c. conducts communication, information, education, socialization, and advocacy regarding violence against women and children as well as criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
d. establishes institutions as a forum for cooperation in the protection and recovery of victims;
e. implements mechanisms for medical services, medicolegal services, psychosocial services, legal services, assistance services, spiritual guidance services, and victim recovery services;
f. provides infrastructure and facilities for the protection and recovery of victims;
g. facilitates the resocialization of victims, so that victims can resume their social functions in society; and
h. conducts health rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, and social reintegration for victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children.
(2) Further provisions regarding the forms and mechanisms of victim protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 64
(1) Families and communities are obligated to prevent the occurrence of violence and the occurrence of criminal acts against women and children.
(2) Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence is obligated to make efforts in accordance with the limits of their ability to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims;
c. provide emergency assistance; and - 37 -
d. assist in the process of submitting applications for protection orders.

Third Part
Community Participation in Victim Protection

Article 65
(1) The community participates in assisting prevention efforts and handling of victims of violence and criminal acts against women and children.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is realized through actions of providing information and/or reporting the occurrence of violence and criminal acts against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties, or participating in handling victims of violence and criminal acts against women and children.
(3) To carry out participation as referred to in paragraph (2), the community has the right to obtain legal protection.
(4) Regional Governments in providing protection to victims may cooperate with the community or social community institutions.
- 38 -

CHAPTER VI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 66
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency.
Enacted in Trenggalek on 30 April 2012

REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,
Promulgated in Trenggalek on July 5, 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY,
SUKIMAN
MULYADI WR
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 3 SERIES E Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
ANIK SUWARNI, SH, M.Si Pembina Tk. I

NIP . 19650919199602 2 001
Reg. Number 188.342/XIV/406.004/2012 Date 9 July 2012 - 39 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY
NUMBER 10 OF 2012
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The existence of Regional Regulations that side with vulnerable or subordinated groups, particularly women and children, becomes very necessary in connection with the many social problems that result in the deprivation of human rights of women and children.

The human rights of women and children are part of human rights contained in the 1945 Constitution and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child as well as the ratification of the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women, however the enforcement of human rights of women and children still cannot encourage becoming a political commitment in the Region.

The form of implementation of protection for women carried out by the Government is implementing gender mainstreaming, namely a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Regional development program policies within the framework of National development.

Children are a trust as well as a gift from God Almighty, which we must always protect because inherent in them are dignity, honor, and rights as human beings that must be upheld. From the perspective of national and state life, children are the future of the nation and the next generation of the nation's ideals, so that every child has the right to survival, growth, and development, participation and the right to protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.

- 40 - Although Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection has included the rights of children, the implementation of obligations and responsibilities of parents, family, community, government, and the state to provide protection to children, a Regional Regulation is still needed as a juridical foundation for the implementation of these obligations and responsibilities in the Region. Thus, the formation of this Regional Regulation is based on the consideration that child protection in all its aspects is part of development activities in the Region, particularly in advancing national and state life.

Parents, family, and community are responsible for safeguarding and maintaining these human rights in accordance with the obligations imposed by law. Likewise, in the context of implementing child protection, the state and Regional Government are responsible for providing facilities and accessibility for children, especially in ensuring their growth and development optimally and in a directed manner.

This Regional Regulation affirms that the accountability of parents, family, community, Regional Government and the state is a series of activities carried out continuously for the protection of children's rights. This series of activities must be sustainable and directed to ensure the growth and development of children, both physical, mental, spiritual and social. This action is intended to realize the best life for children who are expected as potential successors to the nation, resilient, having nationalism imbued with noble character and Pancasila values, and having a strong will to maintain the unity and integrity of the nation and state.

Child protection efforts need to be implemented as early as possible, namely from the fetus in the womb until the child is 18 (eighteen) years old. Starting from the concept of comprehensive, complete, and comprehensive child protection, this Regional Regulation places the obligation to provide protection to children based on the following principles:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and d. respect for the views of the child.

- 41 - In conducting guidance, development and protection of children, the role of the community is needed, whether through child protection institutions, religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations, social organizations, business world, mass media, or educational institutions.

The form of implementation of child protection carried out by the Regional Government is through mainstreaming children's rights, namely integrating children's issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of legislation, policy programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.

The integrity and harmony of a happy, safe, peaceful and tranquil household is the aspiration of everyone in the household. The Republic of Indonesia is a state based on Belief in the One and Only God guaranteed by Article 29 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Thus, every person within the household in exercising their rights and obligations must be based on religion. This needs to be continuously developed in order to build household integrity.

To realize this integrity and harmony, it greatly depends on each person within the household, especially the quality level of behavior and self-control of each person within the household.

The integrity and harmony of the household can be disrupted if quality and self-control cannot be controlled, which ultimately can lead to domestic violence resulting in insecurity or injustice towards people within the household.

To prevent, protect victims, and take action against perpetrators of domestic violence, the state and society are obliged to carry out prevention, protection, and action against perpetrators in accordance with the philosophy of Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The state views that all forms of violence, especially domestic violence, are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as a form of discrimination. The state's view is based on Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, along with - 42 - its amendments. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something that is a human right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to receive facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in order to achieve equality and justice".

Current developments show that acts of physical, psychological, sexual violence, and household neglect in reality occur so that adequate legal instruments are needed to eliminate domestic violence.

The Regional Regulation regulates matters of prevention and protection as well as recovery for victims of violence, and regulates matters of obligations for law enforcement officers, health workers, social workers, volunteer companions, or spiritual counselors to protect victims so that they are more sensitive and responsive to household interests which from the outset are directed towards household integrity and harmony. To carry out prevention of domestic violence, the Regional Government is obliged to carry out tasks in the field of women's empowerment to implement preventive actions, among others, organizing communication, information, and education about preventing violence against women and children.

Based on these considerations, it is time to establish a Regional Regulation that is regulated comprehensively, clearly, and firmly in the implementation of protection for women and children including protection for women and children victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
- 43 -

Article 2
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition where women and men enjoy equal status and have the same conditions to fully realize their basic rights and potential for the integrity and continuity of the household proportionally.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "the principle of the best interests of the child" is that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.
Letter c What is meant by "the principle of the right to life, survival, and development" is the most fundamental basic right for children that is protected by the state, government, society, family, and parents.
Letter d What is meant by "the principle of respect for the views of the child" is respect for the rights of children to participate and express their opinions in decision-making, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.
- 44 -

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c This provision is intended to give freedom to children in order to develop their creativity and intellectuality (reasoning power) in accordance with the child's age level. The provision of this article also affirms that such development must still be under the guidance of their parents.
Point d The provision regarding the right of a child to know who their parents are, in the sense of their origins (including their wet nurse), is intended to prevent the severance of lineage and blood relations between the child and their biological parents, while the right to be raised and cared for by their parents is intended so that the child can be obedient to and respect their parents.
Point e Sufficiently clear.
- 45 - Point f Sufficiently clear.
Point g Sufficiently clear.
Point h Sufficiently clear.
Point i Discriminatory treatment, for example treatment that differentiates based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.
Exploitative treatment, for example actions or conduct that uses, takes advantage of, or exploits a child to obtain personal, family, or group benefits. Neglectful treatment, for example actions or conduct that deliberately neglects the obligation to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate.
Cruel treatment, for example actions or conduct that is tyrannical, vicious, brutal, or shows no compassion toward a child.
Violent and abusive treatment, for example conduct that injures and/or harms a child, and not merely physically, but also mentally and socially.
Unjust treatment, for example actions showing favoritism between one child and another, or arbitrary treatment toward a child.
Other wrongful treatment, for example actions of harassment or indecent conduct toward a child.
Point j What is meant by "separation" is not eliminating the relationship of the child with their parents.
Point k What is meant by "protection" includes activities that are direct and indirect in nature, from actions that endanger the child physically and psychologically.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.
- 46 -

Article 12
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "other assistance" for example social guidance from social workers, consultation from psychologists and psychiatrists, or assistance from linguists.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
What is meant by "other assistance" includes medical, social, rehabilitation, vocational, and educational assistance.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
What is meant by "right" is intended to guarantee their life in accordance with human dignity, increase self-confidence, and the ability to participate in community, national, and state life.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
What is meant by "support for facilities and infrastructure" includes, for example, schools, playgrounds, sports fields, places of worship, health centers, art buildings, recreation areas, breastfeeding rooms, childcare centers, and special detention centers for children.
- 47 -

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by "a child may determine the religion of their choice" is if the child has reached the age of reason and responsibility, and fulfills the requirements and procedures in accordance with the provisions of the religion they have chosen, and the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
What is meant by "disease that threatens the continuity of life and causes disability" for example HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, leprosy, polio. Article 32 Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.
- 48 -

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

Article 37
Sufficiently clear

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear

Article 40
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "in an institution" is through the government institution system and private institution system, while "outside an institution" is the family/individual care system.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) What is meant by "institution" is a social community institution

Article 44
What is meant by "other State institutions" are the police, the prosecutor's office, the courts, and legal aid institutions.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear - 49 -

Article 47
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "psychosocial disturbance" includes, among others, psychological trauma and developmental disorders in children at an early age.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

Article 50
Sufficiently clear

Article 51
Sufficiently clear

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear

Article 56
Sufficiently clear

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear

Article 59
Letter a What is meant by "social institution" is a social institution or organization that is concerned with the issue of domestic violence, for example legal aid institutions. Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
- 50 - Letter d What is meant by "social worker" is a person who has professional competence in social work obtained through formal education or practical experience in the field of social work/social welfare that is officially recognized by the government and carries out professional social work duties.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear

Article 61
Sufficiently clear

Article 62
Sufficiently clear.

Article 63
Sufficiently clear

Article 64
Sufficiently clear

Article 65
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) What is meant by "cooperation" is as a form of community participation.
- 51 -

Article 66
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY NUMBER 11