# REGENT OF PASURUAN
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY
NUMBER 4 OF 2018
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
THE REGENT OF PASURUAN,

Considering : a. that women and children are creatures created by God Almighty who need to receive respect and protection for their dignity and worth as human beings;
b. that women and children have a strategic position as assets of the nation, so that women's empowerment and child protection must be carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner through acceleration of the fulfillment and protection of the rights of women and children in their personal lives, family, society, nation and state;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning Regional Government of Regencies in East Java (State Gazette of 1950 Number 32) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
7. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
8. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
12. Government Regulation Number 12 of 2017 concerning Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2017 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6041);
13. Presidential Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 87 of 2014 concerning Implementing Regulations of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 199);
14. Presidential Regulation Number 61 of 2016 concerning the Indonesian Child Protection Commission (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 135);
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3 of 2008 Concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
17. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 927);
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 42);
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 903);
22. Joint Regulation of the Minister of Law and Human Rights and the Minister of Home Affairs Number 20 of 2012/Number: 77 of 2012 concerning Human Rights Parameters in the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;
23. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 615);
24. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;
25. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2013 Number 3 Series D, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Java Province Number 23);
26. Regulation of the Governor of East Java Number 66 of 2013 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Development of East Java Province (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2013 Number 67 Series E);

With the Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PASURUAN REGENCY
and

REGENT OF PASURUAN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pasuruan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of Pasuruan Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pasuruan.
4. Regional Apparatus Organization hereinafter abbreviated as OPD is the Regional Apparatus Organization within the Government of Pasuruan Regency.
5. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
6. Woman is a person (human being) who can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth to children and breastfeed.
7. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
8. Every person is an individual or corporation, whether a legal entity or not a legal entity.
9. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
10. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
11. Women's Empowerment is a systematic and planned effort to achieve gender equality and justice in family and community life.
12. Gender responsive is a policy, program, activity and budgeting that takes into account differences in the needs, experiences and aspirations of men and women.
13. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
16. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance and has professional competence in their field.
17. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by companions during the service process.
18. Institution is an Office/Agency/Bureau within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
19. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children hereinafter referred to as PPTPPA, is an institution/functional work unit providing integrated services and assistance, counseling, referral and advocacy for women and children victims of violence.
20. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
21. Child-Friendly Regency is a Regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of government, community and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
22. Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is a coordinative institution at the city level that coordinates policy efforts, programs and activities to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.
23. Prosperous Family Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PUSYANGATRA is a forum for activities or a series of family service activities through the provision of IEC, consultation, counseling, guidance and facilitation in order to help realize a small, happy and prosperous family of quality.
24. Family Learning Center hereinafter abbreviated as PUSPAGA is a learning place to improve the family's ability to care for and protect children as well as create referrals for parenting, education, health, protection for children and parents/families to support optimal child development.
25. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension in the planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development policies and programs.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Women's Empowerment and Child Protection shall be implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. best interests of the child;
h. accountability; and
i. gender responsiveness.

Article 3
Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to: a. improve the quality of life of women, children and the quality of families; b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection in the regions, including the development of gender and child data systems; and
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article 4
In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter a, it shall be carried out through:
a. providing access for women and children to education services, health and other strategic fields;
b. encouraging the involvement of women and children in the development process; c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals and family resilience; and
d. encouraging programs that can increase the independence of women in the economic, political, legal, social, cultural and other strategic fields.

Article 5
In order to realize the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter b, efforts shall be made through:
a. establishment, development and capacity strengthening of institutions for the protection of women and children including complaint service units for violence against women and children as well as legal aid services;
b. improvement of the quality of human resources of managers;
c. strengthening of institutional capacity for Gender Mainstreaming and Children in the regions; and
d. strengthening and development of gender and child data systems.

Article 6
In order to implement the objectives as referred to in Article 3 letter c, this shall be carried out through promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 7
Promotive efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. strengthening coordination mechanisms and work networks among service units in efforts to handle cases of violence;
b. providing Communication, Information and Education (IEC) materials related to prevention and handling of violence; and
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and social campaigns in the context of prevention and handling of violence.

Article 8
Preventive efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. conducting legal awareness education for the community, especially for women and children;
b. developing massive and sustainable movements involving the community in prevention and handling of violence actions;
c. instilling character values, morals, and family resilience; and
d. involving the role and participation of the community in women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 9
Curative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. optimizing technical service units related to complaints of violence against women and children;
b. providing adequate facilities and infrastructure for handling complaints, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal aid, repatriation, social reintegration; and
c. conducting handling of victims of crime and violence quickly, precisely and accurately by law enforcement officials.

Article 10
Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in Article 6 are as follows:
a. providing accompanying personnel for victims of crime and violence, which includes among others psychologists, psychiatrists, religious leaders/spiritual companions, lawyers, medical personnel; and
b. strengthening work networks and coordination in the reintegration process as well as the return of victims to their families and/or social environment.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION, ADVANCEMENT, ENFORCEMENT AND FULFILLMENT OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 11
Every woman and child has basic rights as a human being that must be protected, advanced, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 12
Every woman has the right to:
a. live, sustain life and improve her standard of living;
b. live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually;
c. enjoy a good and healthy living environment;
d. live in a family within the bonds of lawful marriage based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
e. obtain work in accordance with her abilities, appropriate conditions and fair and just wages;
f. specifically for women with disabilities, the right to obtain facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. play an active role in the field of politics and government in accordance with the potential and capabilities she possesses;
h. obtain legal information and services;
i. obtain services to increase her income; and
j. obtain other rights in accordance with her human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 13
Every child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and honor, and receive protection from acts of violence, exploitation, discrimination and neglect;
b. obtain their identity;
c. obtain other rights in accordance with human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
d. worship according to their religion, think, and express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under the guidance of Parents or Guardians;
e. obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents;
f. receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and violence committed by educators, educational personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties;
g. persons with disabilities have the right to obtain special education and children who have excellence have the right to receive special education;
h. persons with disabilities have the right to obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
i. be cared for by their own parents, unless there are reasons and/or valid legal rules indicating that the separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS
Article 14
Every person is obligated to:
a. fulfill the rights of women as referred to in Article 12; and b. fulfill the rights of children as referred to in Article 13.

CHAPTER V
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
General

Article 15
In the context of women's empowerment and child protection in the Region, the following shall be established:
a. Integrated Service Center, which may take the form of:

1. PPTPPA;
2. PUSYAN GATRA; and

3. PUSPAGA.
b. Regional Child Protection Commission; and
c. Other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Two
PPTPPA
Article 16
(1) PPTPPA is positioned at the Regency level.
(2) PPTPPA is under the coordination of the Regional Apparatus Organization or work unit that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) PPTPPA as referred to in paragraph (1) has the authority to assist in formulating policies on women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) PPTPPA is a form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and c. an empowerment center for women and children.

Article 17
(1) The management of PPTPPA at the regency level shall be established by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PPTPPA may consist of elements from the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PPTPPA shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Third Part
PUSYAN GATRA
Article 18
(1) PUSYAN GATRA is positioned at the Regency level.
(2) PUSYAN GATRA is under the coordination of the Regional Apparatus Organization or work unit that handles family welfare resilience and mobilization.
(3) PUSYAN GATRA as referred to in paragraph (1) has the authority to assist in formulating family welfare development policies.
(4) PUSYAN GATRA is a form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. information and documentation service for KKB (population and family planning);
b. family counseling center; and
c. family economic business development center.

Article 19
(1) The management of PUSYAN GATRA at the regency level shall be determined by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PUSYAN GATRA may consist of elements from the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PUSYAN GATRA shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Part Four
PUSPAGA
Article 20
(1) PUSPAGA is positioned at the Regency level.
(2) PUSPAGA is under the coordination of the OPD or work unit that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) PUSPAGA as referred to in paragraph (1) is a form of violence prevention service for children that has specific programs including:
a. education/parenting;
b. parenting skills;
c. child protection skills;
d. ability to increase child participation in the family; and e. counseling for children and families.

Article 21
(1) The management of PUSPAGA at the regency level shall be determined by Regent's Decree.
(2) The management of PUSPAGA may consist of elements from the Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding PUSPAGA shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
GENDER MAINSTREAMING
Article 22
(1) Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
(2) Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, national defense and security, and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
(3) Gender justice is a process to be fair toward men and women.

Article 23
(1) Gender Mainstreaming aims to realize the planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development policies and programs with a gender perspective in order to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national and state life.
(2) Gender Mainstreaming encompasses all planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies and programs.
(3) Further provisions regarding Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY
Article 24
(1) The Regional Government together with the community and business sector in an integrated manner shall guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity through the development of a Child-Friendly Regency.
(2) Further provisions regarding the development of a Child-Friendly Regency as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 25
Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's empowerment and child protection in the Region is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other sources that are legal and non-binding.

CHAPTER IX
PARTICIPATION OF THE COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS SECTOR
Article 26
(1) The Community and Business Sector may participate in the implementation activities of women's empowerment.
(2) The participation of the community and Business Sector as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, community groups, social organizations and Companies.
(3) The participation of the community and Business Sector as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for participation of the community and Business Sector as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 27
(1) The Community and Business World may participate in the fulfillment of children's rights including:
a. prevention efforts;
b. risk reduction and handling of child victims of violence; c. exploitation; and
d. mistreatment and neglect, both through individual efforts and institutional efforts.
(2) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be realized through support for the fulfillment of children's rights including:
a. providing information and or reporting every situation of vulnerability and violence that comes to their knowledge;
b. facilitating or conducting prevention and risk reduction activities;
c. providing protection services for children who become victims; d. assisting advocacy for victims and/or the community regarding the handling of cases of violence, exploitation, mistreatment and neglect of children;
e. assisting the repatriation, rehabilitation and social reintegration process; f. support in the process of fulfilling other children's rights; g. establishment of integrated child service centers;
h. provision of educational scholarships;
i. provision of health cost assistance; and
j. provision of legal aid to children experiencing legal problems.
(3) The participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out by individuals, families, community organizations and companies.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for participation of the Community and Business World as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Article 28
Monitoring is conducted periodically and in an integrated manner every 6 (six) months by the OPD that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in coordination with OPDs or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection in the region.

Article 29
Evaluation of the implementation of the women's empowerment and child protection system shall be conducted by the OPD that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection at least 1 (one) time per year.

Article 30
Reporting on the implementation of the women's empowerment and child protection system shall be conducted at least 1 (one) time per year and coordinated by the OPD or other units handling women's empowerment and child protection to the OPD implementing affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection through the OPD Secretary.

CHAPTER XI
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 31
(1) Every person who does not carry out the obligations as referred to in Article (14) shall be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. Oral warning;
b. Written warning;
c. Temporary suspension of activities;
d. Permanent cessation of activities;
e. Temporary revocation of permit;
f. Permanent revocation of permit
g. Administrative fine; and/or
h. Other administrative sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Further provisions regarding administrative sanctions shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 32
Regent Regulation as the implementation of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year after this Regional Regulation is promulgated.

Article 33
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pasuruan Regency.
Enacted in Pasuruan On the date of 26 September 2018

# BUPATI PASURUAN REGULATION
NUMBER 71 OF 2016

CONCERNING

AMENDMENT TO BUPATI PASURUAN REGULATION NUMBER 63 OF 2014 CONCERNING POSITION, ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS AS WELL AS WORK PROCEDURES OF THE REGIONAL SECRETARIAT AND SECRETARIAT OF THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL

WITH THE BLESSING OF GOD ALMIGHTY

BUPATI PASURUAN,

Considering : a. that in order to implement the provisions of Article 4 paragraph (2) of Government Regulation Number 18 of 2016 concerning Regional Apparatus, it is necessary to adjust the nomenclature of the Regional Secretariat organizational structure;

b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to stipulate a Bupati Regulation concerning Amendment to Bupati Pasuruan Regulation Number 63 of 2014 concerning Position, Organizational Structure, Duties and Functions as well as Work Procedures of the Regional Secretariat and Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council;

In view of : 1. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning Establishment of Autonomous Regions and Autonomous Cities within East Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 41, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9);

2. Law Number 5 of 2014 concerning State Civil Apparatus (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 6, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5494);

3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

4. Government Regulation Number 18 of 2016 concerning Regional Apparatus (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 114, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5887);

5. Bupati Pasuruan Regulation Number 63 of 2014 concerning Position, Organizational Structure, Duties and Functions as well as Work Procedures of the Regional Secretariat and Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council (Regional Gazette of Pasuruan Regency of 2014 Number 4 Series E);

HAS DECIDED:

To stipulate : BUPATI REGULATION CONCERNING AMENDMENT TO BUPATI PASURUAN REGULATION NUMBER 63 OF 2014 CONCERNING POSITION, ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS AS WELL AS WORK PROCEDURES OF THE REGIONAL SECRETARIAT AND SECRETARIAT OF THE REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL.

Article I

Several provisions in Bupati Pasuruan Regulation Number 63 of 2014 concerning Position, Organizational Structure, Duties and Functions as well as Work Procedures of the Regional Secretariat and Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council (Regional Gazette of Pasuruan Regency of 2014 Number 4 Series E) are amended as follows:

1. The provisions of Article 1 number 11 are amended so that Article 1 reads as follows:

Article 1

In this Bupati Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pasuruan Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Bupati as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Bupati is the Bupati of Pasuruan.
4. Regional People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional People's Representative Council of Pasuruan Regency.
5. Regional Secretariat is the Regional Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
6. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Pasuruan Regency.
7. DPRD Secretariat is the Secretariat of the Regional People's Representative Council of Pasuruan Regency.
8. DPRD Secretary is the Secretary of the Regional People's Representative Council of Pasuruan Regency.
9. Assistant is an Assistant at the Regional Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
10. Bureau is a Bureau at the Regional Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
11. Division is a Division at the DPRD Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
12. Sub-bureau is a Sub-bureau at the Regional Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
13. Sub-division is a Sub-division at the DPRD Secretariat of Pasuruan Regency.
14. Functional Group is a group of civil servants who occupy functional positions.

2. The provisions of Article 4 paragraph (1) letter b are amended, so that Article 4 reads as follows:

Article 4

(1) Regional Secretariat has the following duties:
a. assisting the Bupati in formulating policies and coordinating Regional Apparatus; and
b. providing administrative services and support to all Regional Apparatus within the regional government.

(2) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Secretariat performs the following functions:
a. coordination of policy formulation;
b. coordination of policy implementation;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation;
d. administrative services;
e. fostering of Regional Secretariat organizational units;
f. implementation of other duties assigned by the Bupati in accordance with their duties and functions; and
g. implementation of Regional Secretariat administrative and household affairs.

3. The provisions of Article 6 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 6 reads as follows:

Article 6

(1) Assistant for Government and People's Welfare is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary.

(2) Assistant for Government and People's Welfare has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating the formulation of policies in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, population and civil registration, education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, population and civil registration, education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Assistant for Government and People's Welfare performs the following functions:
a. coordination of policy formulation in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, population and civil registration, education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, population and civil registration, education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, population and civil registration, education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative affairs of the Assistant for Government and People's Welfare.

4. The provisions of Article 7 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 7 reads as follows:

Article 7

(1) Assistant for Economy and Development is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary.

(2) Assistant for Economy and Development has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating the formulation of policies in the fields of development, economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of development, economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Assistant for Economy and Development performs the following functions:
a. coordination of policy formulation in the fields of development, economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of development, economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of development, economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative affairs of the Assistant for Economy and Development.

5. The provisions of Article 8 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 8 reads as follows:

Article 8

(1) Assistant for Administration is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary.

(2) Assistant for Administration has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating the formulation of policies in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, communication and information, finance, asset management, as well as personnel; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, communication and information, finance, asset management, as well as personnel.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Assistant for Administration performs the following functions:
a. coordination of policy formulation in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, communication and information, finance, asset management, as well as personnel;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, communication and information, finance, asset management, as well as personnel;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, communication and information, finance, asset management, as well as personnel;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative affairs of the Assistant for Administration.

6. The provisions of Article 9 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 9 reads as follows:

Article 9

(1) Bureau of Government is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Government and People's Welfare.

(2) Bureau of Government has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, as well as population and civil registration; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, as well as population and civil registration.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Government performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, as well as population and civil registration;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, as well as population and civil registration;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of government, law, community and village empowerment, as well as population and civil registration;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Government.

7. The provisions of Article 10 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 10 reads as follows:

Article 10

(1) Bureau of People's Welfare is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Government and People's Welfare.

(2) Bureau of People's Welfare has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the fields of education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of People's Welfare performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the fields of education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of education and culture, health, social affairs, women's empowerment and family planning, as well as food security;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of People's Welfare.

8. The provisions of Article 11 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 11 reads as follows:

Article 11

(1) Bureau of Economy is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Economy and Development.

(2) Bureau of Economy has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the fields of economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Economy performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the fields of economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of economy, natural resources, cooperatives, micro, small and medium enterprises, investment, one-stop integrated services, as well as tourism, youth and sports;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Economy.

9. The provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 12 reads as follows:

Article 12

(1) Bureau of Development is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Economy and Development.

(2) Bureau of Development has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the field of development; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the field of development.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Development performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the field of development;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the field of development;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the field of development;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Development.

10. The provisions of Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 13 reads as follows:

Article 13

(1) Bureau of Organization is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Administration.

(2) Bureau of Organization has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, as well as communication and information; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, as well as communication and information.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Organization performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, as well as communication and information;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, as well as communication and information;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of organization, general affairs, protocol, as well as communication and information;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Organization.

11. The provisions of Article 14 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 14 reads as follows:

Article 14

(1) Bureau of Finance and Assets is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Administration.

(2) Bureau of Finance and Assets has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the fields of finance and asset management; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the fields of finance and asset management.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Finance and Assets performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the fields of finance and asset management;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the fields of finance and asset management;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the fields of finance and asset management;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Finance and Assets.

12. The provisions of Article 15 paragraph (2) letter b are amended, so that Article 15 reads as follows:

Article 15

(1) Bureau of Personnel is under and responsible to the Regional Secretary through the Assistant for Administration.

(2) Bureau of Personnel has the following duties:
a. assisting the Regional Secretary in formulating policies in the field of personnel; and
b. assisting the Regional Secretary in coordinating Regional Apparatus in the field of personnel.

(3) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (2), the Bureau of Personnel performs the following functions:
a. formulation of policies in the field of personnel;
b. coordination of Regional Apparatus in the field of personnel;
c. monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation in the field of personnel;
d. implementation of other duties assigned by the Regional Secretary in accordance with their duties and functions; and
e. implementation of administrative and household affairs of the Bureau of Personnel.

Article II

This Bupati Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Bupati Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Pasuruan Regency.

Stipulated in Pasuruan
on December 30, 2016

BUPATI PASURUAN,
signed,

IRSYAD YUSUF

Promulgated in Pasuruan
on December 30, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PASURUAN REGENCY,
signed,

SUWANDI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PASURUAN REGENCY OF 2016 NUMBER 71

M. IRSYAD YUSUF
Promulgated in Pasuruan On the date of September 26, 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY
PASURUAN REGENCY,
signed,

AGUS SUTIADJI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PASURUAN REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 4 REGISTRATION NUMBER. REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY NUMBER 260-4/2018

EXPLANATION
O F
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PASURUAN REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

I. GENERAL

The State as the mandate holder of people's sovereignty is responsible for implementing development to achieve community welfare. This is as mandated by the constitution which has become a national consensus for the Indonesian nation. The 1945 Constitution is the fundamental legal foundation (Fundamental Norm) in formulating the direction and basis for social, political, and state legal policy-making.

The State as an organization certainly always has objectives as stated in the fourth paragraph of the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which states: "Furthermore, to form a Government of the State of the Republic of Indonesia that protects the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian territory and to promote general welfare, educate the life of the nation, and participate in implementing world order based on freedom, eternal peace and social justice." Observing the fourth paragraph of the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, it is clearly stated that this state was formed with the aim of protecting the entire nation and all Indonesian territory as well as improving the welfare of the people. This is also the objective of the formation of regional government which aims to accelerate the realization of community welfare through improvement, services, empowerment, and community participation, as well as increasing regional competitiveness by taking into account the principles of democracy, equity, justice, privileges and specificities of a region within the system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.

Explicitly, the objectives of the Indonesian State reflect several national objectives of the Indonesian nation. The objectives contained in this fourth paragraph constitute the constitutional promise of the Indonesian state to all its people while simultaneously becoming the basic rights of the community. Therefore, the State is obligated to make various efforts in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of its citizens.

One of these four objectives is to protect the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian territory as well as promote general welfare. This means that the Indonesian nation must be free from all forms of actions that can harm its citizens, efforts to maintain this conduciveness are carried out in order to create a prosperous and beneficial social life without looking at certain groups and classes, because the meaning of the entire nation is a reflection for all Indonesian people without exception, whether men, women or children.

The protection that is the State's responsibility is not only for every person both in the individual and group sense along with the cultural identity attached to them, but this protection must also be interpreted as an endeavor to promote general welfare for the entire nation. Therefore, there need to be steps that must be taken by the State to achieve the above objectives by empowering its people, especially those who have been considered weak and marginalized. Based on these considerations, the Pasuruan Regency Government needs to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as a concrete step in order to protect the entire nation and promote general welfare.

From the above description, it is explicitly explained that based on article 18 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, regional governments have the authority to make regulations related to regional needs in order to accommodate regional potential and local wisdom according to their respective localistic needs. Whereas for Pasuruan Regency, it has a distinctive character as a santri city that is strong with the values of its religious teachings. From the perspective of Islam, women's empowerment and child protection are highly upheld, even when Islam was first revealed to the Prophet Muhammad SAW. The condition of the Arab nation at that time greatly looked down upon the status of women. This can be proven by the existence of the custom of women as wives being able to be inherited to their children if their father died. Furthermore, for the fate of children at that time, it seemed that there was absolutely no protection of the rights given, children born with female gender would be killed by being buried alive because they were considered a disgrace to their parents. Departing from this condition, it is necessary to establish a regulation that reflects the values of women's empowerment and child protection.

Women's empowerment and child protection is a problem that needs to receive special attention from the Pasuruan Regency regional government to immediately create a juridical instrument to guard and ensure the guarantee of welfare and security for women and children.

Therefore, a legal umbrella in the form of a Regional Regulation is needed that is capable of accommodating all issues related to women's empowerment and child protection, capable of providing integrated services holistically and comprehensively, and explicitly giving mandates to institutions to coordinate policies and supervision, and mandates to institutions to provide services. In addition, the Regional Regulation can also open the involvement of non-governmental institutions and the community as well as the business world to play a broad role.

The implementation of women's empowerment and child protection in Pasuruan Regency does not yet have a strong legal basis in the form of regional regulations. Therefore, activities related to women's empowerment and child protection are carried out optimally in order to provide protection for women and children.

In relation to this, the Regional Regulation on women's empowerment and child protection is expected to anticipate and overcome all problems related to women's empowerment and child protection programs as well as become a juridical solution for regulations in Pasuruan Regency, so that it can provide protection and services to women and children in an integrated and comprehensive manner.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights" contains the understanding that the State of the Republic of Indonesia recognizes and upholds human rights and fundamental human freedoms as rights that are naturally inherent in and inseparable from humans, which must be protected, respected, and upheld for the enhancement of human dignity, welfare, happiness, and intelligence as well as justice;
Letter b What is meant by "the principle of gender equality" contains the understanding that every policy made must be based on equality of conditions and positions that reflect harmonious, aligned and balanced partnerships between men and women in access, participation, control and equal and fair benefit from development results;
Letter c What is meant by "the principle of non-discrimination" contains the understanding that every policy made must not differentiate, restrict, harass, or exclude either directly or indirectly based on human distinctions on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which result in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields, and other aspects of life;
Letter d What is meant by "the principle of justice and legal certainty" contains the understanding that every person has the right to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal treatment as well as obtaining legal certainty and equal treatment before the law;
Letter e What is meant by benefit contains the understanding that the regulation of policies on women's empowerment and child protection must provide the greatest benefit for the welfare of society Letter f What is meant by participation contains the understanding that the entire process of policy formation and implementation must pay attention to the active participation of all components of society so as to obtain equal benefits in all fields of development and life;
Letter g What is meant by the best interests of the child contains the meaning that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration;
Letter h What is meant by accountability concerns that the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection must be accountable and constitutes part of the accountability for government implementation.
Letter i What is meant by gender responsive concerns policies, programs, activities and budgeting that pay attention to differences in the needs, experiences and aspirations of men and women.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b what is referred to as manager is the manager of PUSYAN GATRA and PUSPAGA Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
The management of PPTPPA as referred to in Article 17 refers to the Regulation of the Minister of PPPA Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
The development of Child-Friendly Regency as referred to has been regulated in Regent Regulation Number 15 of 2015 concerning the Establishment of Child-Friendly Regency and Regent Decree Number 050/120/HK/424.014/2017 concerning the Establishment of the KLA Task Force, KLA Advocacy Team and Children's Forum.

Article 25
Other lawful and non-binding sources may be obtained from CSR assistance, the business sector or other institutions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PASURUAN REGENCY NUMBER 306