WEST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KARAWANG REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2017
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF KARAWANG,

Considering : a. that women as one of the community groups whose existence constitutes potential and development assets need to be empowered so that they can actualize their potential optimally to participate in development;
b. that women as national assets who play a role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations need to receive guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and protection from acts of violence and discrimination;
c. that in order to make effective a comprehensive and integrative system in empowering and protecting women in Karawang Regency, regulation regarding the empowerment and protection of women is required;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9) as amended by Law Number 4 of 1968 concerning the Establishment of Purwakarta Regency and Subang Regency by amending Law Number 14 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1968 Number 31, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2851);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
5679).

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KARAWANG REGENCY and

HEAD OF KARAWANG REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Enact : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Karawang Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of Karawang.
3. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration that lead the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Women are human beings of female gender starting from infants, adolescents, adults up to the elderly.
6. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capabilities, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective capabilities.
7. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties, either temporarily or based on court decisions.
8. Task force is a semi-permanent working group, consisting of related regional apparatus work units, community, universities, and/or community organizations chaired by the Regional Secretary, who is given additional tasks within a certain period of time, to implement specific programs/activities in the field of women's empowerment and protection.
9. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy carried out rationally and systematically to achieve and realize gender equality and justice in a number of aspects of human life (household, community and state), through policies and programs that take into account the experiences, aspirations, needs and problems of women and men into the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all policies and programs in various fields of life and development.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 2
Every woman has the right:
a. to live and improve her standard of living;
b. to security;
c. to a good and healthy environment;
d. to form a family and continue descendants;
e. to work and receive fair wages for her work;
f. to obtain proper education;
g. to obtain care, education, training and/or special assistance;
h. to personal freedom; and
i. to health.

Article 3
Women's Rights in Employment include:
a. Having equal employment opportunities as men; b. Equal opportunities from the selection process, work facilities, benefits to the right to receive equal wages; c. Obtaining paid leave including maternity leave; and
d. Women cannot be dismissed by the employer on the grounds of pregnancy or marital status.

Article 4
The rights of women in the field of Health include:
a. The opportunity to be free from death during childbirth; b. The obtaining of health services, especially family planning services, pregnancy, childbirth and post-childbirth.

Article 5
The rights of women in the field of education are to obtain opportunities to pursue education and to receive scholarships.

Article 6
The rights of women in marriage and family are to: a. Choose her husband freely;
b. Marriage is based on the consent of both parties; and
c. Have equal rights and responsibilities both as parents toward their children and as husband-wife partners.

Article 7
The rights of women in public and political life are the right to vote and be elected as well as to obtain equal opportunities to participate in the formulation of government policy up to its implementation.

Article 8
(1) The empowerment of women is implemented to enhance the position, role and quality of Women in family life, community life, and national life.
(2) The Empowerment of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed so that Women:
a. Obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings;
b. Are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and security activities; and
c. Have equality in enjoying the results of development.

Article 9
(1) Women who become victims of acts of violence have the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services and continuous handling.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out up to the rehabilitation stage.
(3) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (2) may be carried out by individuals, groups, regional government institutions, and/or non-governmental institutions.

CHAPTER III
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Article 10
The Regional Government facilitates the establishment of institutions for Women's Empowerment and Protection in the Region.

Article 11
(1) The Regent establishes policy programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women to eliminate all forms of discrimination and acts of violence against Women.
(2) The implementation of policies, programs and activities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus with authority over the empowerment and Protection of Women.
(3) The Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (2) may cooperate with the community, universities, community organizations, other regency/city governments, and/or international institutions in the empowerment and Protection of Women activities.
(4) The form of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted through:
a. policy analysis;
b. implementation coordination;
c. advocacy;
d. socialization;
e. public communication;
f. information delivery;
g. education;
h. training;
i. service facilities;
j. service provision;
k. model development; and
l. other activities.
(5) The integration of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be set forth in the documents:
a. Regional long-term development plan;
b. Regional medium-term development plan; c. Strategic plan of Regional Apparatus;
d. Regional Government work plan; and
e. work plan and budget of Regional Apparatus.
(6) The provisions regarding the establishment of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 12
(1) The implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women in the Region as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) shall be carried out by establishing, developing, strengthening or utilizing task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions.
(2) The membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of relevant Regional Apparatus, community, Higher Education Institutions and/or community organizations.
(3) Provisions regarding the establishment and membership of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 13
(1) The provision of Women's Empowerment and Protection services as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (4) letter j, includes:
a. identification of victims of criminal violence;
b. legal assistance;
c. medical rehabilitation;
d. psychosocial rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration;
f. repatriation assistance; and
g. other forms.
(2) Women's Empowerment and Protection services as referred to in paragraph (1) are provided to women:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. in conflict-prone and disaster areas;
d. workers;
e. elderly;
f. persons with disabilities;
g. victims of sexual exploitation;
h. who are heads of households;
i. pregnant and/or breastfeeding; and
j. other vulnerable victims.

CHAPTER IV
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 14
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, groups and/or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 15
(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure synergy, continuity, and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the empowerment and Protection of Women.
(2) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to identify developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the Protection of Women in the Region.
(3) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (2) is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus implementing policies, programs and activities that implement policies, programs, and activities for the empowerment and Protection of Women.
(4) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (3) is conducted starting from the planning stage, up to the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Empowerment and Protection of Women for the current year.

Article 16
(1) Regional Governments conduct evaluations of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) The evaluation results as referred to in paragraph (1) are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for Women's Protection for the following year.

CHAPTER VI
FUNDING
Article 17
Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. Other legal and non-binding sources, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 18
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all Regional laws and regulations related to the Empowerment and protection of women are declared to remain in force insofar as they do not conflict with the provisions in this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 19
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 20
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Karawang Regency.
Enacted in Karawang on the date of 12 April 2017

REGENT OF KARAWANG,
CELLICA NURRACHADIANA
promulgated in Karawang on 19 April 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KARAWANG REGENCY,
TEDDY RUSFENDI SUTISNA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KARAWANG REGENCY
YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KARAWANG REGENCY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE :(3/45/2017) Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,
NENENG JUNENGSIH
NIP. 19640501 199003 2 004