# JEMBER REGENCY GOVERNMENT
REGIONAL REGULATION OF JEMBER REGENCY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN JEMBER REGENCY
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF JEMBER,

Considering : a. that in order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Jember Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, services and protection are needed for women and children victims of violence in Jember Regency;
b. that in order for the handling of violence against women and children in Jember Regency to be carried out more effectively and efficiently, it is necessary to regulate the protection of women and children victims of violence in Jember Regency;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence in Jember Regency.

In View of : 1. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 Year 1946 concerning the Criminal Code;
2. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 12 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 41 Year 1950);
3. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6 Year 1974 concerning Basic Provisions on Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3039);
4. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 32).
5. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 8 Year 1981 concerning the Criminal Procedure Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76);
- 1 - - 2 -
6. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
7. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23 Year 1992 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 100, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3495);
8. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of International Labour Organization Convention Number 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
9. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
10. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of International Labour Organization Convention Number 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
11. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 26 Year 2000 concerning Human Rights Courts (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 208, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4026);
12. Police Law Number 2 Year 2002 concerning the State Police of the Republic of Indonesia (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4168);
13. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
14. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 17 Year 2003 concerning State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 47, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4286);
15. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 Year 2004 concerning State Treasury (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 5, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4355);
16. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 10 Year 2004 concerning the Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
- 3 -
17. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
18. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437), as has been amended twice most recently by Law Number 12 Year 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 108, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4548);
19. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
20. Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 104 Year 2000 concerning Balancing Funds (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 201, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4021);
21. Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3 Year 2002 concerning Compensation, Restitution and Rehabilitation for Gross Violations of Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 7, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4172).
22. Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
23. Government Regulation of the Republic of Indonesia Number 38 Year 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
24. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 36 Year 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1990 Number 57);
25. Presidential Decree of the Republic of Indonesia Number 88 Year 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Trafficking in Women and Children;
26. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 Year 2006 concerning Types and Forms of Regional Legal Products;
27. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 16 Year 2006 concerning Procedures for Drafting Regional Legal Products;
28. Regional Regulation of Jember Regency Number 20 Year 2000 concerning the Authority of the Jember Regency Government;
29. Regional Regulation of Jember Regency Number 5 Year 2005 concerning the Medium-Term Regional Development Plan of Jember Regency Year 2005-2010 (Regional Gazette of Jember Regency Year 2005 Number 5);
- 4 -
30. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 9 Year 2005 concerning the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2005 Number 4 Series E);

With the Joint Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF JEMBER REGENCY
and

REGENT OF JEMBER
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN JEMBER REGENCY.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regency Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration
2. Regent is the Regent of Jember
3. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb
4. Woman is a person of female gender
5. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim
6. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life
7. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
8. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death.
9. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
10. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse - 5 - in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
11. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred
13. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination
14. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (NAPZA) abuse, children victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of abuse and neglect.
15. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
16. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Judicial body is the general court that has the authority to receive, examine, and adjudicate, as well as resolve every case submitted to it, to realize law enforcement and justice.
18. Prosecution is the action of the public prosecutor to transfer a case to the competent district court in the manner and according to the procedures regulated in the law with a request that it be examined and decided by a judge in a court session.
19. Lawsuit is a notification accompanied by a request by an interested party to a judge to take action according to law against a person who has harmed them in a civil manner
20. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is an institution providing services to victims of violence based at the Regional General Hospital managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
21. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and danger from perpetrators.
22. Standard Operational Procedure hereinafter referred to as SOP is the operational standard procedure that serves as a reference for service actions established by Regent Regulation.
- 6 -
23. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and or community organizations.
24. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children.
25. Household is family members and relatives (grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and so on) and non-relatives (servants, drivers and so on) who live and eat from one kitchen and reside in one house.
26. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter referred to as APBD is the APBD of Jember Regency.
27. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter referred to as APBN is the annual financial plan of the State Government approved by the House of Representatives.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES OF SERVICE
Article 2
The principles of protection for women and children victims of violence are:  1. Respect and fulfillment of victims' rights  2. Justice and gender equality
3. Non-discrimination
4. Best interests of victims

Article 3
The purpose of this Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence is to provide protection and services for the best interests of women and children victims of violence that occurs in the domestic and/or public sphere.

Article 4
The provision of services to victims is carried out with principles including free of charge, fast, safe, empathy, non-discrimination, easily accessible, and confidentiality.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF VICTIMS
Article 5
Every victim has the right to:
1. Obtain protection from the community and government as well as non-governmental institutions at the local, national and international levels.
2. Obtain information about the location of complaint centers.
- 7 -
3. Obtain integrated services in accordance with service principles.
4. File claims and or legal suits through judicial bodies and or courts outside the judiciary, and may report to the International Court
5. Obtain information about laws and regulations that protect victims
6. Obtain confidential handling
7. Obtain information and be involved in every decision-making process related to assistance and developments in case handling.
8. Obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife, mother or child, family member, household member, as well as community member.
9. Obtain assistance at every level of examination and throughout the judicial process.
10. Obtain continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
11. Obtain protection from disclosure of identity through mass media.

Article 6
Every victim has the obligation to:
1. The victim has the obligation not to take revenge against the perpetrator of violence;
2. The victim has the obligation to become a witness if it does not endanger themselves and if there is a security guarantee for the victim;
3. The victim has the obligation to give the perpetrator an opportunity to provide compensation to the victim in addition to the punishment determined by the Court;
4. The victim is willing to obtain assistance;
5. The victim together with the community has the obligation to prevent the increase of other victims of violence.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Regency Government

Article 7
(1) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence, in the form of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children who are victims of violence as well as laws and regulations;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values towards women and children;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence;
- 8 -
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and ensuring the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. facilitating the formation of service institutions;
c. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to ensure the implementation of protection for victims by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands or other persons legally responsible for the victims.
(4) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to supervise the implementation of services for victims, with service standards that involve the community.
(5) The Regency Government is obligated and responsible to provide funds for the protection of women and children victims of violence through the Regency APBD and or other state financial sources
(6) The Regent appoints officials to carry out the obligations and responsibilities of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Integrated Service Center Article 8 The Manager of Women and Children Protection implemented by the Integrated Service Center has the obligation to provide services in accordance with service principles as regulated in the Regional Regulation.

Part Three
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 9
(1) The community is obligated to make efforts to provide support for the development of violence prevention programs (2) The community is obligated to compile proposals regarding the formulation and policies on protection (3) The community is obligated to make efforts to provide protection and moral or material support to victims (4) The community is obligated to conduct supervision and reporting of acts of violence to the competent authorities.
- 9 -

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional

Article 10
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of PPT.
(2) The Regency Integrated Service Center receives case referrals from service institutions within the Regency area.
(3) Provisions regarding the Integrated Service Center shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Principles of Implementation

Article 11
(1) The principle of service provision to victims shall not be subject to any fees whatsoever;
(2) The provision of services to victims shall be carried out quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discrimination, and easily accessible;
(3) Services to victims guarantee the confidentiality of everything that is reported.

Third Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 12
Forms of services for victims organized by P3A include:
1. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims, carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
2. Medicolegal services are a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field.
3. Psychosocial services are services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems.
4. Legal services are services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process.
5. Economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
- 10 -
6. Information Services (Informed Consent), related to services and assistance

Article 13
Service mechanisms are organized according to Standard Operational Procedure (SOP) procedures, the guidelines of which will be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE
Article 14
(1) Assistance includes all integrated efforts to restore and strengthen the condition of victims, carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, Advocates and social workers.
(2) Assistance by the police, prosecutor's office and advocates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) The duties of Social Workers as assistants are:
a. to provide sufficient information to victims about their rights;
b. to provide psychosocial services to victims so that victims feel safe and comfortable;
c. to accompany victims during the examination and medical recovery process;
d. to accompany victims during the medicolegal process;
e. to accompany victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and court;
f. to monitor the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
g. to maintain the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media.;
h. to coordinate with other assistants;
i. to provide continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

CHAPTER VII
FUNDING
Article 15
(1) Funding for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence includes:
a. medical services, which include doctor's examinations, treatment costs, hospital costs, and medication costs;
b. medico-legal services, which include examinations for Visum et Repertum and Visum et Psikiatrikum;
- 11 -
c. psychosocial services, which consist of counseling and psychological therapy as well as safe houses (shelters);
d. legal services;
e. economic empowerment, in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access;
(2) Funding management is carried out through technical institutions appointed by the Regency Government which is conducted transparently and accounted for in accordance with laws and regulations.
(3) Sources of funds in the implementation of protection for women and children are sourced from the State Budget (APBN), Provincial Budget (APBD), Regency Budget (APBD) as well as other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 16
(1) Guidance on the implementation of protection of Women and Children shall be carried out by the relevant Agency in accordance with their respective main duties and functions.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of providing guidelines that include technical implementation of protection of Women and Children.
(3) Supervision of the implementation of protection of Women and Children shall be carried out by the relevant agency together with the internal supervisory apparatus of the Government in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER IX
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 17
(1) Every person who intentionally fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, and or fails to report and fails to provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the laws and regulations.
(2) Appointed officials who fail to carry out obligations and responsibilities as stipulated in Article 7 shall be subject to administrative action and or sanctions.
(3) Appointed officials who fail to carry out supervision as stipulated in Article 15 shall be subject to administrative action and or sanctions.
(4) Administrative action and or sanctions as referred to in paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) shall be imposed in accordance with the laws and regulations.
- 12 - (5) PPT managers who carry out service duties and violate service principles shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 18
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Jember Regency.
Enacted in Jember on the date of 29 November 2008

REGENT OF JEMBER,
MZA DJALAL
Promulgated in Jember On the date of January 5, 2009

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF JEMBER REGENCY
Drs. H. DJOEWITO, MM Principal Senior Supervisor

NIP. 510 074 249
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF JEMBER REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 14
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF JEMBER REGENCY
NUMBER 14 YEAR 2008
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE IN JEMBER REGENCY
I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION
The State has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb or damage psychological, physical, sexual or economic security, this is philosophically stated in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution that the first purpose of the establishment of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire nation and all the blood of Indonesia.
Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 Year 1948 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women), it is obliged to comply with these provisions. Likewise in the fourth amendment of the 1945 Constitution, Chapter XA of the 1945 Constitution concerning Human Rights, states that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the Government.
Furthermore, in the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence against Women Year 1999 it is stated that Women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by God Almighty so they must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class.
From the series of provisions above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children because this constitutes a crime against human existence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Number 1 Respect for the rights of victims is intended to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims as referred to in Article 5.
- 1 - - 2 - Number 2 Gender justice is a condition where every person, both male and female, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare; Gender equality is the equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Number 3 Non-Discrimination is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Number 4 The best interests of victims are all best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
What is meant by gender-based violence is actions based on gender relations that place women in a subordinate position to men. The domestic sphere means the space where interpersonal relations occur; the public sphere means the space where relations concerning public interests occur. Service and support institutions must also be able to provide education and awareness to the community about such gender-based violence.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear - 3 -

Article 11
Number 1 Sufficiently clear Number 2 Sufficiently clear Number 3 Sufficiently clear Number 4 Sufficiently clear Number 5 Economic access is defined as sustainable economic development in accordance with the situation and condition of the victim Number 6 Sufficiently clear

Article 12
SOP is established by the service institution in accordance with the mechanism that has been agreed upon

Article 13
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Social workers are persons who provide social services to women and children victims of violence who understand the principles of services

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear - 4 -

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF JEMBER REGENCY YEAR 2008 NUMBER 4 - 5 -