Whereas

MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG
WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINGKAWANG CITY
NUMBER 4 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG,

a. that children and women as creations of Almighty God need to be protected and their honor, dignity, and self-esteem safeguarded from all forms of discrimination, acts of violence, and exploitation to improve the quality of life of children and women physically, spiritually, and socially in realizing an advanced, just, prosperous, welfare, and democratic society based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

b. that the fate of children and women in Singkawang City needs attention from the Regional Government and the community because cases of violence against children and women still occur, and children in conflict with the law, thus requiring efforts to provide legal protection for children and women;

JDIH Kota Singkawang Considering

c. that to provide protection for children and women, also as implementation of higher Laws and Regulations and constituting one of the mandatory governmental affairs that is the authority of the Regional Government, the regulation of protection of children and women needs to be regulated in a Regional Regulation;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Children and Women;

In View of

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);

3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On the Elimination of All Form of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

5. Law Number 12 Year 2001 concerning Establishment of Singkawang City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2001 Number 92, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4119);

JDIH Kota Singkawang 6. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);

7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 14 Year 2009 concerning Ratification of Protocol To Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking In Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nation Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime (Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4990);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

9. Law Number 10 Year 2012 concerning Ratification of Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);

10. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

11. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

12. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);

13. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

14. Presidential Regulation Number 69 Year 2008 concerning Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking;

15. Presidential Regulation Number 18 Year 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 44);

16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 446);

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2011 concerning National Socio-Cultural Strategy to Realize Gender Equality (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 168);

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 Year 2011 concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 168);

20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Indicators for Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 169);

21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 10 Year 2012 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Strengthening of Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 984);

JDIH Kota Singkawang

22. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 concerning System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 615);

23. Regional Regulation Number 3 Year 2015 concerning Implementation of Protection of Women from Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Year 2015 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 3);

24. Regional Regulation Number 4 Year 2015 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Year 2015 Number 4, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 4);

With Mutual Approval of
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SINGKAWANG CITY
and

THE MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG CITY
DECIDES:
To Establish

REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Singkawang.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Singkawang City.
4. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including those still in the womb.
5. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
JDIH Kota Singkawang
6. Victim is a child and woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
7. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, the community, and/or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring, or has occurred.
8. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
9. Special protection is a form of protection received by children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
10. Violence against women and children, hereinafter referred to as violence, is any act based on gender differences that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, mentally, psychologically, including intimidation, forced eviction, threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, neglect, and preventing the ability of women and children to enjoy all their rights and freedoms.
11. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
12. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
13. Guardian is a person or body who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
14. Every person is an individual or corporation, whether a legal entity or not a legal entity.
15. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring, or has occurred.
JDIH Kota Singkawang
16. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of strengthening victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
17. Regional Apparatus Organization, hereinafter abbreviated as OPD, is a regional apparatus organization within the Singkawang City Government.
18. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent acts of violence against children and women from occurring.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence to their families, substitute families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is recovery from disturbances to physical, psychological, and social conditions so that they can carry out their roles again properly both in the family and in society.
21. Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with their families, communities, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of the Regional Government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
23. Agency is a regional apparatus work unit whose duties and responsibilities are to coordinate the handling of affairs in the field of organizing the protection of children and women.
24. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
25. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated, one-stop, and networked technical service established by the government, Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions, and other institutions in efforts to empower women and protect women and children comprehensively from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including human trafficking.
26. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations, and/or community organizations.
27. Regional Action Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RAD, is the foundation and guideline for relevant agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in carrying out activities for the implementation of JDIH Kota Singkawang prevention and protection of children and women victims of violence.
28. Task Force is a coordinative institution formed by the Regional Government that coordinates policies, programs, and activities for the protection of children and women in the region.
29. Child-Friendly City, hereinafter abbreviated as KLA, is a city that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of the Regional Government, community, and business world that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs, and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF CHILDREN, WOMEN, AND VICTIMS
Article 2
(1) Every child has the right:
a. to live, grow, develop, and participate in a reasonable manner in accordance with human dignity and honor, and to receive protection from criminal acts, violence, exploitation, and neglect;
b. to a name as personal identity and citizenship status;
c. to worship according to their religion under parental guidance and to practice the teachings of their religion;
d. to know their parents, be raised, and be cared for by their own parents;
e. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
f. to obtain education and teaching in accordance with age level, physical and mental condition, intelligence, and interests and talents;
g. to express and have their opinion heard as well as to receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with the level of intelligence and age for self-development in accordance with moral values and propriety;
h. to rest and utilize leisure time, play, express themselves for self-development;
i. to receive proper care from parents/guardians or other parties responsible for their care;
JDIH Kota Singkawang j. to obtain protection from abuse in politics, involvement in armed conflicts, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence, involvement in warfare, targets of persecution, torture or imposition of inhumane punishment and involvement of children in the worst forms of work;
k. to obtain protection from the dangers of narcotics, pornography, and violent shows or other things that impact changes in child growth and development;
l. to have contact with parents if separated; and
m. to obtain other rights in accordance with Laws and Regulations.
(2) Every woman has the right:
a. to live, sustain life, and improve their standard of living;
b. to live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually;
c. to enjoy a good and healthy living environment;
d. to live in a family within the bonds of lawful marriage based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations;
e. to obtain work according to ability, appropriate conditions and fair and just wages;
f. specifically for women with disabilities, the right to receive facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. to play an active role in the field of politics and government in accordance with the potential and capabilities they possess;
h. to obtain legal information and services; and
i. to obtain other rights in accordance with human dignity and based on the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) Every victim has the right to receive:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. assistance in accordance with applicable provisions;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
g. guarantee of rights related to the victim's status as a family member as well as a community member;
h. to obtain restitution in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
i. other rights regulated in the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 3
Child victims of violence in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1), and paragraph (3) also obtain special rights as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth, and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 4
Every victim has the right to report and receive assistance as well as receive guarantees regarding their rights related to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of society.

Article 5
The rights as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (3) letter c, are also granted to the family of the witness and/or victim up to the second degree, in the event that the family of the witness and/or victim receives threats either physical or psychological from other persons in connection with the testimony of the witness and/or victim.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS OF CHILDREN
Article 6
Every child is obligated to: a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, society, and care for friends; c. love the homeland, nation, and state;
d. perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and e. practice noble ethics and morals.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
The obligations and responsibilities of organizers of child and women protection are the joint responsibility of the Regional Government, community, family, and parents or guardians.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 shall be implemented by:
a. formulating and implementing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of children and women;
b. ensuring the establishment and implementation of cooperation between various parties in the Region, with and between various parties in the regency/city and all related elements in the implementation of the protection of children and women;
c. providing support for facilities, infrastructure, and availability of human resources in the administration of the protection of children and women;
d. fulfilling, protecting, and respecting the rights of children and ensuring children to exercise their rights in expressing opinions in accordance with the age and intelligence of the child; and e. fostering and supervising the administration of the protection of children and women.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(3) In order to implement the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of children and women in 1 (one) RAD as a basis for OPD in implementing the protection of children and women in the region.
(4) The RAD as referred to in paragraph (3) constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan which is regulated by Mayor Regulation.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 9
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 are carried out in the form of community participation in the implementation of protection of children and women.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be carried out in the form of:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. submitting reports to the authorities if acts of violence against women and children occur;
c. providing assistance to victims; and
d. playing an active role in efforts to increase the fulfillment of children's rights and the empowerment of women.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, community organizations, professional organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, mass media, and the business sector.
(4) The role of community organizations, professional organizations, and educational institutions is carried out by taking necessary steps in accordance with their respective duties, functions, authorities, and competencies to assist in the implementation of protection of children and women.
(5) The participation of mass media is carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials related to the implementation of protection of children and women by taking into account the best interests of children and/or victims.
(6) The role of the business sector is carried out through:
a. company policies with a child and women perspective;
b. products intended must be safe for children; and
c. contributing to the fulfillment of children's rights and the empowerment of women through corporate social responsibility.
(7) Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), are implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 10
The obligations and responsibilities of the family as referred to in Article 7, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

Article 11
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of parents as referred to in Article 7, include:
a. nurturing, caring for, educating, providing a sense of security and not committing mistreatment and violence against children;
b. developing children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. reporting every birth of a child to the authorized agency to conduct birth registration;
d. preventing marriage at child age; and e. providing character education and instilling moral values in children.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family, which shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) In the event that the parents and family of the child cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), and paragraph (2), shall be transferred to a person or legal entity that meets the requirements appointed as guardian of the child concerned.

BABV
POSITION OF CHILDREN
Part One
Identity of Children

Article 12
(1) The identity of every child must be given from birth. (2) The identity as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be set forth in a birth certificate.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) The making of a birth certificate is based on a statement from the person who witnessed and/or assisted the birth process.
(4) In the case of a child whose birth process is not known, and whose parents' whereabouts are not known, the making of a birth certificate for such child shall be based on the statement of the person who found the child and supplemented with a police examination report.

Article 13
(1) The organizer of the making of birth certificates is carried out by the OPD that administers population administration affairs.
(2) Provisions regarding the procedures and requirements for making birth certificates as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Second Part
Children Born from Mixed Marriages

Article 14
(1) If a mixed marriage occurs between a citizen of the Republic of Indonesia and a foreign citizen, a child born from that marriage has the right to obtain the citizenship of his or her father or mother in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(2) In the event of a divorce from a marriage as referred to in paragraph (1), the child has the right to choose or based on a court decision, to be in the custody of one of his or her two parents.
(3) In the event of a divorce as referred to in paragraph (2), while the child is not yet capable of determining a choice, and his or her mother has the citizenship of the Republic of Indonesia, for the best interests of the child or upon the request of his or her mother, the Regional Government is obligated to process the status of citizenship of the Republic of Indonesia for that child.

CHAPTER VI
CUSTODY
Article 15
(1) In the event that parents as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) neglect their obligations, supervisory action may be taken against them or parental custody may be revoked.
(2) Supervisory action against parents or revocation of custody as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through court determination.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 16
(1) One of the parents, biological siblings or family up to the third degree, may submit a request to the court to obtain a court determination regarding the revocation of parental authority or to take supervisory action if there are strong reasons for it as referred to in Article 15 paragraph (1).
(2) If one of the parents, biological siblings, or family up to the third degree, cannot carry out their function, then the revocation of parental authority as referred to in paragraph (1) may also be submitted by an authorized official or other institution that has the authority to do so.
(3) The court determination as referred to in paragraph (1) may appoint an individual or government/community institution to become a guardian for the child concerned.
(4) The individual who carries out the care of the child as referred to in paragraph (3) must be of the same religion as the religion professed by the child to be cared for.

CHAPTER VII
GUARDIANSHIP
Article 117 (1) In the event that a child is not capable of performing legal acts, while the parents or family's place of residence or whereabouts are unknown, then a person or legal entity that meets the requirements may be appointed as guardian of the child concerned.
(2) To become a guardian of a child as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through a court determination.
(3) The guardian appointed must have the same religion as the religion professed by the child.
(4) The guardian appointed as referred to in paragraph (2) is responsible for the child and must manage the property belonging to the child concerned for the best interests of the child.
(5) Provisions regarding the requirements and procedures for appointing a guardian shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

CHAPTER VIII
ADOPTION OF CHILDREN
Article 18
(1) Adoption of children may only be carried out for the best interests of the child, and is carried out based on customary practices and in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.
(2) Adoption of children does not sever the blood relationship between the adopted child and his/her biological parents.
(3) Adoption of children must be recorded in the birth certificate without eliminating the child's original identity.
(4) Prospective adoptive parents must be of the same religion as the religion adhered to by the prospective adopted child.
(5) Adoption of children by foreign nationals may only be carried out as a last resort in accordance with the Laws and Regulations.
(6) In the event that the child's origins are not known, then the child's religion shall be adjusted to the religion of the majority of the local population.

Article 19
(1) Adoptive parents are obligated to inform their adopted child regarding their origin and biological parents.
(2) The notification of origin and biological parents shall be carried out with due consideration to the child's mental readiness.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
General

Article 20
The implementation of child and women protection is carried out through:  a. planning and development of child and women information systems;  b. prevention and protection;
c. child protection;
d. special protection;
e. women protection;
f. protection in the workplace;
g. handling and recovery of victims of violence;
h. rehabilitation, reintegration, and empowerment;
i. law enforcement services, and legal assistance; and  JDIH Kota Singkawang j. facilitation of juvenile justice.

Second Part
Planning and Development of Child and Women Information System

Article 21
(1) Planning for the protection of children and women is implemented by providing data and information related to the protection of children and women in the region.
(2) Data and information as referred to in paragraph (1) concerns data on gender mainstreaming (PUG), data on child rights mainstreaming (PUHA), and evaluation of programs and data services.
(3) Data and information as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be provided by the OPD that administers the affairs of child and women protection.
(4) Data information as referred to in paragraph (3) is required for policy planning and program intervention coordinated by the Agency.

Part Three
Prevention and Protection Article 22 (1) The Regional Government is obligated to undertake prevention and protection efforts against violent treatment, exploitation, discrimination, maltreatment, and neglect.
(2) The implementation of prevention and protection as referred to in paragraph (1), may cooperate with educational institutions, religious institutions, mass media, professional organizations, business entities, and/or community institutions.
(3) Prevention and protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented by:
a. forming networks;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of prevention and protection based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a system for prevention of violence and protection of children and women;
d. disseminating Laws and Regulations related to the protection of women victims of violence;
e. providing education for victims of violence and vulnerable groups;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
f. organizing family support in the form of family parenting education, child parenting education, family mediation, and economic support;
g. increasing the capacity of protection services for women and children including institutional capacity development and enhancement of professionalism and competence of service providers;
h. increasing the ability of individuals and/or vulnerable groups to recognize risks and dangers from situations or actions that may cause violence, exploitation, maltreatment and neglect; and i. increasing the utilization of communication, information, and education media.
(4) Prevention and protection efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 23
(1) Every Person and/or Institution is obligated to protect children and women from violence, exploitation, discrimination, mistreatment and neglect.
(2) Protection by Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) by not implementing policies and actions that violate the rights of children and women.

Fourth Part
Child Protection

Paragraph 1
At time a

Article 24
(1) Every child receives protection to worship according to their religion. (2) Before the child can determine their choice, the religion embraced by the child follows the religion of their parents.

Article 25
(1) Regional Government, community, family, parents, guardians, and social community institutions guarantee the protection of children in embracing their religion.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1), includes fostering, guidance, and practice of religious teachings for children.

Paragraph 2
Health

Article 26
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains an optimal degree of health from the time they are in the womb.
(2) The provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), is supported by community participation.
(3) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
(4) Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) are organized free of charge for families who are unable to afford them.
(5) The implementation of provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (4) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 27
(1) Parents and family are obligated to be responsible for maintaining the health of children and caring for children from the time they are in the womb.
(2) In the event that parents and family are unable to carry out their responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), then the Regional Government is obligated to fulfill them.
(3) The obligation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 28
Every person is prohibited from performing abortion on a child still in the womb, except for reasons and procedures that are justified in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 29
Regional Government, community, family, and parents or guardians are obligated to protect children from actions that disrupt the health and growth and development of children.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Paragraph 3
Education

Article 30
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide basic education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years for all children.
(2) Parents are obligated to fulfill the child's right to obtain basic education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years.

Article 31
Regional Government, family, and parents or guardians are obligated to provide the widest possible opportunity to children to obtain education.

Article 32
Education as referred to in article 31 is directed towards:
a. the development of the child's personality, talents, mental and physical abilities to their fullest potential;
b. the development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
c. the development of respect for the child's parents, cultural identity, language, and values, the national values of the country in which the child is living, the country from which the child may originate, and the diverse customs of the child's own place of residence;
d. the preparation of the child for a responsible life; and
e. the development of respect and love for the environment.

Article 33
(1) Children with disabilities are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain inclusive education and/or special education.
(2) Children who have excellence are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.
(3) Children who receive special protection are given opportunities to obtain their right to education.

Article 34
(1) Regional Governments are responsible for providing education costs and/or free services or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children residing in remote areas.
(2) The accountability of Regional Governments as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 35
(1) Children in educational unit environments must receive protection from acts of physical violence, psychological violence, sexual crimes, and other crimes committed by educators, educational institutions, fellow students and/or other parties.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by educators, educational personnel, government officials and/or the community.

Article 36
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to develop child-friendly school models. (2) Child-friendly schools as referred to in paragraph (1) constitute a joint effort of school community members to:
a. create a safe and comfortable environment for children at school;
b. develop child participation in accordance with their age and maturity; and c. provide opportunities for children from poor families and/or persons with disabilities to receive equal and fair treatment in obtaining services and guidance at school.

Paragraph 4
Social

Article 37
(1) Regional Government is obligated to organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, both within institutions and outside institutions.
(2) The organization of maintenance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by institutions or the community.
(3) To organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, institutions and the community, as referred to in paragraph (2), may establish cooperation with various related parties.
(4) In the case of organizing maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (3), supervision shall be carried out by the OPD that administers affairs in the social sector in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 38
(1) The Regional Government in carrying out maintenance and care is obligated to endeavor and assist children to be able to: a. participate;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. freely express opinions and think in accordance with their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information in accordance with the child's age stage and development;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and engage in cultural arts; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.
(2) The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the age, level of ability of the child and their environment so as not to hinder and disturb the child's development.

Article 39
In the event that a child is neglected because as their parents neglect their obligations, then the institution or community as referred to in Article 37, family or authorized official may submit an application to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 40
(1) The court determination as referred to in Article 39 shall simultaneously determine the place of shelter, maintenance and care for the neglected child concerned.
(2) The institution or community given authority shall be obligated to provide the place as referred to in paragraph (1).
(3) The Regional Government shall be obligated to conduct guidance and support the smooth implementation of child care carried out by the institution or community.

Part Five
Special Protection

Article 41
Regional Government, society and other state institutions are obligated and responsible to provide special protection to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually; JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome;
h. children victims of abduction, sale and/or trafficking;
1. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
J. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorist networks;
I. children with special needs;
m. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Article 42
Special protection for children is carried out through efforts:
a. rapid handling, including treatment and/or rehabilitation physically, psychologically and socially as well as prevention of diseases and other health disorders;
b. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery;
c. provision of social assistance for children who come from underprivileged families; and
d. provision of protection and assistance in every judicial process.

Article 43
Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 41 letter a consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children victims of riots;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 44
Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 43 letter a shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 45
Special protection for child victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 43 letters b through d shall be implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, shelter, education, health, learning, and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children experiencing psychosocial disorders.

Article 46
Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 41 letter b shall be implemented through:
a. treatment of children in a humane manner with attention to needs according to their age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane and degrading to dignity and status;
f. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention or imprisonment except as a last resort and for the shortest period of time;
h. provision of justice before a juvenile court that is objective, impartial and in a hearing closed to the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity;
j. provision of accompaniment by parents or guardians and persons trusted by the child;
k. provision of social advocacy;
l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility especially for children with disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 47
Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 41 letter c shall be carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

Article 48
Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or socially as referred to in Article 41 letter d is carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of Laws and Regulations related to the protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various institutions or government agencies, companies, labor unions, social community institutions, and the community in the elimination of exploitation of children economically and/or sexually.

Article 49
Special protection for children who become victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances as referred to in Article 41 letter e and are involved in their production and distribution shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 50
(1) Special protection for children who become victims of pornography as referred to in Article 41 letter f is implemented through guidance, assistance, and social, physical health, and mental recovery efforts.
(2) Guidance, assistance and social, physical health, and mental recovery are implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) Every person is obligated to protect children from the influence of pornography and prevent access to information containing elements of pornography.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 51
Special protection for children with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome as referred to in Article 41 letter g shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 52
Special protection for child victims of abduction, sale, and child trafficking as referred to in Article 41 letter h shall be carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 53
Special protection for child victims of physical and/or psychological violence as referred to in Article 41 letter i is carried out through efforts to: a. disseminate and socialize the provisions of Laws and Regulations that protect child victims of acts of violence; and b. monitor, report, and impose sanctions.

Article 54
Special protection for child victims of sexual crimes as referred to in Article 41 letter j shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. provide education on reproductive health, religious values, and moral values;
b. social rehabilitation;
c. psychosocial assistance during treatment until recovery; and
d. provide protection and assistance at every level of examination starting from investigation, prosecution, up to examination in court proceedings.

Article 55
Special protection for children who are victims of terrorist networks as referred to in Article 41 letter k shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. provide education about education, ideology, and nationalism values;
b. provide counseling about the dangers of terrorism;
c. provide social rehabilitation; and
d. provide social assistance.

Article 56
Special protection for children with special needs as referred to in Article 41 letter I is carried out through efforts: a. treatment of children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child; JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. fulfillment of the special needs of the child; and
c. obtaining the same treatment as other children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development.

Article 57
Special protection for child victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 41 letter m shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 58
Special protection for children with deviant social behavior as referred to in Article 41 letter n shall be carried out through guidance on religious values and social values, counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and the community.

Article 59
Special protection for children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition as referred to in Article 41 letter o shall be carried out through counseling, rehabilitation and assistance by the Regional Government and community.

Article 60
Further provisions regarding special protection for children as referred to in Article 41 letters a through o shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 61
Every child who becomes a victim as referred to in Article 41 letter d, letter f, letter h, letter i, and letter j has the right to file a claim to the court in the form of the right to restitution which is the responsibility of the perpetrator of the crime in accordance with the applicable provisions.

Sixth Part
Protection of Women

Article 62
(1) For the prevention of acts of violence against women, the Regional Government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families and communities by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
b. opening employment opportunities for women;
c. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women from acts of violence;
d. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
e. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, higher education institutions and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women; and
f. opening complaint posts for the protection of women from acts of violence.
Part Seven Protection in the Workplace

Article 63
(1) Every company is prohibited from employing child labor under age or exploiting children.
(2) Companies must position female workers as work partners to grow the company.

Article 64
(1) The provisions as referred to in Article 63 paragraph (1), may be exempted by taking into account the following requirements: a. age for child workers in informal sector work is above 15 (fifteen) years;
b. written approval is obtained from the parent/guardian of the child worker in informal sector work;
c. the implementation must be set forth in a written work agreement between the company/employer and the parent/guardian of the child worker in informal sector work;
d. not employed at night;
e. working time of at most 3 (three) hours per day;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
f. not employed in a place or environment that can disrupt the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health;
g. provide opportunities to socialize with family and the surrounding environment;
h. provide opportunities to obtain education in accordance with their talents and interests;
i. employed for light types of work; and j. provide health protection for children and the opportunity for one day off per week.
(2) Protection for child workers in informal sector work as referred to in paragraph (1), aims to: a. prevent all forms of exploitation, discrimination, harassment and violence against children; and
b. protect children from activities that can disrupt the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health.
(3) Protection efforts for child workers in informal sector work as referred to in paragraph (2), include among others: a. providing education to the community about children's rights; b. providing assistance in the form of psychological, medical and legal services to child workers in informal sector work who experience exploitation, discrimination, harassment and violence; c. empowering families through the provision of skills training and reduction of expenditures;
d. providing scholarships to child workers in informal sector work who have dropped out of school to continue formal education to a higher level; and e. providing non-formal education and skills training for child workers in informal sector work who do not pursue formal education.

Article 65
(1) For female workers who work beyond working hours, the company is obligated to provide overtime pay in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(2) The company is obligated to protect occupational health and safety, as well as grant maternity leave rights to female workers.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) The company is prohibited from making policies that create discrimination against female workers.
(4) Companies that violate the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), may be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. verbal warning;
b. written warning; and
c. other administrative sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Eighth Part
Handling

Article 66
(1) The targets of handling include:
a. children outside the care of parents;
b. children in disaster emergency situations;
c. children in conflict with the law;
d. child victims of physical, mental and sexual violence;
e. children subjected to maltreatment and neglect;
f. child victims of economic and sexual exploitation;
g. children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse or matters that cause dependency on narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances;
h. child victims of pornography;
i. children who have deviant social behavior;
j. children who experience stigmatization due to their parents' behavior;
k. children and women who become victims of human trafficking;
l. children and women who are in situations where the nature and conditions of the workplace can endanger health, safety and morals; and
m. women victims of physical, mental and sexual violence.
(2) Handling as referred to in paragraph (1) must be carried out immediately including:
a. identification process and receipt of complaints/reports;
b. rescue actions;
c. placement of children and women in temporary shelters;
d. rehabilitation including: JDIH Kota Singkawang
1) health recovery services;
2) psychosocial recovery services; and
3) legal assistance support;
e. social reintegration.

Article 67
(1) The identification and receipt of complaints/reports as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. ensuring readiness for complaints regarding child and women protection issues;
b. following up on information or complaints/reports received concerning child and women protection issues; and
c. identifying the type of problem, needs and handling plan.
(2) The Regional Apparatus Organization responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs is obligated to identify problems and receive complaints/reports.

Article 68
(1) Rescue actions as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter b shall be carried out if based on identification results it is known that the safety of children or women victims of violence is threatened.
(2) Actions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by removing the child from the situation and environment that poses a threat.
(3) The OPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection is obligated to carry out rescue actions and coordinate with police officers or civil service police units.

Article 69
(1) Placement of child or female victims of acts of violence in temporary shelters as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter c shall be carried out if based on identification results:
a. there is a threat to safety;
b. the child has no family/caregiver or guardian; and/or
c. the child cannot be reunited with family/caregiver/guardian and/or the community.
(2) Placement as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out for a certain period of time while the child or victim receives recovery services and/or until the family/caregiver/guardian is assessed to have the readiness to care for and protect the child.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) Services provided to children and/or women while in temporary shelters include among others services for fulfilling basic needs and psychosocial assistance.
(4) The OPD responsible for social affairs is obligated to provide temporary shelters.
(5) The OPD responsible for social affairs may cooperate with the civil service police or the police in efforts to maintain the security of children or women whose safety is threatened while in temporary shelters.

Article 70
(1) Health recovery services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 1 include:
a. emergency services;
b. services for the provision of visum et repertum or visum psychiatricum in accordance with applicable provisions;
c. follow-up services in the form of outpatient and/or inpatient care in accordance with medical provisions;
d. deoxyribose nucleic acid verification services;
e. delivery process services for pregnancy as a result of sexual violence and/or rape;
f. services for the provision of further referrals in accordance with the circumstances and condition of the victim; and
g. services for the provision of special rooms separated from general patients.
(2) OPD with authority over health affairs is obligated to provide health recovery services.

Article 71
(1) Psychosocial recovery services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 2 include: a. psychological and social assessment as the basis for preparing treatment to be provided;
b. counseling;
c. psychological therapy and social rehabilitation programs;
d. mental and spiritual guidance;
e. assistance; and
f. provision of conducive and representative places for the implementation of psychosocial recovery service activities.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) The OPD responsible for social affairs is obligated to organize psychosocial recovery services.

Article 72
(1) Legal assistance and accompaniment services as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter d number 3 include: a. ensuring that children are accompanied by legal counsel; and b. facilitating accompaniment for children and women victims of violence, both in the examination process during court proceedings and outside court proceedings.
(2) The Regional Apparatus Organization responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs is obligated to organize or coordinate legal assistance services with related agencies.

Article 73
(1) Social reintegration in the form of post-rehabilitation service support as referred to in Article 66 paragraph (2) letter e includes: a. tracing of family members;
b. reuniting children and family members/substitute family and/or community;
c. facilitation of providing assistance to families in a psychosocial manner; d. support for access to further education or health services; and e. monitoring and evaluation.
(2) OPD responsible for social affairs is obligated to implement social reintegration.

Article 74
(1) Handling as referred to in Article 67 through Article 73 shall be implemented synergistically.
(2) The implementation of handling as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus Organization responsible for women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(3) Further provisions regarding the technical implementation of handling of children and women shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Ninth Part
Law Enforcement Services and Legal Aid

Article 75
(1) Law enforcement services constitute actions by law enforcement officials in implementing Laws and Regulations to handle cases of violence against children and women, especially to impose sanctions on perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
(2) Law enforcement services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by prioritizing the best interests of children and women victims of violence.
(3) Law enforcement services are aimed at providing protection for children and women victims of violence or children in conflict with the law with a gender-responsive approach so that victims and perpetrators obtain justice and legal certainty.
(4) For the purpose of implementing law enforcement as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government in cooperation with relevant agencies and institutions shall allocate resources to encourage the achievement of effectiveness and efficiency of law enforcement services for children and women victims of violence and children in conflict with the law in accordance with applicable provisions.

Article 76
Types of legal aid services for children and women victims of violence and children in conflict with the law include:
a. litigation legal aid; and
b. non-litigation legal aid.

Tenth Part
Facilitation of Child Criminal Justice Article 77 (1) The Regional Government has the role of facilitating the child criminal justice process based on the principle of restorative justice.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (2) Facilitation of the child criminal justice process as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. capacity building of human resources whose duties are related to child criminal justice and the community;
b. increased coordination with law enforcement officials;
c. development of effective methods through information support, facilities and positive activities as well as taking immediate action on gaps that encourage children and/or groups of children to commit legal violations;
d. provision and delivery of legal and psychosocial assistance services in realizing the restorative justice and diversion process for children in conflict with the law;
e. encouraging a paradigm shift in society towards children in conflict with the law;
f. developing diversion mechanisms for children in conflict with the law in accordance with Laws and Regulations;
g. developing cooperation with relevant agencies or institutions in organizing education, coaching and guidance programs for handling children who commit criminal acts, especially children under 12 (twelve) years of age to achieve optimal development; and
h. provision of facilities and infrastructure supporting the child justice process by prioritizing the best interests of the child in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) Further provisions regarding the facilitation of child criminal justice as referred to in paragraph (1), and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Eleven
Empowerment

Article 78
(1) Empowerment is implemented in the form of: a. facilitating the development of interests and talents for children and women;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
b. developing economic enterprises for adult women; c. developing creative spaces for children and women; and d. assistance for children and women victims of acts of violence.
(2) The implementation of empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) may cooperate with educational institutions, private institutions and/or non-governmental organizations.

BABX
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Article 79
(1) The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System is the entire process of implementing women's empowerment and child protection conducted comprehensively, inclusively and integratively starting from the stage of report/complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance up to repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of crime and violence in their social environment.
(2) The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women, children and family quality;
b. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection including the development of gender and child data; and
c. provide special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.
(3) The Women's Empowerment and Child Protection System is implemented through:
a. providing access for women and children to education services, health and other strategic fields;
b. encouraging the involvement of women and children in the development process;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals and family resilience;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
d. encouraging programs that can increase women's independence in the economic, political, legal, socio-cultural fields as well as other strategic fields;
e. establishment of development and strengthening of the capacity of Women and Child Protection institutions including complaint service units for violence against women and children as well as legal aid services;
f. improving the quality of human resources of managers;
g. strengthening the institutional capacity of regional gender and child mainstreaming;
h. strengthening and developing gender and child data systems; and
i. conducting promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts in accordance with Laws and Regulations.
(4) In the framework of comprehensive, inclusive and integrative women's empowerment and child protection in the region, the Regional Government establishes:
a. P2TP2A or similar institutions that have the same functions and roles;
b. regional child protection commission or other similar institutions to support supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region; and
c. other institutions according to needs and/or provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 80
(1) P2TP2A is an integrated, one-stop and networked technical service unit for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection established by the government, Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions or other institutions.
(2) P2TP2A is positioned under the coordination of the OPD that handles women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have the authority to formulate policies on women's empowerment and child protection.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (4) P2TP2A is one form of integrated service unit that functions as:
a. an information center for children and women;
b. a service center for children and women victims of violence; and c. an empowerment center for children and women.

Article 81
(1) P2TP2A is established based on a Decree of the Mayor.
(2) Membership of P2TP2A consists of structural and non-structural elements originating from professionals, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding the technical aspects of P2TP2A are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 82
(1) In order to increase the effectiveness of supervision of the implementation of the fulfillment of children's rights, Regional Governments may establish a Regional Child Protection Commission or other similar institutions to support the supervision of the implementation of child protection in the region.
(2) The membership of the Regional Child Protection Commission consists of 1 (one) chairperson, 1 (one) vice chairperson, and 7 (seven) members.
(3) The membership of the Regional Child Protection Commission comes from elements of the Regional Government, religious leaders, community leaders, community organizations, the business sector, and community groups that care about child protection.

Article 83
(1) The Regional Child Protection Commission has the following duties: a. conducting supervision of the implementation of protection and fulfillment of children's rights;
b. providing input and proposals in the formulation of policies regarding the implementation of child protection;
c. collecting data and information regarding child protection; d. receiving and conducting examinations of public complaints regarding violations of children's rights;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. conducting mediation on disputes regarding violations of children's rights; f. conducting cooperation with institutions established by the community in the field of child protection;
g. providing reports to the authorities regarding alleged violations of the Child Protection Law; and h. other duties in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(2) Further provisions regarding the Regional Child Protection Commission shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 84
In the event of changes to Laws and Regulations concerning the Regional Child Protection Commission, the regulation regarding the Regional Child Protection Commission shall be guided by the laws and regulations which are further regulated by Mayoral Regulation.
CHAPTER XI

CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY
Article 85
To ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination, real integrated efforts are needed between the Regional Government, community and business sector through the development of KLA.

Article 86
The development of KLA as referred to in Article 85, shall be implemented based on the following principles: a. good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information disclosure, and rule of law; b. non-discrimination, namely not differentiating ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical or psychological condition of the child, or other factors;
c. the best interests of the child, namely making what is best for the child as the primary consideration in every policy, program, and activity;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
d. the right to life, survival, and development of the child, namely guaranteeing the right to life, survival and development of the child to the maximum extent possible; and e. respect for the views of the child, namely recognizing and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion, is given the opportunity to express their views freely on all matters affecting them.

Article 87
The development of KLA is directed towards the fulfillment of children's rights which include:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, utilization of leisure time, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.

Article 88
(1) In order to realize KLA, development stages of KLA are arranged which include: a. preparation;
b. planning;
c. implementation;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.
(2) In every stage of KLA development, it is mandatory to consider the views of children obtained through child consultation.

Article 89
(1) To effectuate the development of KLA, a KLA Task Force shall be established as determined by Mayoral Decree.
(2) Membership of the KLA Task Force may consist of Regional Government, child representatives, business sector, religious leaders, community leaders and other parties as needed.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 90
(1) The main duties of the KLA Task Force are as follows: a. coordinating various efforts for KLA development; b. preparing the RAD for KLA development;
c. implementing socialization, advocacy and communication for KLA development;
d. conducting monitoring of the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the RAD for KLA development;
e. conducting evaluation at the end of each year on the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the RAD for KLA development; and f. submitting reports to the Mayor.
(2) Further provisions regarding the KLA Task Force shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CHILD PARTICIPATION
Article 91
(1) Every child has the right to participate in expressing opinions, ideas, thoughts and others as well as to be involved in decision-making processes concerning their lives either directly or indirectly, regarding all matters related to themselves and implemented based on awareness, understanding in accordance with age and level of thinking maturity, as well as mutual willingness so that the Child can enjoy the results or obtain benefits from such decisions.
(2) Child participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through the establishment of a Children's Forum.
(3) The Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (2), is an organization whose members are children who become administrators of children's organizations, studios or children's activity groups and the like which are generally based on the development of talents, interests, abilities and utilization of leisure time.
(4) The Children's Forum is directly fostered by the Regional Government and is intended to increase the capacity of children who have been active in various organizations in certain fields.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (5) In fostering the Children's Forum, the Regional Government may cooperate with professional organizations, community institutions, business entities that are child-responsive.
(6) The establishment of the Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be stipulated by Decree of the Mayor.

Article 92
(1) In every formulation of policies related to Children, Regional Governments must pay attention to and accommodate the opinions of children conveyed through the Children's Forum.
(2) Regional Governments may include representatives of the Children's Forum in Regional Development Planning Deliberations.

CHAPTER XIII
FUNDING AND REPORTING
Article 93
(1) Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Children and Women in the region may be sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. National Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and d. other sources that are legal and non-binding.
(2) Funding as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is based on the needs and financial capacity of the region.

CHAPTER XIV
GUIDANCE, SUPERVISION AND REPORTING
Article 94
(1) The mayor has the authority to conduct guidance in the implementation of child and women protection.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented in the form of:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
JDIH Kota Singkawang (3) In the context of guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may cooperate with the Central Government, other Regional Governments, Non-Governmental Organizations, the business sector and universities.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented through OPD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 95
(1) The mayor is obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of child and women protection in the region.
(2) The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of child and women protection organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the mayor or the Regional House of Representatives.

Article 96
(1) OPD that organizes child and women protection is obligated to report the implementation related to its duties and responsibilities in organizing child and women protection to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be submitted in writing, covering: a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XV
AWARDS
Article 97
(1) The Regional Government may grant awards to any person and/or institution that demonstrates full commitment and attention in the implementation of child and women protection.
(2) The award as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in the form of a certificate and/or other forms.
(3) Further provisions regarding the procedures for granting awards as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.
JDIH Singkawang City

CHAPTER XVI
PROHIBITIONS
Article 98
Every person is prohibited from:
a. receiving child visitors and employing children in discotheque businesses, nightclubs, bars, karaoke, pubs/music houses, massage parlors and steam baths/saunas, and/or other worst forms of work places for children.
b. producing, selling and/or promoting cigarettes in the school environment.
c. selling and/or promoting cigarettes, gambling equipment, contraceptives and goods that can damage the morals of children.
d. broadcasting and showing pornographic acts in community activities that can be accessed by children.
e. receiving child visitors during school hours or allowing child visitors after nine o'clock at night to access the internet at internet cafes.
f. refusing complaints and/or charging fees in providing services to victims at Protection Service Institutions.
g. treating children in a discriminatory manner that results in children experiencing losses both material and moral thereby hindering their social function;
h. treating children with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
i. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in situations of maltreatment and neglect;
j. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing violence against children;
k. committing violence or threat of violence forcing children to have sexual intercourse with him/her or with another person;
l. committing violence or threat of violence, coercing, committing deceit, committing a series of lies, or persuading children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
m. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit or participating in committing kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking of children;
JDIH Kota Singkawang n. obstructing children from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
o. recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests, and leaving children without protection of life;
p. placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of children;
q. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropics; and
r. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

CHAPTER XVII
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
Article 99
(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are granted special authority as investigators to conduct investigations into criminal acts regulated in this Regional Regulation as referred to in the Criminal Procedure Code.
(2) The investigative authority as referred to in paragraph (1), is as follows: a. to receive, search for, collect, and examine information or reports concerning criminal acts of child and women protection so that such information or reports become more complete and clear;
b. to examine, search for, and collect information regarding individuals or entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts of child and women protection;
c. to request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts of child and women protection;
d. to examine books, records, and other documents concerning criminal acts of child and women protection;
JDIH Kota Singkawang
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records, and other documents, as well as to carry out seizure of such evidence;
f. to request assistance from experts in the framework of performing investigation duties of criminal acts of child and women protection;
g. to order to stop and/or prohibit a person from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and to examine the identity of persons, objects, and/or documents carried;
h. to photograph a person related to criminal acts of child and women protection;
i. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. to terminate the investigation; and/or
k. to take other necessary actions for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal acts of child and women protection in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
(3) In the event the investigation meets the elements as referred to in paragraph (1) the Investigator notifies the commencement of the investigation and submits the results of the investigation to the Public Prosecutor through the Investigator Official of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XVIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 100
(1) Institutions or bodies designated by the Mayor to carry out service duties that violate service principles may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Perpetrators of acts of violence shall be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with the applicable Laws.
(3) Any person who deliberately fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of violence, allows violence to occur, fails to report and fails to provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as stipulated in the applicable Laws and Regulations.
JDIH Singkawang City

CHAPTER XIX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 101
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 102
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Singkawang City.
Enacted in Singkawang on the date of 12 December 2017 MAYOR OF SINGKAWANG,

AWANG ISHAK
Enacted in Singkawang on the date of 12 December 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SINGKAWANG CITY,
SYECH BANDAR
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINGKAWANG CITY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 4
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SINGKAWANG CITY,
WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (4/2017)
in accordance with the original JDIH Singkawang City

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF THE CITY OF SINGKAWANG
NUMBER 4 OF 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN
I. GENERAL
The implementation of protection for children and women is carried out based on the principles of humanity, integration and justice. So that every person must receive their right to protection against a sense of security and freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity which is contrary to what is aspired to in the Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, namely the creation of a just and civilized humanity.

In Article 2 of Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection, that the implementation of Child Protection is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child including:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

In Article 3 of Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, that the elimination of domestic violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.

In Article 3 of Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection, that Child Protection aims to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from JDIH Kota Singkawang violence and discrimination, for the realization of quality Indonesian children who are noble in character and prosperous.

In Article 4 of Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, that the elimination of domestic violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence in the household;
b. protect victims of domestic violence;
c. take action against perpetrators of domestic violence; and
d. maintain the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

To realize law enforcement and the fulfillment of the basic rights of children and women, the Government of the City of Singkawang is obligated to provide protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as the fulfillment of civil rights and freedoms which are set forth in a policy at the regional level.

The establishment of a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Children and Women is an elaboration of higher legislation that regulates the rights of children and women. In the Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Children and Women, the norms formulated are efforts to address the problems faced in the implementation of protection of children and women in the City of Singkawang. The implementation of protection of children and women is carried out to realize the fulfillment of the rights of children and women in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and to receive protection from violence, discrimination, exploitation, and neglect for the realization of human resource development in the City of Singkawang that is faithful, intelligent, quality, noble in character and prosperous.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Singkawang City

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by "Parents whose whereabouts are unknown" means that if the biological father/mother of the child passes away or migrates, the responsibility transfers to the closest family member to care for the child, and if the child's parents divorce, custody of the child shall be in accordance with the court decision regarding child custody or with the results of deliberation between both biological parents of the child (father and mother).
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Singkawang City

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "caring for a child from the womb" is that every child starting from the womb must be protected so that they remain alive as is proper and caring for them so that their life develops appropriately.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "child-friendly school" is a school that implements management aimed at ensuring every child is inclusively in an environment that is physically safe, emotionally protective, and psychologically supportive.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by "equal treatment" is not differentiating based on ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 37
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "in institutions" is through the government institution system and private institutions, while "outside institutions" is the family/individual care system. Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear~

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
What is meant by "other state institutions" is the police, prosecutor's office, courts, and legal aid institutions.
What is meant by "economically exploited" includes actions or conduct of instrumentalizing, utilizing, or extorting a child to obtain personal, family, or group benefits.
What is meant by "physical and/or mental violence" is treatment that causes injury and/or harm to a child, and not solely physical, but also mental and social.
What is meant by "maltreatment" is acts or actions of abuse or indecent conduct toward a child.
What is meant by "neglect" is actions or conduct of deliberately disregarding the obligation to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Singkawang City

Article 43
Point a What is meant by "child who becomes a refugee" is a condition where in a general refugee situation where there is a movement of people leaving a Regional/state territory in order to avoid a disaster or calamity either due to nature or due to direct human actions such as disease outbreaks, floods, war, nuclear leaks, bomb explosions and others.
Point b What is meant by "Child victim of unrest" is a condition that occurs in a conflict situation within the territory of the State either in the form of horizontal conflict (between citizens) or vertical (with authorities) with various causes.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "psychosocial disturbance" includes, among others, psychological trauma and developmental disorders in children at an early age.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Singkawang City

Article 50
Sufficiently clear.

Article 51
Sufficiently clear.

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear.

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear.

Article 56
What is meant by "receiving equal treatment" is without distinguishing tribe, religion, race, group, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear.

Article 59
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear.

Article 61
Sufficiently clear.

Article 62
Sufficiently clear.

Article 63
Sufficiently clear.

Article 64
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 65
Sufficiently clear.

Article 66
Sufficiently clear.

Article 67
Sufficiently clear.

Article 68
Sufficiently clear.

Article 69
Sufficiently clear.

Article 70
Sufficiently clear.

Article 71
Sufficiently clear.

Article 72
Sufficiently clear.

Article 73
Sufficiently clear.

Article 74
Sufficiently clear.

Article 75
Sufficiently clear.

Article 76
Sufficiently clear.

Article 77
Sufficiently clear.

Article 78
Sufficiently clear.

Article 79
Sufficiently clear.

Article 80
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Singkawang City

Article 81
Sufficiently clear.

Article 82
Sufficiently clear.

Article 83
Sufficiently clear.

Article 84
Sufficiently clear.

Article 85
Sufficiently clear.

Article 86
Sufficiently clear.

Article 87
Sufficiently clear.

Article 88
Sufficiently clear.

Article 89
Sufficiently clear.

Article 90
Sufficiently clear.

Article 91
Sufficiently clear.

Article 92
Sufficiently clear.

Article 93
Sufficiently clear.

Article 94
Sufficiently clear.

Article 95
Sufficiently clear.

Article 96
Sufficiently clear.
JDIH Kota Singkawang

Article 97
Sufficiently clear.

Article 98
Sufficiently clear.

Article 99
Sufficiently clear.

Article 100
Paragraph (1) What is meant by administrative sanctions is that institutions or organizations that do not implement protection services for women and children are given sanctions in the form of reprimand, oral, written and revocation of permit.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 101
Sufficiently clear.

Article 102
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SINGKAWANG CITY NUMBER 55  JDIH Singkawang City