REGENT OF KOTABARU
PROVINCE OF SOUTH KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KOTABARU REGENCY
NUMBER 08 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF KOTABARU,

Considering : a. that women and children with their dignity have the right to be protected from various acts of violence, exploitation, and discrimination that marginalize and degrade their dignity as human beings;
b. that negative behavior and culture as well as actions that may result in women and children being in a position of pressure or powerlessness in the scope of social community, or in the scope of legal processes should be given special treatment that maintains the stability of their soul and spirit to remain able to carry out their lives in social interaction;
c. that the Regional Government is obliged to provide protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 27 Year 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 Year 1953 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1953 Number 9) as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 72, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1820);
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
- 2 -
4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as last amended by Law Number 12 Year 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
7. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 44 Year 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
10. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
11. Law Number 25 Year 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
12. Law Number 36 Year 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
- 3 -
14. Government Regulation Number 58 Year 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 140, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);
15. Government Regulation Number 65 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for the Preparation and Implementation of Minimum Service Standards (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 150, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4585);
16. Government Regulation Number 79 Year 2005 concerning Guidelines for the Development and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
17. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6404);
18. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
19. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
20. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as last amended several times by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 Year 2011 concerning the Second Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 310);
21. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 Year 2014 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 32);
- 4 -
22. Regional Regulation of Kotabaru Regency Number 05 Year 1991 concerning Civil Servant Investigators within the Government of Dati II Kotabaru (Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency Dati II Kotabaru Year 1991 Number 02 Series C);
23. Regional Regulation of Kotabaru Regency Number 19 Year 2007 concerning Government Affairs That Are the Authority of the Regional Government of Kotabaru Regency (Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency Year 2007 Number 19);
24. Regional Regulation of Kotabaru Regency Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Establishment, Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions of Kotabaru Regency (Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency Year 2011 Number 12, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency Number 05) as amended by Regional Regulation of Kotabaru Regency Number 17 Year 2012 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Kotabaru Regency Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Establishment, Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Technical Institutions of Kotabaru Regency (Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency Year 2012 Number 17);

With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF KOTABARU REGENCY
and

REGENT OF KOTABARU
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Regency Region of Kotabaru.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government Administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Kotabaru.
- 5 -
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Kotabaru Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit within the scope of the Kotabaru Regency Government.
6. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
7. Woman is an adult human of female gender and a person recognized by law as a woman.
8. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
9. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of acts of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
10. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
11. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or unconsciousness and/or causes death.
12. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness or severe psychological suffering in a person.
13. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
- 6 -
15. Victim of acts of violence is an individual or group of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
16. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
18. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
21. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
23. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated service unit established by the regional government to provide services in the context of empowerment of Women and Children victims of acts of violence.
24. Regional Action Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RAD is a foundation and guideline for related services, vertical agencies, and the community, in the context of implementing prevention and protection activities for women and children victims of acts of violence.
25. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
- 7 -
26. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
27. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a direct line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
28. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
29. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Regional Government and DPRD and stipulated by Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
(1) The implementation of protection of women and children, is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of women and children;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination in the empowerment of women and children;
d. the best interests of women and children; and
e. restoration of social and economic rights for women and children who experience acts of violence or neglect.
(2) The objectives of implementing protection of women and children, include:
a. preventing acts of violence or neglect against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminating all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protecting and providing a sense of security for women and children;
d. providing services to women and children victims of acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitating and conducting mediation of domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; and - 8 -
f. seeking to obtain compensation/restitution for losses suffered by victims from perpetrators of violence.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 3
(1) The protection of women and children in the region includes prevention, services, and empowerment for victims of physical violence, psychological violence, sexual violence, exploitation, human trafficking, and domestic neglect including child deviant behavior.
(2) The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence is a joint obligation and responsibility among the Regional Government, community, family, and parents.
(3) In the region, P2TP2A may be established which is the result of joint initiative between the Regional Government and non-government parties.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
(1) Every woman and child who becomes a victim of physical violence, exploitation or human trafficking has the right to obtain protection and services.
(2) Protection and services for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. complaints or requests for protection from the person concerned;
b. confidential handling or placement of victims in safe locations and houses whose existence is kept confidential to avoid intimidation and threats;
c. medical services/health treatment in the form of care and recovery from injuries or physical conditions of victims by medical personnel and paramedics;
d. medicolegal services for evidence in the legal field;
e. protection by law enforcement officials;
f. provision of information regarding legal rights and obligations to victims or guardians of victims as well as identification of incidents;
g. continuous handling up to the Rehabilitation stage;
- 9 -
h. psychological assistance to restore the traumatic condition of victims and restore the self-confidence of victims;
i. assistance support for legal processes and obtaining the right to compensation or restitution;
j. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member (social reintegration); and
k. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(3) In the event that the victim is a child, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in paragraph (2), also obtains special rights including:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma;
e. the right to obtain freedom; and
f. the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 5
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 6
The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 5 letter a, include:
a. implementing the obligations for protection of women and children from acts of violence as stipulated by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs and activities for protection of women and children from acts of violence;
- 10 -
c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. providing shelters for women and children victims of violence;
f. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
g. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 5 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 8
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 5 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

BAB VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
Center for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 9
Regional Governments are obligated to establish P2TP2A.
- 11 -

Article 10
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to facilitate the establishment of P2TP2A in the region.
(2) P2TP2A is established through joint initiative between the Regional Government, NGOs, Universities, professional organizations, organizations and the community.
(3) P2TP2A in the region is named P2TP2A Kabupaten Kotabaru.
(4) The establishment and Working Procedures of P2TP2A in the region are stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Organizational Structure of P2TP2A in the Regions

Article 11
(1) The organizational structure of P2TP2A consists of:
a. Protector/Patron;
b. Advisor;
c. Coordinator;
d. Chairperson;
e. Vice Chairperson;
f. Secretary;
g. Vice Secretary;
h. Treasurer; and
i. Members.
(2) Coordinators consist of:
a. Assistance and Advocacy Division;
b. Service and Recovery Division;
c. Network and Information Strengthening Division;
d. Education and Training Division;
e. Case Manager; and
f. Expert Team.
(3) Further provisions regarding the organizational structure of P2TP2A and the description of coordinator duties shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 12
P2TP2A establishes functional networks with: a. Police;
b. Prosecutor's Office;
c. Courts;
d. Hospitals/Community Health Centers;
e. Psychiatrists; and - 12 -
f. Other institutions that have similar objectives.

Article 13
P2TP2A as an independent institution in the region must be in one coordination together with SKPD whose scope of duties and responsibilities covers the field of Women's Empowerment and Regional Child Protection.

Third Part
Financing of P2TP2A

Article 14
(1) The Government assists the operational activities of P2TP2A by budgeting in the APBD in accordance with the capacity and financial condition of the region.
(2) The budgeting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be through the SKPD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the field of Women's Empowerment and Regional Child Protection.
(3) For administrative order and financial utilization, P2TP2A is obligated to prepare a work program and accountability for the use of regional finances.

Article 15
(1) Financing of P2TP2A in addition to being obtained from APBD funds can be through obtaining assistance receipts from individuals, entities, or official institutions whose existence is legally recognized.
(2) P2TP2A is obligated to submit annual reports for performance and financial acquisition from APBD to the Regent through SKPD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the field of Women's Empowerment and Regional Child Protection.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION, SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 16
The Regional Government through the regional P2TP2A, implements prevention efforts and services for victims of violence, exploitation and neglect of Children and Women up to the empowerment of victims to be able to return to living their lives in accordance with the dignity and worth they possess.
- 13 -

Part Two
Prevention of Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect of Women and Children

Article 17
(1) The form of prevention as referred to in Article 16 is carried out through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations related to the protection of Children and Women to the wider community in the region;
b. dissemination activities of the existence of P2TP2A to be known by everyone in the region through the distribution of brochures, leaflets, pamphlets or notice boards so that incidents of violence, exploitation and neglect can be reported as soon as possible and can be handled before reaching the worst conditions;
c. training for members who are able to disseminate norms of prohibitions and sanctions to the community;
d. opening of public complaint channels by the Regional Government or P2TP2A in each area through community networks;
e. strengthening coordination channels with Sub-district, Urban Village/Village level Governments;
f. immediate handling of public complaints in all areas of the region and securing subjects of acts of violence, exploitation, human trafficking or neglect; and/or
g. counseling/socialization in the form of raising awareness of the wider community down to the smallest community groups (families), especially parents, to protect women and children.
(2) The Regional Government through P2TP2A conducts data collection on areas of violence based on incident rates and conducts research and assessment of the vulnerability level of areas to find solutions for reducing up to stopping the occurrence of acts of violence, exploitation and neglect in vulnerable point areas.
- 14 -

Third Part
Services for Women and Children Who Experience Acts of Violence, Exploitation and Neglect

Article 18
(1) The form of services provided to women and children victims of violence, exploitation, human trafficking or neglect shall be implemented in accordance with the rights of victims as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3).
(2) To support the operations of P2TP2A, the Regent shall order the SKPD related to services as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the minimum service standards established by the government.

Article 19
Regional Government or P2TP2A is obligated to establish operational standards for Assistance to victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking or neglect in every stage of fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 20
The provision of services and assistance to victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. fast, safe, and empathetic;
c. coordination between government agencies;
d. guarantee of confidentiality;
e. easily accessible; and
f. free of charge.

Fourth Part
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 21
(1) The Regional Government through P2TP2A is obligated to conduct empowerment in the economic field for victims of acts of violence, exploitation and/or trafficking or neglect.
(2) Forms of empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. procuring the needs required for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitude, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
- 15 -
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large companies, as well as financial institutions to develop the enterprises of victims of acts of violence;
e. endeavoring to provide capital for victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding access to information and promoting the products of victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 22
(1) Cooperation is conducted to strengthen the role of P2TP2A in achieving the objectives of protection of women and children in regional areas.
(2) Cooperation is conducted with:
a. the government;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city government;
d. non-governmental institutions; and
e. international institutions whose existence is recognized.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2), includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of a joint agreement.

Part Two
Partnership

Article 23
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector for support in the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area.
(2) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through: - 16 -
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of violence.
(3) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 24
(1) In providing protection for women and children, the community may:
a. establish family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. establish women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. independently conduct socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. provide first aid to victims; and
e. report to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER X
REGIONAL ACTION PLAN
Article 25
(1) In order to implement obligations and responsibilities, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) RAD as the basis for implementing protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
- 17 - (3) Further provisions regarding the RAD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 26
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The Regent may appoint the Head of SKPD whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the protection of women and children to conduct guidance and supervision.

Article 27
The community may conduct supervision over the implementation of protection for women and children in the regional area through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or DPRD.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION
Article 28
(1) In addition to general investigation officials, investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children in this Regional Regulation may also be conducted by Civil Servant Investigators whose appointment is in accordance with the laws and regulations.
(2) Civil Servant Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), are authorized to:
a. receive reports or complaints from a person regarding the occurrence of criminal acts of violence against women and children;
b. take initial action at that time at the scene and conduct examination;
c. interrogate a suspect and examine the suspect's identity;
d. seize objects and/or documents; e. take fingerprints and photograph a person;
f. summon persons to be heard and examined as suspects or witnesses;
g. bring in expert witnesses required in connection with the examination of the case;
- 18 -
h. terminate the investigation after receiving instruction from the General Investigator that there is insufficient evidence, or the incident does not constitute a criminal act and subsequently through the General Investigator notify this matter to the public prosecutor, the suspect or their family; and/or
i. take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal acts of violence against women and children, which according to law can be accounted for.
(3) The Investigator as referred to in paragraph (2), shall notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of the investigation to the public prosecutor through the Police Officer Investigator of the Republic of Indonesia National Police, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code.

CHAPTER XIII
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 29
(1) Every person who intentionally fails to provide protection to women and children resulting in the occurrence of acts of violence, allows acts of violence to occur, and/or does not report and does not provide protection to victims, shall be subject to sanctions as regulated in the Laws and Regulations.
(2) If the appointed official or P3A Official responsible for providing protection fails to carry out their obligations and responsibilities, they shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the Laws and Regulations.
(3) P3A Officials who carry out service and protection duties for Children and Women from acts of violence and violate service principles may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal organizational mechanism.

CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Article 30
(1) The handling of legal cases in the investigation process by law enforcement officials must be handled by special investigators who have been appointed according to their competence by law enforcement institutions for the field of protection of women and children.
(2) Special investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are: - 19 -
a. in investigation cases for women or girl children victims of violence must be handled by female investigators;
b. the implementation process as referred to in point a must be in a closed room attended only by the victim's parents or guardian along with the advocacy and psychology team from P3A who have the same gender;
c. in investigation cases for boy children victims of violence may be conducted by male or female investigators, preferably of the same gender and implemented as referred to in point b; and
d. The trial process is not open to the public.

Article 31
In the case of trial proceedings related to cases of violence against children, the presence of the child does not necessarily have to be required at the trial, except in circumstances that are absolutely compelling while still separating the meeting between the child and the perpetrator in trial proceedings at different times.

Article 32
In the event that the perpetrator of a criminal act is a child, the following matters shall apply:
a. the legal process is carried out humanely by considering that the child still has hope for their future;
b. The Investigator must be a person who has competence in special investigation for child handling cases; c. The investigation is conducted in a closed room and only attended by the advocacy team and the child's parents/guardian; d. during the investigation process, the child is not placed in general detention, but rather entrusted to their family with supervision and monitoring; e. the trial process is carried out specifically in a juvenile court room; and
f. the child's punishment process is placed in a special juvenile correctional institution, with a transition period that may be accompanied by their parents.

Article 33
News media are not permitted to expose news coverage for cases concerning child victims of sexual violence in order to protect the child's identity and their hope for the future unless the victim loses their life as a result of such violence.
- 20 -

CHAPTER XV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 34
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Kotabaru Regency.
Enacted in Kotabaru on the date of June 6, 2014

REGENT OF KOTABARU,
H. IRHAMI RIDJANI
Promulgated in Kotabaru on June 6, 2014

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF KOTABARU REGENCY,
H. SURIANSYAH
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KOTABARU REGENCY
YEAR 2014 NUMBER 08
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF KOTABARU REGENCY, SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (39/2014) - 1 -

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF KOTABARU REGENCY
NUMBER 08 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
The role of women is very important because they are the mothers of the nation who become the pillars of the family to build the future of human resources in various fields including family economic empowerment, likewise with children who are the generation of the nation who will play a role in filling development in the future.
Children and Women must receive protection from violent treatment, exploitation, human trafficking and neglect by responsible parties. Protection is intended to create a peaceful and prosperous atmosphere for all levels of society in fostering life and togetherness within the regional territory.
Violence cannot be avoided just like that, but must be prevented as early as possible from spreading to a level that is detrimental to all parties. Protection efforts are prioritized on prevention efforts and minimizing incidents.
Acts of violence against Children and Women constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life is guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Children and Women victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region so that institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee its implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of Children and Women victims of violence in Kotabaru Regency. As one of the efforts to protect Children and Women, it is carried out through guidance, training and assistance to victims and families of violence victims. Economic empowerment is also carried out for the prevention of women as victims, which can be done by cultivating and developing micro and small enterprises in accordance with local potential. To cultivate micro and small enterprises, it is necessary to increase the capacity and capability of women through assistance and guidance so that women are motivated to start and develop their businesses.
- 2 -

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Paragraph (1) Letter a Respect for the rights of Children and Women constitutes respect for the fulfillment of basic rights for women and children.
Letter b What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a condition where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare; Gender equality is the equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is all best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
Letter e What is meant by restoration of socio-economic rights is increasing understanding, awareness, responsibility, commitment, participation, capability and independence for the purpose of economic improvement and quality of women or target groups so as to avoid problems.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear - 3 - Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and or causes death What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes What is meant by "exploitation" includes:
a. actions that exploit a child economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. actions with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.
What is meant by "trafficking in persons" is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
- 4 - What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:
a. actions that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. actions of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after children as appropriate;
c. actions that neglect a person within the scope of one's household, whereas according to the law applicable to him or her or because of an agreement or contract he or she is obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. actions that result in economic dependence by limiting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
What is meant by deviant behavior of children such as the use of glue aibon which can cause children to feel addicted or intoxicated because they are invited by their friends, and deviation towards free sex behavior or use of illicit goods.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Special stigma for cases of child rape, victims have the right not to receive exposure through media coverage including mention of family background, location/place of residence and matters related to the child's future interests.
Letter e Sufficiently clear - 5 - Letter f Compensation or restitution currently has not been formally institutionalized juridically but has been institutionalized in customary rules (adat), legal remedies are possible in the case of claims for damages as developed in developed countries today.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
P2PT2A is an institution that is within the scope of the related SKPD.

Article 10
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
- 6 -

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
- 7 -

Article 25
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF KOTABARU REGENCY NUMBER 05