REGENT OF BANGKA
BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKA REGENCY
NUMBER 9 OF 2019
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF BANGKA,

Considering : a. that the empowerment of women is carried out so that women can actualize their potential optimally to participate in development in accordance with their nature and capacity;

b. that women as national assets who play a role in the process of continuation and preparation of quality generations, need to receive guarantees of their rights and protection from acts of violence and discrimination in order to build society, nation and state;

c. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, mandates that women's empowerment is a mandatory affair organized by the Regency Regional Government;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 55) Emergency Law Number 5 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 56) and Emergency Law Number 6 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 57) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions including Kotaparaja Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra As Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);

3. Law Number 27 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 217, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4033);

4. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1945 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);

5. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);

6. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

7. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

8. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

9. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635), as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601);

10. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

11. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);

12. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);

13. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

14. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5589) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

15. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

16. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in Regions;

17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Improving the Quality of Life of Women;

18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;

19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 4 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Empowerment of Community Institutions in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANGKA REGENCY and

REGENT OF BANGKA
DECIDES:
To Stipulate : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regency is Bangka Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of Government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Bangka.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bangka Regency.
5. Regional Secretary is the Regional Secretary of Bangka Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and Regional House of Representatives in the administration of Government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
7. Human Rights are a set of rights inherent to the nature and existence of human beings as creatures of God Almighty and constitute His gift that must be respected, upheld and protected by the state, law, Government, and every person for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity and worth.
8. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental, spiritual, social capacity, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective capabilities.
9. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
10. Discrimination Against Women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality between men and women.
11. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural circumstances of society.
12. Gender Equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
13. Society is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children.
15. Labor Force is every person who is capable of performing work to produce goods and/or services either to meet their own needs or for society.
16. Worker/Laborer is every person who works by receiving wages or remuneration in other forms.
17. Elderly Women are persons who have reached 60 years of age and above.
18. Women with Disabilities are women who experience physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with their activities and social interaction normally.
19. Homeless Women are women who do not have a permanent place of residence and for various reasons must live under bridges, public parks, roadsides or various other public facilities to sleep and carry out daily life.
20. Domestic Women Workers are people who work for a person or several people in a household to perform household work for wages.
21. Women Heads of Household are women who, for various reasons, are left by their husbands, and ultimately act or contribute and function to carry out the role and responsibilities as head of household.
22. Women Former Inmates of Correctional Institutions are women who have served sentences in correctional institutions.
23. Women Disaster Victims are women who suffer or die as a result of natural and social disasters.
24. Women Commercial Sex Workers are women who work as sex workers by their own will and/or are prostituted.
25. Women Victims of Violence are women who experience physical, mental suffering and/or economic loss resulting from a criminal act.

Article 2
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. Women's rights;
b. obligations and responsibilities of the Regency Regional Government; c. women's empowerment;
d. women's protection;
e. strategy for women's empowerment and protection;
f. implementation of women's protection;
g. mechanism for organizing women's empowerment and protection; h. financing; and
i. guidance and supervision.

Article 3
Empowerment and Protection of Women is implemented based on the principles of: a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. the best interests of women.

Article 4
The objectives of this Regional Regulation are:
a. to empower women both individually and in groups and society at large so that they are able to live more independently; and b. to prevent and address the risks of violence and vulnerability of women so that their survival can be fulfilled in accordance with the principles of equality and justice.

CHAPTER II
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue her lineage;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life in order to become a human being who is faithful, pious, responsible, of noble character, happy, and prosperous in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery/servitude and threats;
g. obtain protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
h. obtain welfare and a decent life;
i. participate in politics;
j. perform legal acts; and
k. freely choose a partner in her marriage.
(2) Every woman during the marriage bond has equal rights and responsibilities with her husband over all matters relating to her marital life, relations with her children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with statutory regulations.
(3) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities with her former husband over all matters relating to children with due regard to the best interests of the child.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE REGENCY REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 6 (1) The Regency Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility for the empowerment and protection of women.
(2) The efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services; and
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) The efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 7
Women's empowerment is directed towards obtaining opportunities and rights as human beings in order to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy;
b. social culture;
c. politics; and
d. law.

Article 8
Empowerment of women in the economic field as referred to in Article 7 letter a is implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups; c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups; d. facilitation and capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 9
Empowerment of women in the social and cultural field as referred to in Article 7 letter b shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome;
c. health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts primarily in the field of reproductive health;
d. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about family planning;
e. independence, health and welfare including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
f. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 10
(1) Empowerment of women in the political field as referred to in Article 7 letter c includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) Empowerment of women in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations.

Article 11
(1) Women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 7 letter d includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) Women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Article 12
(1) Protection of women includes:
a. social protection;
b. economic protection; and
c. legal protection.
(2) Social protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is to ensure the survival of women in the form of social protection in order to ensure the fulfillment of proper living needs.
(3) Economic protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is to prevent and address the risk of vulnerability resulting from shocks and social vulnerability of a person, family, group and/or community for the survival of women.
(4) Legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is implemented in terms of providing protection to women who become witnesses and victims of acts of violence and discrimination.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 13
The implementation of protection for women is provided to:
a. women workers/laborers;
b. elderly women;
c. women with disabilities;
d. homeless women;
e. domestic women workers;
f. women heads of household;
g. women former inmates of correctional institutions; h. women victims of disaster;
i. women commercial sex workers; and
j. women victims of violence.

Second Part
Female Workers/Laborers

Article 14
(1) The implementation of protection for female workers/laborers as referred to in Article 13 letter a is to provide protection from acts of economic exploitation and cruel, inhumane treatment and to ensure proper appreciation for their work.
(2) Female workers/laborers as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security;
c. access to information and legal consultation services;
d. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve status; and
e. witnesses and victims.

Third Part
Elderly Women

Article 15
(1) The implementation of protection for elderly women as referred to in Article 13 letter b is in the context of extending life expectancy so that they can carry out their social functions and play an active role naturally in their social life.
(2) Elderly women as referred to in paragraph (1) receive the right to protection for:
a. basic health services to maintain and improve health status including psychological services and diseases related to the elderly (gerontological/geriatric);;
b. use of facilities and accessibility of public facilities and infrastructure; and
c. government administrative services.

Fourth Part
Women with Disabilities

Article 16
(1) The implementation of protection for women with disabilities as referred to in Article 13 letter c in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination including freedom from cruel treatment, inhuman treatment, degrading human dignity, and freedom from exploitation.
(2) Women with disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection for:
a. guarantee of continuity and personal self-development; b. participation in the fields of education, health, employment, politics, sports, arts and culture as well as utilization of information and communication technology;
c. accessibility to information, legal aid, mobility, social services; and d. early intervention efforts including treatment and rehabilitation for the improvement of their function and capacity.

Fifth Part
Homeless Women

Article 17
(1) The implementation of protection for homeless women as referred to in Article 13 letter d is in the context of providing protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the absence of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) receive the right to protection for:
a. decent housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration registration;
d. opportunities to obtain skills to improve economic status; and
e. access to information and legal consultation services.

Sixth Part
Female Domestic Workers

Article 18
(1) The implementation of Protection for female domestic workers as referred to in Article 13 letter e is in the framework of providing protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel treatment, inhumane treatment, degrading of human dignity, and exploitation in employment relations.
(2) Female domestic workers as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security;
c. access to information and legal consultation services; and
d. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Seventh Part
Female Head of Household

Article 19
(1) The implementation of Protection for women heads of household as referred to in Article 13 letter f is in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, negative stigma and economic empowerment for women heads of household.
(2) Women heads of household as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection against:
a. acts of discrimination and efforts to weaken the function of women as the economic support of the family;
b. strengthening of capacity and recognition as head of household in their environment; and
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.

Eighth Part
Women Former Inmates of Correctional Institutions Article 20 (1) The implementation of Protection for women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in Article 13 letter g is in order to provide protection from obstacles to adjusting themselves in community life, so that they can carry out life normally.
(2) Women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
b. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Part Nine
Women Victims of Disaster

Article 21
(1) The implementation of Protection for women victims of disaster as referred to in Article 13 letter h is in the context of providing protection during disaster and post-disaster.
(2) Women victims of disaster as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. access to proper housing;
b. health services;
c. information access services and legal consultation; and
d. post-disaster recovery.

Tenth Section
Female Commercial Sex Workers

Article 22
(1) The implementation of Protection for female commercial sex workers as referred to in Article 13 letter i is in the context of providing health protection and improving life skills capabilities as capital to enhance social status.
(2) Protection for female commercial sex workers as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing life skills capabilities;
b. facilitating reproductive health services; and
c. preventing the occurrence of human trafficking.

Part Eleven
Women Victims of Violence

Article 23
(1) The Implementation of Protection for Women Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 13 letter j is in the context of providing legal protection and/or recovery from trauma and health.
(2) Protection for Women Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. legal assistance;
b. assistance following the occurrence of acts of violence;
c. rehabilitation and social reintegration; and
d. trauma and health services.

CHAPTER VII
STRATEGY FOR WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION Article 24 (1) Women's empowerment and protection shall be implemented by integrating gender mainstreaming and gender-disaggregated data in an integrated manner based on applicable laws and regulations.
(2) In women's empowerment and protection, a Working Group and Integrated Services shall be established as determined by Regent's Decree. (3) Women's empowerment and protection shall be coordinated by the Agency responsible for Women's Empowerment.

CHAPTER VIII
MECHANISM FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
PROTECTION
Article 25
The mechanism for the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is carried out through the following stages:
a. formulation of policy, program planning and activities; b. budgeting of programs and activities;
c. implementation of programs and activities; and
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Article 26
(1) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning as referred to in Article 25 letter a is implemented through:
a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of data; b. coordination and synchronization of the preparation of program and activity planning with related Regional Apparatus; and
c. determination of programs and activities in planning documents. (2) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning is further regulated in minimum service standards and standard operating procedures.
(3) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning for the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus in charge of Regency development planning.
(4) The budgeting of programs and activities as referred to in Article 25 letter b is implemented through general budget policy as set forth in the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
(5) The implementation of programs and activities as referred to in Article 25 letter c is implemented through:
a. implementation of programs and activities as set forth in the budget document of the Regional Apparatus; and
b. coordination and synchronization of the implementation of programs and activities with related Regional Apparatus.
(6) The implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as referred to in Article 25 letter d is implemented through:
a. conducting monitoring and evaluation periodically on the implementation of programs and activities that have been implemented; and b. making reports periodically.

CHAPTER IX
FINANCING
Article 27
All costs for the implementation of planning policies, programs and activities related to Women's Empowerment and Protection are sourced from: a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. Other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) The forms of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows:
a. providing socialization to the community and business sector regarding;
b. policies on women's empowerment and protection;
c. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding women's empowerment and protection, and other related issues as well as disseminating them to the community;
d. facilitating capacity building of institutions organizing women's empowerment and protection;
e. facilitating forums for women's participation and women's organizations;
f. facilitating rehabilitation and reintegration services for women victims of disasters and victims of violence;
g. coordinating the participation of the business sector and other institutions, including international assistance for women's empowerment and protection; and
h. providing awards to the community and business sector both individually and institutionally who have made efforts in women's empowerment and protection.
(3) The form of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities on women's empowerment and protection.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bangka Regency.
Enacted in Sungailiat on 27 September 2019

REGENT OF BANGKA,
Stamp/signed

MULKAN
Promulgated in Sungailiat On the date of 27 September 2019 Pj. REGIONAL SECRETARY

BANGKA REGENCY,
Stamp/seal

AKHMAD MUKHSIN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANGKA REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 6 SERIES D
Copy In Accordance With The Original

HEAD OF LEGAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS DIVISION,
Stamp/signed

TIAMAN FAHRUL ROZI, SH. MH
SUPERVISOR LEVEL I
NIP. 19660608 198603 1 004
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANGKA REGENCY, BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE.

(SERIAL NUMBER 2.9/2019)