COPY
REGENT OF BELITUNG
BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BELITUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2018
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF BELITUNG,
Considering : a. that discrimination and violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against humanity, and are not in accordance with Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children and to improve the quality of life of women and children is one of the mandatory affairs that becomes the duty, authority, and responsibility of the Regional Government;
c. that violence against women and children in Belitung Regency tends to increase and spread, thus requiring integrated protection efforts;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Belitung Regency concerning the Protection of Women's and Children's Rights from Acts of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 1
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions and Municipalities in South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 27 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of Bangka Belitung Islands Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 217, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4033);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143), as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
7. Regulation….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 2
7. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 446);
With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BELITUNG REGENCY and

HEAD OF BELITUNG REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Belitung Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Belitung.
4. Regional Apparatus Organization, hereinafter abbreviated as OPD, is the Regional Apparatus of Belitung Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit of Belitung Regency.
6. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Woman….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 3
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
8. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering, whether physical, sexual, economic, or psychological to the victim.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence and/or for and on behalf of another party who is their dependent.
10. Protection is all preventive actions, services and empowerment to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
11. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
12. Service is action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against the victim will occur, is occurring, or has occurred.
13. Empowerment is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and earn independently after they have recovered and been provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
14. Companion is a person who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
15. Accompaniment is activities and actions carried out by companions to women and children.
16. Counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert/trained person in such a way that the psychological understanding and ability of the victim and/or perpetrator increases in solving the problems faced.
17. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
18. Forum….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 4
18. Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence, hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK, is a coordination forum for prevention, handling and empowerment of victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner and is formed at the regency, sub-district and village/kelurahan levels.
19. Standard Operating Procedure, hereinafter abbreviated as SOP, is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
20. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children.
21. Household is family members and relatives including grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, cousins and non-relatives including domestic helpers and drivers who live and eat from 1 (one) kitchen and reside in 1 (one) house.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE
Article 2
The scope of protection of women and children from acts of violence, as follows:
a. principles and objectives;
b. forms of violence;
c. rights of women and children victims of violence;
d. obligations and responsibilities;
e. prevention of acts of violence;
f. special protection of children;
g. services and empowerment of victims of acts of violence; h. institutions;
i. cooperation and partnership;
j. reporting;
k. guidance….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 5
k. guidance and supervision; and
l. financing.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 3
Protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination is conducted based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. empowerment; and
f. integration.

Article 4
The objectives of the protection of women and children from acts of violence and discrimination are:
a. to prevent acts of violence and discrimination against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. to eliminate all forms of violence, discrimination, and exploitation against women and children;
c. to protect women and children from acts of violence and discrimination in obtaining their legitimate rights constitutionally;
d. to protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
e. to provide services and protection to women and children who are victims of acts of violence and discrimination, reporters, and witnesses; and
f. to facilitate and conduct mediation of domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

CHAPTER….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 6

HEAD OF DPPAS KAB. BELITUNG
CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of violence against women and children include: a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. coercion/deprivation of liberty;
f. exploitation;
g. threat of certain actions; and/or
h. other violence.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE Article 6 Women and children victims of acts of violence shall receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected; b. the right to recovery of health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilities in the judicial process; and
j. the right to assistance.

Article 7
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 6, also obtain the following special rights:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth, and development;
b. the right….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 7
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 8
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 9
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 8 letter a, include: a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence; c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence; d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence; e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent establishes programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for OPD and

UKPD….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 8 UKPD in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the strategic plan of the OPD.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 10
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 8 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or the authorized party; and
c. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 11
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 8 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

Article 12
Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence against women and children is obligated to make efforts in accordance with their capabilities to:
a. prevent and stop the ongoing act of violence;
b. provide protection to the victim;
d. provide….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 9
d. provide emergency assistance; and/or
e. assist in the process of submitting an application for protection order.

CHAPTER VII
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 13
(1) To prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children, the Regional Government shall conduct empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance, and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. increasing the number and quality of educational units both formal and non-formal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement, and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern towards the prevention of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities, and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 14
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 13, shall be implemented….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 10 implemented by OPD and UKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;  f. youth and sports;
g. population and civil registration;
h. mental and spiritual; and
i. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by OPD and UKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan.
(3) In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social community institutions; and
f. business sector and other institutions.

CHAPTER VIII
SPECIAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
Article 15
(1) Special protection of children is provided to:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children with HIV/AIDS;
h. children….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 11
h. children victims of abduction, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. children victims of sexual crimes;
k. children victims of terrorist networks;
l. children with disabilities;
m. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. children with deviant social behavior; and
o. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(2) The Regional Government in implementing the handling of special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
SERVICES AND EMPOWERMENT OF VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Service Principles

Article 16
The provision of services to victims is implemented with the principles of:
a. swift;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Second Part
Form of Service

Article 17
(1) The forms of services provided to women and children victims of acts of violence are as follows: a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. assistance….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 12
c. legal assistance;
d. rehabilitation and social reintegration;
e. repatriation;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms within the police force;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/or
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
(3) The forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by related OPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and d. mental and spiritual.
(4) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments, non-governmental organizations, and social institutions.
(5) Further provisions regarding the procedures for handling services for women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 18
Regional Governments are obligated to provide complaint services for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 19
Regional Government and the community or social service institutions may establish recovery houses or safe houses.
Article….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 13

Article 20
Further provisions regarding Complaint Services and social services as referred to in Article 17 and Article 18, shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence Article 21 (1) Empowerment of women victims of violence can be carried out by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and/or
c. capital assistance.
(2) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by OPD that administers governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, and governmental affairs in the Social field in accordance with their duties and functions.

CHAPTER X
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 22
(1) In the context of providing protection services to women and children from acts of violence, the Regional Government shall establish PPT as an integrated service center for the protection of women and children from acts of violence including victims of acts of violence.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), functions as an integrated service center in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Work Procedures of PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Article….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 14

Article 23
In addition to establishing the PPT in the Protection of Women and Children as referred to in Article 22, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the following shall be established:
a. Task force on criminal acts of human trafficking;
b. Regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor;
c. Task force for the protection of women and children at the sub-district level;
d. Domestic violence prevention group at the village/sub-village level; and
e. Other forms of task forces that support the Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children.

Article 24
(1) The task force as referred to in Article 23 letter a, shall consist of members, among others:
a. representatives from the Regional Government;
b. law enforcement;
c. community organizations;
d. non-governmental organizations;
e. professional organizations; and
f. researchers/academics.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinative institution tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of human trafficking.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 25
(1) The Regional Action Committee as referred to in Article 23 letter b, consists of members, among others:
a. representatives from the regional government;
b. law enforcement;
c. organization….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 15
c. community organizations;
d. non-governmental organizations;
e. professional organizations; and
f. researchers/academics.
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 26
(1) The women and children protection task force at the sub-district level as referred to in Article 23 letter c, constitutes a functional work unit that organizes integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against women and children at the sub-district level.
(2) The membership of the women and children protection task force at the sub-district level as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of sub-district apparatus, offices/agencies at the sub-district level, elements of the sector police (Polsek), elements of the military district command (Koramil), community leaders/religious leaders, and youth elements.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Decree of the Sub-District Head.

Article 27
(1) The domestic violence prevention group at the kelurahan/village level as referred to in Article 23 letter d, constitutes a functional work unit that organizes integrated protection services and handling of cases of violence against women and children at the kelurahan/village level.
(2) The domestic violence prevention group at the kelurahan/village level as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of kelurahan/village apparatus, elements of babinsa and elements of babinkamtibmas, community leaders/religious leaders, and youth elements.
(3) Provisions….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 16 (3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Decree of the lurah/village head.

CHAPTER XI
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 28
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of protection of women and children from acts of violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with:
a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. other Regency/City Governments; and
d. non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. provision of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses;
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 29
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. assistance….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 17
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who are withdrawn/neglected from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), are implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
REPORTING
Article 30
(1) PPT is obligated to report the implementation of protection services for women and children from acts of violence to the Regent.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. services; and
c. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 31
(1) Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Guidance….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 18 (3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), in order to realize the objectives of protection of the rights of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by related OPD/agencies and the community.

Article 32
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be conducted with the principles of professionalism, transparency, and accountability.

Article 33
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent and/or DPRD.

CHAPTER XIV
FINANCING
Article 34
Financing for the implementation of protection of women's and children's rights from acts of violence is sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); d. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
e. Other legal and non-binding financial sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XV
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 35
The institutional structure of PPT and Task Force that have already been formed must adjust to the provisions of this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XVI....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 19

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 36
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency.
Enacted in Tanjungpandan on the date of 6 August 2018

# BUPATI BELITUNG REGULATION
NUMBER 45 OF 2016

CONCERNING

AMENDMENT TO BUPATI BELITUNG REGULATION NUMBER 75 OF 2015 CONCERNING SECOND AMENDMENT TO BUPATI BELITUNG REGULATION NUMBER 50 OF 2014 CONCERNING REGIONAL REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015

WITH THE BLESSING OF GOD ALMIGHTY

BUPATI BELITUNG,

Considering : a. that to implement the provisions of Article 176 paragraph (1) of Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government, and Article 136 paragraph (1) of Government Regulation Number 58 of 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Amendment to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;

b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Bupati Regulation concerning Amendment to Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 75 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 50 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015;

In view of : 1. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning Establishment of Level II Regions in South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);

2. Law Number 17 of 2003 concerning State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 47, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4286);

3. Law Number 1 of 2004 concerning State Treasury (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 5, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4355);

4. Law Number 15 of 2004 concerning Audit of Management and Responsibility of State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 66, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4400);

5. Law Number 25 of 2004 concerning National Development Planning System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 104, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4421);

6. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

7. Law Number 33 of 2004 concerning Financial Balance between Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 126, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);

8. Law Number 28 of 2009 concerning Regional Taxes and Regional Levies (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 130, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5049);

9. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

10. Government Regulation Number 23 of 2005 concerning Financial Management of Public Service Bodies (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 48, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4502) as amended by Government Regulation Number 74 of 2012 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 23 of 2005 concerning Financial Management of Public Service Bodies (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 171, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5340);

11. Government Regulation Number 55 of 2005 concerning Balancing Funds (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 137, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4575);

12. Government Regulation Number 56 of 2005 concerning Regional Financial Information System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 138, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4576);

13. Government Regulation Number 58 of 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 140, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);

14. Government Regulation Number 8 of 2006 concerning Financial Reporting and Performance of Government Agencies (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 25, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4614);

15. Government Regulation Number 71 of 2010 concerning Government Accounting Standards (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 123, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5165);

16. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times, most recently by Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 21 of 2011 concerning Second Amendment to Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 310);

17. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 32 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Granting Grants and Social Assistance Sourced from Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;

18. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 52 of 2015 concerning Guidelines for Procurement, Rehabilitation, Construction, and Demolition of Houses of Worship;

19. Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 3 of 2008 concerning Formation of Regional Apparatus Organization (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2008 Number 3) as amended by Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 5 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 3 of 2008 concerning Formation of Regional Apparatus Organization (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2011 Number 5);

20. Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2014 Number 6) as amended several times, most recently by Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 8 of 2015 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2015 Number 8);

21. Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 50 of 2014 concerning Implementation of Belitung Regency Regional Regulation Number 6 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2014 Number 50) as amended several times, most recently by Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 75 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 50 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2015 Number 75);

HAS DECIDED:

To establish : BUPATI REGULATION CONCERNING AMENDMENT TO BUPATI BELITUNG REGULATION NUMBER 75 OF 2015 CONCERNING SECOND AMENDMENT TO BUPATI BELITUNG REGULATION NUMBER 50 OF 2014 CONCERNING REGIONAL REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015.

Article 1

Several provisions in Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 50 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2014 Number 50) as amended by Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 75 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Bupati Belitung Regulation Number 50 of 2014 concerning Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget for Fiscal Year 2015 (Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency of 2015 Number 75) are amended as follows:

1. The provisions of Article 2 are amended so as to read as follows:

Article 2

(1) The total Regional Revenue as referred to in Article 1 letter a amounts to Rp1,001,421,095,664.00 (one trillion one billion four hundred twenty-one million ninety-five thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah) consisting of:
a. Regional Original Revenue amounting to Rp67,959,099,664.00 (sixty-seven billion nine hundred fifty-nine million ninety-nine thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah);
b. Balancing Funds amounting to Rp825,462,000,000.00 (eight hundred twenty-five billion four hundred sixty-two million rupiah);
c. Other Legitimate Regional Revenue amounting to Rp107,999,996,000.00 (one hundred seven billion nine hundred ninety-nine million nine hundred ninety-six thousand rupiah).

(2) Regional Original Revenue as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a consists of:
a. Regional Taxes amounting to Rp9,000,000,000.00 (nine billion rupiah);
b. Regional Levies amounting to Rp7,959,099,664.00 (seven billion nine hundred fifty-nine million ninety-nine thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah);
c. Results of Separated Regional Wealth Management amounting to Rp1,000,000,000.00 (one billion rupiah);
d. Other Legitimate Regional Original Revenue amounting to Rp50,000,000,000.00 (fifty billion rupiah).

(3) Balancing Funds as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b consist of:
a. Revenue Sharing Funds amounting to Rp37,462,000,000.00 (thirty-seven billion four hundred sixty-two million rupiah);
b. General Allocation Funds amounting to Rp614,000,000,000.00 (six hundred fourteen billion rupiah);
c. Special Allocation Funds amounting to Rp174,000,000,000.00 (one hundred seventy-four billion rupiah).

(4) Other Legitimate Regional Revenue as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c consists of:
a. Provincial Revenue Sharing and Other Regional Governments amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah);
b. Financial Assistance from Provincial Government and Other Regional Governments amounting to Rp107,999,996,000.00 (one hundred seven billion nine hundred ninety-nine million nine hundred ninety-six thousand rupiah);
c. Other Revenue amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah).

2. The provisions of Article 3 are amended so as to read as follows:

Article 3

(1) Regional Expenditure as referred to in Article 1 letter b amounts to Rp1,084,421,095,664.00 (one trillion eighty-four billion four hundred twenty-one million ninety-five thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah) consisting of:
a. Indirect Expenditure amounting to Rp449,688,691,664.00 (four hundred forty-nine billion six hundred eighty-eight million six hundred ninety-one thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah);
b. Direct Expenditure amounting to Rp634,732,404,000.00 (six hundred thirty-four billion seven hundred thirty-two million four hundred four thousand rupiah).

(2) Indirect Expenditure as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a consists of:
a. Personnel Expenditure amounting to Rp364,688,691,664.00 (three hundred sixty-four billion six hundred eighty-eight million six hundred ninety-one thousand six hundred sixty-four rupiah);
b. Interest Expenditure amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah);
c. Subsidy Expenditure amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah);
d. Grant Expenditure amounting to Rp60,000,000,000.00 (sixty billion rupiah);
e. Social Assistance Expenditure amounting to Rp25,000,000,000.00 (twenty-five billion rupiah);
f. Profit Sharing Expenditure amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah);
g. Financial Assistance Expenditure amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah);
h. Unexpected Expenditure amounting to Rp0.00 (zero rupiah).

(3) Direct Expenditure as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b consists of:
a. Personnel Expenditure amounting to Rp95,000,000,000.00 (ninety-five billion rupiah);
b. Goods and Services Expenditure amounting to Rp318,732,404,000.00 (three hundred eighteen billion seven hundred thirty-two million four hundred four thousand rupiah);
c. Capital Expenditure amounting to Rp221,000,000,000.00 (two hundred twenty-one billion rupiah).

Article 2

The Budget Realization Report and Budget Balance Sheet as referred to in Article 1 are as contained in the Appendix which is an inseparable part of this Regional Regulation.

Article 3

This Bupati Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Bupati Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Belitung Regency.

Enacted in Tanjungpandan
on December 30, 2016

BUPATI BELITUNG,
signed.

SAHANI SALEH

Promulgated in Tanjungpandan
on December 30, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BELITUNG REGENCY,

signed.

ISYAK MEIROBIE

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BELITUNG REGENCY OF 2016 NUMBER 45

SAHANI SALEH
Promulgated in Tanjungpandan on the date of August 6, 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY
BELITUNG REGENCY,
signed.

KARYADI SAHMINAN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BELITUNG REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 2
Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,
signed.

IMAM FADLLI, SH
NIP. 197109152001121002
REGULATION REGISTER NUMBER OF BELITUNG REGENCY, BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE: (3.2/2018) D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 20

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BELITUNG REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2018
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Women and children are a serious concern, considering their vulnerable position as victims of violence both from family and their environment. Various acts of violence against women and children both inside and outside the household will destroy the life of families, communities, government, nation, and State, therefore the Regional Government of Belitung Regency is obligated to provide protection to women and children from acts of violence which is an implementation of several laws and regulations, including Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning amendments to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is one of the obligations of Regional Government as regulated in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government. On that basis, the Regional Government of Belitung Regency has made various efforts to protect the rights of women and children from acts of violence, however it has not been able to provide protection to women and children from various acts of violence, among others caused by the still low understanding of the community regarding the rights of women and children, handling that has not been well coordinated, implementation that has not been sustainable, and so forth.

Therefore....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 21 Therefore, a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women's and Children's Rights from Acts of Violence is needed to provide legal certainty in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

The Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women's and Children's Rights from Acts of Violence, gives responsibility to the Regional Government starting from the prevention of acts of violence to the handling of victims of acts of violence. In its implementation, the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, other regional governments and the community. In addition, adequate funding support both from the Government, Regional Government and the participation of the business world and community, it is hoped that violence against women and children can be eliminated. Through this Regional Regulation it is hoped that the rights of children and women and their protection can be better implemented, so that it can be carried out more comprehensively, integrated and continuously by government elements, families and communities as well as other institutions related to child and women protection efforts.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Letter a The principle of humanity becomes the foundation of the concept of protection of women and children from acts of violence, which is respect for human rights and the dignity of every citizen and resident of Indonesia proportionally (the second principle of Pancasila).
Letter b The principle of justice and gender equality, that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 22 play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, governmental activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
Letter c The principle of non-discrimination that in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence does not discriminate on the basis of age, gender, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.
Letter d Principle of Victim Protection The principle of shelter is a principle that functions to provide protection to women and children in order to provide peace in family and community life.
Letter e Principle of Empowerment The principle of best interests for women and children, that all actions concerning women and children carried out by families, communities and Regional Governments to fulfill the rights of women and children as regulated in laws and regulations.
Letter f Principle of Integration

Article 4
Letter a What is meant by trafficking in persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer or receipt of a person by means of the threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, falsification of documents or identity, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of a person having control over another person, whether carried out within the State or between States, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
Letter b What is meant by exploitation is an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical sexual reproductive organs or unlawfully transferring/utilizing labor or transplanting organs and or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by witness is a person who sees, hears and experiences incidents of violence and human rights violations.
Letter f Mediation is carried out for cases of domestic violence that fall into the category of complaint offenses as regulated in Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence.

Article 5
Letter a Physical violence is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or causing death.
Letter b Psychological violence is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
Letter c Sexual violence is caused by:
1) acts in the form of sexual harassment;
2) forced....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 24
2) forced sexual relations;
3) forced sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
4) forced sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.
Letter d Neglect is caused by:
1) acts that result in the failure to fulfill a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
2) acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
3) acts of neglecting a person within the household sphere, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they must provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
4) acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Letter e Coercion/Deprivation of Freedom is a situation where a person/victim is made to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will and restricts their freedom as a human being who has the right to determine choices.
Letter f Exploitation is caused by:
1) acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
2) acts….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 25
2) acts with or without the victim's consent including prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
3) all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.
Letter g Threat of certain actions constitutes a form of intimidation to do or not do what is requested by the perpetrator with consequences that are not good for the victim.
Letter h Other violence is caused among others by any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear.

Article 6
Letter a What is meant by the right to have one's dignity respected is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by the right to information is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas and signs that contain value, meaning and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology....
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 26 communication electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by the right to compensation includes economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health and education or skills guarantees.
Letter g What is meant by the victim's right to rehabilitation includes access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance for the restoration of civil rights, restoration of good name, citizenship.
Letter h What is meant by the right to complaint handling is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j What is meant by the right to assistance includes among others psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, clergy, advocates and family members.
What is meant by assistance is individuals who work as volunteers to provide protection and support to women and children who are victims of acts of violence during the judicial process, these assistants can come from family members, friends and independent organizations that provide attention to witnesses and victims or advocates.

Article 7
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b The basic rights referred to include the right to education and access to parents during the handling process.
Letter….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 27 Letter c What is meant by equal protection rights is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics or other opinions, ethnicity or social life, ownership, disability, birth or other status.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by the right to obtain freedom is freedom to express their views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by Regional Action Plan is the stages of programs and activities for the protection of women's and children's rights from acts of violence including forms of worst forms of work for children that must be carried out by OPD and UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions, prepared based on achievement targets within a period of 5 (five) years.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.
Article….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 28

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by complaint services is a series of actions carried out by the organizers of integrated service institutions to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families and/or the community.
Letter b What is meant by health services is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
Letter c What is meant by legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
Letter d What is meant by social rehabilitation is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
What is meant by social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
Letter….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 29 Letter e What is meant by repatriation is returning women and child victims of violence from Belitung Regency or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
Letter f What is meant by identification services is services to determine the background of problems and identification of victims.
Letter g What is meant by psychological services is services to restore the mental and psychological condition of victims to return to normal.
Paragraph 2 Sufficiently Clear Paragraph 3 What is meant by minimum service standards (SPM) is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, enforcement and legal aid as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of violence.
Paragraph 4 Sufficiently Clear

Article 18
Sufficiently Clear

Article 19
Sufficiently Clear

Article 20
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 30 Letter b What is meant by the worst forms of work for children, among others:
a. children who are prostituted
b. children who work in the construction sector
c. children who work as scavengers
d. children who carry out activities on the street
e. children who work as domestic workers
f. children who work in home industries
g. children who work as beggars
h. children who work as vehicle washers
i. children who carry out activities as street vendors, newspaper vendors, shoe shiners and street buskers j. children who work in the industrial sector and types of activities that use hazardous chemicals
k. children who work on jermal
l. children who work in the entertainment sector.
Letter c Sufficiently Clear Letter d Sufficiently Clear Letter e Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Sufficiently Clear

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear purpose….
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 31

Article 31
Paragraph (1) What is meant by guidance on the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community to realize the achievement of the objectives of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence.
What is meant by supervision of the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence is a process of activities aimed at ensuring that efforts made by the Regional Government and the Community run efficiently and effectively in accordance with plans and provisions of laws and regulations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BELITUNG REGENCY NUMBER 46
D:\PERDA PDF\2-PERDA PERLINDUNGAN HAK PEREMPUAN DAN ANAK.doc 32