REGENT OF PESAWARAN
LAMPUNG PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF PESAWARAN,

Considering : a. that the Republic of Indonesia is a State that upholds the dignity and worth of every human being, provides guarantees for the rights and security of women and children and freedom from all forms of violence, mistreatment, exploitation, trafficking and neglect;
b. that in order for efforts to protect children and children to obtain optimal results, there needs to be concrete action from the regional government and it is necessary to increase the broad participation of the community;
c. that based on Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection are governmental affairs that must be implemented by Regional Governments;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c above, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
4. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning the National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 33 of 2007 concerning the Establishment of Pesawaran Regency in Lampung Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4749);
7. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
8. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
11. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2011 concerning Policy on Fulfillment of Children's Education Rights (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 65);
12. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 10 of 2011 concerning Policy on Handling Children with Special Needs (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 857);
13. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 170);
14. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 2036);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PESAWARAN REGENCY and

REGENT OF PESAWARAN
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Pesawaran Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administrator who leads the implementation of government which is the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Pesawaran.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Pesawaran Regency.
5. District is a part of the regency area led by a district head.
6. Village is a part of the regency area led by a Village Head;
7. Village Government is the village government in Pesawaran Regency.
8. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife and their children, or father and children or mother and children or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward laterally to the third degree.
10. Parents are biological father and/or mother or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
11. Guardian is a person or entity who in reality exercises parental authority as a parent toward a child.
12. Woman is a human being who can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth and breastfeed.
13. Child is a person who has not reached 18 (eighteen) years of age, including a baby still in the womb.
14. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
15. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
16. Protection of women is all efforts made to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
17. Empowerment of women is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capacity, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
18. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
19. Child with Disability is a Child who has physical, mental, intellectual, or sensory limitations for a long period of time who in interacting with the environment and community attitudes may encounter obstacles that make it difficult to participate fully and effectively based on equal rights.
20. Child with Excellence is a Child who has extraordinary intelligence or has special potential and/or talent not limited to intellectual ability, but also in other fields.
21. Adopted Child is a Child whose rights are transferred from the environment of the authority of the Family of Parents, legal Guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the Child into the Family environment of the adoptive Parents based on court decision or determination.
22. Foster Child is a Child who is cared for by a person or institution to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health because the Parents or one of the Parents is unable to guarantee the proper growth and development of the Child.
23. Custody is the power of Parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop the Child in accordance with the religion professed and in accordance with abilities, talents, and interests.
24. Child Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by Parents, Family, community, state, government, and regional government.
25. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
26. Violence is any act unlawfully, which results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom.
27. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
28. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
29. Child-Friendly Regency is a Regency that has a Development and public Service system from the Regency Government with support from parents, families, community, private sector and Children's forum for the fulfillment of children's rights through the integration of commitments and resources that are planned comprehensively and sustainably through policies, programs, activities and budgeting for child welfare.
30. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a cooperative network that carries out integrated social service functions.
31. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is a cooperative network that carries out integrated service functions for the protection of women and children.
32. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
33. Family Welfare Consultation Institution hereinafter abbreviated as LK3 is an integrated social service unit that handles family psychosocial problems to realize family resilience.
34. Regional Child Protection Commission hereinafter abbreviated as KPAD is an integrated social service unit that implements child protection services to realize the fulfillment of children's rights.
35. Children's Forum is a Social Organization that represents the voice and participation of children that is independent and not affiliated with political organizations where the formation and preparation of its activities are determined in the Regent's Regulation.
36. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
37. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment, or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, which results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields, and other aspects of life.
38. Safe House (Shelter) is a protection house for women and children including families and witnesses of violence victims.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE
Article 2
The Scope of this Regional Regulation consists of: a. implementation of women's protection;
b. implementation of children's protection;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. institutional framework;
e. child-friendly regency;
f. child-friendly regency task force;
g. special development planning deliberation for women and children;
h. financing.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES, PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 3
The implementation of women's protection is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia encompassing:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender justice and equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. the best interests of women;
f. appreciation of women's opinions;
g. legal certainty; and
h. women's empowerment.

Article 4
The basic principles of the convention on the rights of the child include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

Article 5
The objectives of implementing protection for women and children are:
a. to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
b. to protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
c. to maintain the integrity of the household in order to realize a harmonious and prosperous family;
d. to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
e. to provide services to women and children who are victims of acts of violence;
f. to provide protection to reporters and witnesses;
g. to realize children who are qualified, of noble character, and prosperous;
h. to carry out empowerment of women who are victims of violence.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S PROTECTION
Part One
Women's Rights

Article 6
The rights of women are as follows:
a. to live, sustain life and improve their standard of living;
b. to live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually;
c. to enjoy a good and healthy living environment;
d. to live in a family and continue descendants within the bond of legal marriage based on the provisions of laws and regulations;
e. to obtain work in accordance with ability, conditions and decent and fair wages;
f. specifically for women with disabilities, the right to obtain facilities and special treatment in public services;
g. to play an active role in the field of politics and government in accordance with their potential and capabilities;
h. to obtain information and legal services;
i. to obtain services to increase their income; and
j. to obtain other rights in accordance with their human dignity and based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

Second Part
Women's Empowerment

Article 7
(1) In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family life, society, nation, and state, women must be empowered.
(2) The empowerment of women as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in activities:
a. economic;
b. socio-cultural;
c. political; and
d. legal.

Article 8
The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter a, shall be carried out through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of the strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation of capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of the development of marketing networks.

Article 9
Empowerment of women in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter b, shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to address health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts primarily in the field of reproductive health;
c. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 10
(1) The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter c, includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
(2) The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 11
(1) The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) letter d, includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
(2) The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12
(1) Regional Governments have the obligation and responsibility in efforts to empower women.
(2) Efforts to empower women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 13
(1) To implement women's empowerment as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall organize gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, human rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation for women related to the fields of health, economy, law, human rights, environment and socio-culture; improving the quality of life in development, education, human rights and politics;
h. organizing protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i. facilitating the integration of protection of women especially for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating protection of women especially for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l. developing gender-based information systems;
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
(2) The forms of women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

Third Part
Prevention of Violence and Participation in Prevention

Paragraph 1
Prevention of Violence

Article 14
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against women shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the agency having the duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented through the following means:
a. establishing a working network in efforts to prevent violence;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership work patterns between Regional Government institutions and the community;
c. building an integrated security system in areas prone to cases of violence against women;
d. building complaint and service units regarding violence against women at the sub-district, urban village and/or Village levels; and
e. awareness campaigns, socialization and education to the community regarding the protection and empowerment of women.

Paragraph 2
Participation in Prevention

Article 15
Participation in prevention efforts as referred to in Article 14, the Regional Government is obligated to involve:
a. family;
b. community; and
c. women's advocacy institutions.

Fourth Part
Protection of Women

Article 16
(1) Protection of women includes:
a. protection of the personal security of victims or witnesses;
b. physical and psychological threats;
c. confidentiality of the identity of victims and witnesses;
d. provision of testimony during the ongoing legal process regulated through protection mechanisms.
(2) Protection for women victims also includes the provision of safe houses as temporary shelter to obtain a sense of security during the judicial process and/or outside the judicial process.
(3) The implementation of protection and safe houses shall be carried out by the Regional Government.
(4) Further provisions on the mechanism for protection of women as referred to in paragraph (2), and the implementation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (3), shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
Rights and Obligations of the Child

Article 17
Every child has the right to live, grow, develop, and participate appropriately in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as to receive protection from violence and discrimination.

Article 18
Every child has the right to a name as personal identity and citizenship status.

Article 19
Every Child has the right to worship according to their religion, to think, and to express themselves in accordance with their level of intelligence and age under the guidance of Parents or Guardians.

Article 20
(1) Every child has the right to know their parents, to be raised, and to be cared for by their own parents.
(2) In the event that for any reason the parents cannot guarantee the child's growth and development, or the child is in a state of neglect, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 21
Every child has the right to obtain health services and social security in accordance with their physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs.

Article 22
(1) Every Child has the right to obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents.
(2) Every Child has the right to receive protection in educational units from sexual crimes and Violence committed by educators, education personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.
(3) In addition to obtaining the Rights of the Child as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), Children with Disabilities have the right to obtain special education and Children who have excellence have the right to receive special education.

Article 23
Every child has the right to express and have their opinion heard, to receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with their level of intelligence and age for their self-development in accordance with moral values and propriety.

Article 24
Every child has the right to rest and utilize leisure time, associate with children of the same age, play, recreate, and create in accordance with their interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development.

Article 25
Every Child with Disabilities has the right to obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards.

Article 26
(1) Every child during the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care, has the right to receive protection from treatment of:
a. discrimination;
b. exploitation, whether economic or sexual;
c. neglect;
d. cruelty, violence, and abuse;
e. injustice; and
f. other mistreatment.
(2) In the event that parents, guardians or child caregivers commit any form of treatment as referred to in paragraph (1), then the perpetrator shall be subject to aggravated punishment.

Article 27
(1) Every Child has the right to be raised by their own Parents, unless there are valid reasons and/or legal rules indicating that the separation is in the best interests of the Child and constitutes a last resort.
(2) In the event of separation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Child still has the right to:
a. meet directly and maintain personal relations regularly with both Parents;
b. receive care, maintenance, education and protection for the growth and development process from both Parents in accordance with their abilities, talents and interests;
c. obtain financial support for living from both Parents; and
d. obtain other Rights of the Child.

Article 28
Every child has the right to obtain protection from:
a. exploitation in political activities;
b. involvement in armed conflict;
c. involvement in social unrest;
d. involvement in events containing elements of violence; and
e. involvement in warfare.

Article 29
(1) Every child has the right to obtain protection from being a target of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhumane punishment.
(2) Every child has the right to obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
(3) Arrest, detention, or imprisonment of a child shall only be carried out if in accordance with the applicable law and can only be carried out as a last resort.

Article 30
(1) Every child who is deprived of liberty has the right to:
a. receive humane treatment and be placed separately from adults;
b. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal remedies; and
c. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a hearing closed to the public.
(2) Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.

Article 31
Every child who becomes a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act has the right to obtain legal assistance and other assistance.

Article 32
Every child has the obligation to:
a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, society, and care for friends; c. love the homeland, nation, and state;
d. perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and e. practice noble ethics and morals.

Article 33
Regional government, family, and parents are obligated to ensure that children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.

Article 34
Every Person is prohibited from performing abortion on a Child still in the womb, except for reasons and procedures that are justified in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 35
(1) Regional Government, Society, and Parents are obligated to protect Children from actions that disrupt the health and growth and development of Children.
(2) In carrying out their obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Government, Society, and Parents must conduct activities that protect Children.

Part Two
Prevention

Article 36
(1) Efforts to prevent violence against children shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the agency having the duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through the following means:
a. establishing a network in efforts to prevent violence;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership work patterns between regional government institutions and the community;
c. building an integrated security system in areas vulnerable to cases of violence against children;
d. incorporating local content material on children's rights and the elimination of violence against children as teaching material in teaching and learning activities in early childhood education institutions up to the level of Senior High School;
e. establishing complaint and service units regarding violence against children at the sub-district, urban village and/or village levels, as well as schools;
f. awareness campaigns, socialization and education to the community regarding child protection.

Third Part
Child Protection

Article 37
(1) Every child shall receive protection from violent treatment, exploitation, trafficking, discrimination, maltreatment and neglect.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is elaborated in various fields of life, among others:
a. in the field of health;
b. in the field of religion;
c. in the field of education;
d. in the field of social affairs; and
e. special protection.

Article 38
(1) Protection in the field of health as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter a, is carried out by the government through the provision of health facilities and efforts to provide comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains the optimal degree of health from the time they are in the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
(3) Comprehensive health service efforts as referred to in paragraph (2) are implemented by the Regional Government free of charge for families who are unable to afford them.

Article 39
(1) Parents and family provide protection to maintain the health of children starting from examination of the child's developmental growth since in the womb.
(2) In the event that parents and family are unable to carry out the protection as referred to in paragraph (1), then the Regional Government is obligated to fulfill it.
(3) The Regional Government provides free assistance and services for underprivileged communities as referred to in paragraph (2), and its implementation is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 40
(1) Every Child has the right to be raised by their own Parents, unless there are valid reasons and/or legal rules indicating that the separation is in the best interests of the Child and constitutes a last resort.
(2) In the event of separation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Child still has the right to:
a. meet directly and maintain regular personal relations with both Parents;
b. receive care, maintenance, education and protection for their growth and development from both Parents in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. obtain financial support for living from both Parents; and
d. obtain other Child Rights."

Article 41
(1) Every child receives protection in the field of religion as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter b, to worship according to their religion.
(2) Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes development, guidance, and practice of good religious teachings for children.

Article 42
(1) Every child receives protection in the field of education as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter c, to obtain education.
(2) Regional Government, parents, and family must provide the widest possible opportunity to children to obtain education from an early age.
(3) Regional Government provides adequate facilities and infrastructure to support the teaching and learning process for children.
(4) Non-governmental institutions may provide teaching and learning facilities and infrastructure for children, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 43
Education as referred to in Article 42 paragraph (1), is intended and directed to:
a. development of the child's personality abilities, mental, talents, and physical to the fullest extent possible;
b. development of respect for parents and fellow human beings;
c. development of understanding of customary and cultural values in the place where the child grows and develops;
d. preparation of the child for a responsible life; and
e. development of respect and love for the nation and state.

Article 44
(1) Regional Governments provide protection for children with disabilities, to obtain opportunities and accessibility to receive inclusive education and/or special education.
(2) Children who have excellence are given the opportunity to obtain special education.

Article 45
Regional Governments shall provide education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children living in remote areas.

Article 46
(1) Protection in the field of education as referred to in Article 37 letter c applies within and in the environment of educational units.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of protection from physical violence, psychological violence, sexual crimes, and other crimes.
(3) Protection within and outside educational units can be carried out by educators, educational personnel, regional government apparatus, and/or the community.

Article 47
Special services as referred to in Article 33, in addition to assistance in the form of money, school equipment, may also be in the form of procurement of school shuttle buses, the procurement of which is in accordance with the regional financial capacity.

Article 48
(1) Child protection in the Social field as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter d, includes the maintenance and care of neglected children.
(2) Maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of clothing, food, shelter, education, health, security guarantees, freedom to worship according to their religion and equal treatment with other children to achieve social integration as optimally as possible; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities.
(3) Maintenance of neglected children as referred to in paragraph (1), may also be carried out by individuals and non-governmental organizations or community organizations.
(4) Regional government institutions, and/or individuals, and/or community organizations in providing services as referred to in paragraph (2), may cooperate with various related service units.
(5) Supervision of the implementation of maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out by regional apparatus organizations (OPD) that administer affairs in the social field in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 49
Special protection as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) letter e, is given specifically to:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. children from minority and isolated groups;
c. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
d. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
e. children who are victims of pornography;
f. children with HIV/AIDS;
g. children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
h. children who are victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
i. children who are victims of sexual crimes;
j. children who are victims of terrorist networks;
k. children with disabilities;
l. children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect; m. children with deviant social behavior; and
n. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Article 50
(1) Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 37 letter a, consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children victims of riots;
c. children victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.
(2) Special protection for children in emergency situations as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 51
(1) Regional government and society provide special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 49 letter a, which includes children in conflict with the law and child victims of criminal acts.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. humane treatment with attention to needs according to their age;
b. separation from adults;
c. provision of legal assistance and other assistance effectively;
d. implementation of recreational activities;
e. freedom from torture, punishment, or other treatment that is cruel, inhumane and degrading to dignity and status;
f. avoidance of imposition of the death penalty and/or life imprisonment;
g. avoidance of arrest, detention or imprisonment, except as a last resort and for the shortest period of time;
h. provision of justice before a Children's Court that is objective, impartial, and in a hearing closed to the public;
i. avoidance of publication of their identity.
j. provision of assistance from Parents/Guardians and persons trusted by the Child;
k. provision of social advocacy;
l. provision of private life;
m. provision of accessibility, especially for Children with Disabilities;
n. provision of education;
o. provision of health services; and
p. provision of other rights in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 52
Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 49 letter b, shall be carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.

Article 53
Special Protection for Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 51 paragraph (2) letter d shall be carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of provisions of laws and regulations related to the Protection of Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various companies, labor unions, non-governmental organizations, and the Community in the elimination of exploitation of Children economically and/or sexually.

Article 54
Special protection for Children who become victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances abuse as referred to in Article 49 letter d and Children who are involved in their production and distribution shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 55
Every Person is obligated to protect Children from the influence of pornography and prevent Children's access to information containing elements of pornography.

Article 56
(1) Special Protection for Children who become victims of pornography as referred to in Article 49 letter e shall be implemented through efforts of guidance, assistance, as well as social, physical health and mental recovery.
(2) Guidance, assistance, as well as social, physical health and mental recovery as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 57
Special Protection for Children with HIV/AIDS as referred to in Article 49 letter f shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, care, and rehabilitation efforts.

Article 58
Regional Government provides special protection for child victims of trafficking as referred to in Article 37 letter e and child victims of abduction as referred to in Article 49 letter g which is carried out through efforts of:
a. supervision;
b. protection;
c. prevention;
d. care; and
e. rehabilitation.

Article 59
Special Protection for Children with Disabilities as referred to in Article 49 letter k shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. treat Children humanely in accordance with the dignity and Rights of the Child;
b. fulfill special needs;
c. provide equal treatment with other Children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development; and
d. provide social assistance.

Article 60
Special Protection for Children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 49 letter l shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care, counseling, social rehabilitation, and social assistance.

Article 61
Special Protection for Children with deviant social behavior as referred to in Article 49 letter m shall be carried out through guidance on religious values and social values, counseling, social rehabilitation, and social assistance.

Article 62
Special protection for Children who become victims of stigmatization from labeling related to the condition of their Parents as referred to in Article 49 letter n shall be carried out through counseling, social rehabilitation, and social assistance.

Article 63
Further provisions regarding special protection for children as referred to in Article 37 through Article 62 shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
General

Article 64
The obligation and responsibility in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence and discrimination is a shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Village Government;
c. Community; and
d. Parents and Family.

Second Part
Regional Government

Article 65
The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 64 letter a, include:
a. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
b. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence established by the government;
c. conducting cooperation with other parties in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity;
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
g. providing recovery services and social reintegration;
h. encouraging and increasing community participation; and
i. providing human resources in the implementation of protection of women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination.

Article 66
(1) In order to implement the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in Article 65 letter a, the Regent shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in the regional action plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination.
(2) The regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Village Government

Article 67
The obligations and responsibilities of the Village Government as referred to in Article 64 letter b, include:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination established by the Regional Government;
b. conducting cooperation with other parties in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
d. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination in accordance with the village's financial capacity;
e. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination; and
f. encouraging and increasing community participation.

Fourth Part
Society

Article 68
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 64 letter c, are carried out by participating in the protection of women and children victims of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination, either individually or in groups.
(2) The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, women and child protection institutions, social welfare institutions, community organizations, educational institutions, mass media, and the business sector.
(3) The role of the community in implementing the protection of women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. providing information through socialization and education regarding the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
b. providing input in the formulation of policies related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
c. reporting to the authorities if violations of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination against women and children occur;
d. playing an active role in the rehabilitation and social reintegration process for women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
e. conducting monitoring and supervision of the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
f. providing facilities and infrastructure in order to support the protection of women and children from acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination;
g. playing an active role by eliminating negative labeling of women and children victims of acts of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination; and
h. providing space for women and children to be able to participate and express opinions.

Part Five
Parents and Family

Article 69
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of parents and family as referred to in Article 45 letter d, are to safeguard and prevent the occurrence of all forms of violence, exploitation, trafficking and discrimination both against women and against children.
(2) The obligations and responsibilities of parents towards children as referred to in paragraph (1), are to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. prevent the occurrence of marriage at child age; and
d. provide character education and instillation of moral values in children.
(3) Guardians and/or foster parents who are appointed as referred to in paragraph (3) must have similarity with the religion adhered to by the Child.
(4) Guardians and/or foster parents as referred to in paragraph (3) are responsible for the child and must manage the property belonging to the child concerned for the best interests of the child.
(6) Guardians and/or foster parents as referred to in paragraph (3), may represent the child to perform legal acts, both inside and outside the court for the best interests of the child.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Part One
Article 70
(1) In the context of protection of women and children, Regional Governments may establish PPT.
(2) The establishment and development of PPT shall be adjusted to priority needs, regional financial capacity as well as institutional and personnel capacity available in the region.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), may take the form of:
a. P2TP2A;
b. LK3;
c. KPAD; and
d. other institutions according to needs and in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 71
(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 70 paragraph (3) letter a, is positioned at the district level and sub-district level.
(2) P2TP2A is under the coordination of OPD or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have the authority to formulate policies on women's empowerment and child protection.
(4) P2TP2A is one form of integrated service unit, which functions as:
a. information center for women and children;
b. service center for women and children victims of violence; and
c. empowerment center for women and children. Article 72 (1) The establishment of P2TP2A is stipulated by Regent's Decree for the district level and sub-district head's decree for the sub-district level.
(2) P2TP2A membership may come from elements of Regional Government, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
(3) Further provisions regarding P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated in Regent's Regulation.

Article 73
(1) In the context of handling psychosocial problems of victims, recovery of psychosocial conditions of victims and strengthening family resilience, LK3 may be established in the regions.
(2) The procedures for establishment, main duties and functions as well as service mechanisms of LK3 shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 74
(1) In order to provide protection and fulfillment of children's rights, KPAD may be established in the regions.
(2) The procedures for establishment, main duties and functions as well as service mechanisms of KPAD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Second Part
Children's Forum

Article 75
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to facilitate the establishment of a children's forum.
(2) The children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a representation of children in Pesawaran Regency, including representation of children's geographical domicile, components of children's socio-cultural groups and children's educational backgrounds.
(3) In every formulation of policies related to children, the Regional Government must consider and accommodate the opinions of children conveyed through the children's forum.
(4) The establishment of the children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by a Decree of the Regional Head.
(5) Sources of financing for the implementation of children's forum activities may come from:
a. contributions from members of the children's forum;
b. donations from the community/private parties that are non-binding in nature;
c. assistance from the Regional Government; and/or
d. other sources of financing in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY
Article 76
(1) To guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights to live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence and discrimination, concrete integrated efforts are needed among local government, community and business sector through the development of CFA.
(2) The implementation of Child-Friendly Regency by the Regency Government is intended to:
a. Guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights to live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, for the realization of quality children with noble character and prosperity;
b. Guarantee the fulfillment of children's rights in creating a sense of security, friendliness, and companionship;
c. Protect children from the threat of social problems in their lives;
d. Develop the potential, talents and creativity of children;
e. Optimize the role and function of the family as the first educational base for children; and
f. Build regency facilities and infrastructure capable of meeting the basic needs of children to grow and develop optimally.

Article 77
Child-Friendly Regency organized by the Regency Government is implemented based on principles that include:
a. Good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information disclosure and rule of law.
b. Non-discrimination, namely not distinguishing ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical, mental or psychological condition of the child.
c. Culture and local wisdom;
d. Best interests of the child, namely making what is best for the child as the primary consideration in every policy, program and activity; and
e. Respect for the views of the child, namely recognizing and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion is given the opportunity to express their views freely on all matters that affect them.

First Part
Child-Friendly

Article 78
(1) The physical condition of an area in which there are facilities and infrastructure managed in such a way as to meet minimum requirements for the interest of child growth and development in a healthy and normal manner, does not contain elements that endanger children.
(2) The appropriateness as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of infrastructure such as highways, bridges, sidewalks, transportation facilities, district parks, green living environment and the availability of supporting legal instruments.
(3) The appropriateness as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented at the village, sub-district and district levels as well as in the provision of public services, including in the education and health sectors.

Second Part
Child-Friendly

Article 79
(1) The non-physical condition of an area in which there are cultural values, ethics, attitudes, and behaviors of the community that are consciously practiced or used and developed in such a way as to provide a sense of pleasure, comfort, and joy to children.
(2) Friendliness as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. The manner in which adults face and treat children such as greeting, giving salutations;
b. Choosing and using wise words for children;
c. The habit of praising children;
d. Saying thank you;
e. Being patient and not imposing one's will;
f. Listening to children's opinions carefully; and g. Providing examples of good and positive things.
(3) Friendliness as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in the environment of Rukun Warga, Rukun Tetangga, families and the provision of public services including in the education and health sectors.
(4) In realizing child-friendly conditions and situations, a social movement of child-caring communities is carried out in the form of child-friendly RW, child-friendly RT, child-friendly families, child-friendly schools, child-friendly puskesmas, child-friendly polyclinics, child-friendly midwives and others.

Third Part
Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency

Article 80
(1) The implementation of a child-friendly regency includes: a. Fulfillment of basic health and welfare rights; b. Fulfillment of the right to survival;
c. Fulfillment of the right to growth and development;
d. Fulfillment of the right to participate; and
e. Fulfillment of the right to obtain protection against violence and discrimination.
(2) Every person is obligated to support the child-friendly Regency program as referred to in paragraph (1).

CHAPTER IX
REGENCY CHILD-FRIENDLY TASK FORCE Article 81 (1) In order to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of the Child-Friendly Regency policy in the region, a Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is established whose membership includes Regional Apparatus Organizations, child representatives, and may involve legislative institutions, judiciary, business sector, religious/community/customary leaders and the community.
(2) The Child-Friendly Regency Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1) has the following main duties:
a. coordinating the implementation of policies and development of the Child-Friendly Regency;
b. determining the tasks of the Task Force members;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication of information and education on Child-Friendly Regency policies;
d. collecting baseline data;
e. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
f. disseminating baseline data;
g. determining the focus and priority of programs in realizing a Child-Friendly Regency, which are adjusted to regional potential;
h. preparing a 5 (five) year Regional Action Plan for the Child-Friendly Regency and work mechanisms;
i. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once every 1 (one) year.
(3) The membership of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is appointed and dismissed by the Regent.

Article 82
(1) To assist the smooth implementation of the tasks of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force, a Secretariat is established.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duty to provide technical and administrative support to the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force.
(3) The Secretariat of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force is domiciled at the office of the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Agency.
(4) The establishment of the secretariat and the appointment of secretariat personnel of the Child-Friendly Regency Task Force shall be determined by the Regional Head.

CHAPTER X
SPECIAL MUSRENBANG FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN Article 83 (1) Special musrenbang for women and children is a form of annual meeting or gathering organized specifically for women and children in order to explore various ideas and inputs for the fulfillment of women's and children's rights in regional development program activities.
(2) Special musrenbang for women and children is implemented before the implementation of musrenbang.
(3) Further provisions regarding the implementation mechanism of special musrenbang for women and children as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
FINANCING
Article 84
The costs of implementing the protection of women and children are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Village Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
c. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 85
(1) The Regional Head has the authority to conduct guidance and supervision over the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) The form of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) may include:
a. providing socialization to the community and children's groups regarding the concept of Child-Friendly Regency and children's rights;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding child protection, reproductive health, dangers of Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Narcotics and other Addictive Substances (NAPZA) and distributing them to the community;
c. providing training related to child care/education, counseling principles, basic psychology to communities participating in efforts to organize early childhood education, development of Toddler Family Development Groups (BKB), organizing integrated child protection services and other similar activities related to fulfilling children's needs;
d. facilitating the organization of children's forums and components of children's socio-cultural groups;
e. facilitating the growth and development of centers or platforms for information and counseling services for adolescents;
f. providing awards to the community, both individuals and groups or community organizations deemed to have carried out child protection efforts well.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) may include monitoring and evaluation activities over the Protection of Women and Children implemented by child protection organizers.
(4) The authority as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to the Head of Women's Empowerment and Family Planning and/or other officials within the Regional Government in accordance with their respective duties and functions.

CHAPTER XIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 86
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pesawaran Regency.
Enacted in Gedong Tataan on the date of 14 January 2019

REGENT OF PESAWARAN,
DTO.
DENDI RAMADHONA K.
Promulgated in Gedong Tataan on the 14th of January 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PESAWARAN REGENCY,
DTO.
KESUMA DEWANGSA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESAWARAN REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 41
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY LAMPUNG PROVINCE: 02/837/PSW/2019.
In Accordance With the Original Copy

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
PESAWARAN REGENCY SECRETARIAT,
SUSI PATMININGTYAS, S.H.
Pembina Tk. I

NIP. 19661015 199503 2 002
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PESAWARAN REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
I. GENERAL
That humans are bestowed by God Almighty with reason and conscience that gives them the ability to distinguish between good and bad which will guide and direct attitudes and behavior in living their lives. With their reason and conscience, humans have the freedom to decide for themselves their behavior or actions. In addition, to balance that freedom, humans have the ability to be responsible for all actions they undertake.
Those basic freedoms and basic rights are what are called human rights that are inherently attached to humans naturally as a gift from God Almighty. These rights cannot be denied. Denial of these rights means denying human dignity. Therefore, the state, government, or any organization bears the obligation to recognize and protect human rights for every human being without exception. This means that human rights must always be the starting point and objective in the implementation of social, national, and state life.
The State upholds human rights, including the rights of Children as marked by the guarantee of protection and fulfillment of Children's Rights in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and several provisions of laws and regulations both national and international in nature. This guarantee is strengthened through the ratification of international conventions on Children's Rights, namely the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child through Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of The Child.
The State, Government, Regional Government, Society, Family and Parents are obligated to provide protection and ensure the fulfillment of Children's rights in accordance with their duties and responsibilities. The protection of Children that has been carried out so far has not provided guarantees for Children to receive treatment and opportunities in accordance with their needs in various fields of life, so that in implementing efforts to protect Children's Rights by the Government must be based on the principles of human rights, namely respect, fulfillment, and protection of Children's Rights.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear Article 3 Sufficiently Clear Article 4 Sufficiently Clear Article 5 Sufficiently Clear Article 6 Sufficiently Clear Article 7 Sufficiently Clear Article 8 Sufficiently Clear Article 9 Sufficiently Clear Article 10 Sufficiently Clear Article 11 Sufficiently Clear Article 12 Sufficiently Clear Article 13 Sufficiently Clear Article 14 Sufficiently Clear Article 15 Sufficiently Clear Article 16 Sufficiently Clear Article 17 Sufficiently Clear Article 18 Sufficiently Clear Article 19 Sufficiently Clear

Article 20
Sufficiently Clear Article 21 Sufficiently Clear Article 22 Sufficiently Clear Article 23 Sufficiently Clear Article 24 Sufficiently Clear Article 25 Sufficiently Clear Article 26 Sufficiently Clear Article 27 Sufficiently Clear Article 28 Sufficiently Clear Article 29 Sufficiently Clear Article 30 Sufficiently Clear Article 31 Sufficiently Clear Article 32 Sufficiently Clear Article 33 Sufficiently Clear Article 34 Sufficiently Clear Article 35 Sufficiently Clear Article 36 Sufficiently Clear Article 37 Sufficiently Clear

Article 38
Sufficiently Clear Article 39 Sufficiently Clear Article 40 Sufficiently Clear Article 41 Sufficiently Clear Article 42 Sufficiently Clear Article 43 Sufficiently Clear Article 44 Sufficiently Clear Article 45 Sufficiently Clear Article 46 Sufficiently Clear Article 47 Sufficiently Clear Article 48 Sufficiently Clear Article 49 Sufficiently Clear Article 50 Sufficiently Clear Article 51 Sufficiently Clear Article 52 Sufficiently Clear Article 53 Sufficiently Clear Article 54 Sufficiently Clear Article 55 Sufficiently Clear

Article 56
Sufficiently Clear Article 57 Sufficiently Clear Article 58 Sufficiently Clear Article 59 Sufficiently Clear Article 60 Sufficiently Clear Article 61 Sufficiently Clear Article 62 Sufficiently Clear Article 63 Sufficiently Clear Article 64 Sufficiently Clear Article 65 Sufficiently Clear Article 66 Sufficiently Clear Article 67 Sufficiently Clear Article 68 Sufficiently Clear Article 69 Sufficiently Clear Article 70 Sufficiently Clear Article 71 Sufficiently Clear Article 72 Sufficiently Clear Article 73 Sufficiently Clear

Article 74
Sufficiently Clear

Article 75
Sufficiently Clear

Article 76
Sufficiently Clear

Article 77
Sufficiently Clear

Article 78
Sufficiently Clear

Article 79
Sufficiently Clear

Article 80
Sufficiently Clear

Article 81
Sufficiently Clear

Article 82
Sufficiently Clear

Article 83
Sufficiently Clear

Article 84
Sufficiently Clear

Article 85
Sufficiently Clear

Article 86
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PESAWARAN REGENCY NUMBER 78