COPY
REGENT OF TOLITOLI
CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TOLITOLI REGENCY NUMBER 2 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF TOLITOLI,
Considering : a. that violence against women and children is a crime against human rights so that it becomes the obligation of the state to protect from all forms of violence and discrimination;
b. that to fulfill the rights of women and children as well as part of the local government's efforts to protect women and children from exploitation, neglect and discrimination;
c. that to provide direction, foundation and legal certainty in the protection of women and children, regulation at the regional level is required;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 29 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 74, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1822);
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF TOLITOLI REGENCY and

HEAD OF TOLITOLI REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child who is still in the womb.
2. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and community organizations and/or associations.
3. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward up to the third degree.
4. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty;
5. Violence against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
6. Violence against Children is any act against a Child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the Child.
7. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of Violence.
8. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that Violence against Women will occur, is occurring or has occurred;
9. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from Violence and discrimination.
10. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
11. Service is action taken as soon as possible to Victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that Violence against Victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
12. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany Victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of Violence Victims.
13. Accompaniment is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the empowerment of Violence Victims to resolve the problems they face.
14. Repatriation is an effort to return Women and Child Victims of Violence to their families, or communities that can provide protection and fulfill their needs.
15. Counseling is a process of providing objective and complete information, conducted systematically with interpersonal communication guidance, counseling techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge aimed at helping a person recognize their current condition, the problems being faced, and determine solutions or efforts to overcome these problems.
16. Rehabilitation is the recovery of Victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
17. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with their families, communities, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
18. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment, hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A, is an integrated service provider institution for Victims established by the Regional Government.
19. Minimum Service Standards, hereinafter abbreviated as SPM, is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing complaint handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance as well as repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Child Victims of Violence.
20. Social Welfare Implementation Institution, hereinafter abbreviated as LPKS, is an institution or social service facility that implements social welfare services for Children in conflict with the law, established by the ministry of social affairs.
21. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to Victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
22. Region is Tolitoli Regency.
23. Regent is the Regent of Tolitoli.
24. Regional Government is the Regent of Tolitoli as an element of Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
25. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent of Tolitoli and the Regional House of Representatives in the Implementation of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Regency Region.
26. Regional House of Representatives of Tolitoli Regency, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.

Article 2
(1) The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. rights of women and children victims of violence;
b. Protection of women victims of acts of violence;
c. child protection;
d. P2TP2A;
e. cooperation, obligations and responsibilities;
f. information and reporting system;
g. guidance and supervision; and
h. funding.
(2) Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, includes:
a. prevention of acts of Violence;
b. integrated services for Victims of acts of Violence; and
c. empowerment of Victims of acts of Violence.
(3) Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, includes:
a. Child Protection who are Victims of acts of Violence; and b. Special Protection of children.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 3
Women and Children Victims of acts of Violence shall receive rights, including:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to recovery;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to social Rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling that is prompt, appropriate, comfortable and in accordance with needs;
h. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
i. the right to assistance;
j. the right to a sense of security; and
k. the right to restitution.

Article 4
Child Victims of acts of Violence in addition to obtaining rights as referred to in Article 3, also obtain special rights, including: a. the right to survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic population services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
General

Article 5
The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect women from acts of Violence that occur in public or private life in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence;
d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and
h. threat of certain actions.

Article 6
Every person who hears, sees or knows of the occurrence of Violence as referred to in Article 5 shall make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of the criminal act;
b. provide protection to the victim;
c. provide emergency assistance; and
d. assist in the complaint process and submission of application for protection order.

Second Part
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 7
(1) Regional Government conducts Prevention of acts of Violence against Women as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (2) letter a by means of:
a. socializing laws and regulations;
b. conducting empowerment and awareness to families, parents and communities by providing information, guidance and/or counseling;
c. conducting efforts to increase the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
d. conducting efforts to build community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of Women and Children from Violence;
e. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities, religious institutions/organizations and various non-governmental organizations in efforts to prevent Violence against Women and Children;
f. establishing a Violence prevention system, mapping of locations or areas prone to Violence;
g. increasing community awareness that respects Women and protects Children;
h. establishing P2TP2A at the Regency level and Women and Children Protection Service Posts at the Sub-district, Village and Urban Village levels; and
i. establishing a Women and Children protection task force.
(2) In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:
a. Family and/or closest relatives;
b. Community;
c. vertical agencies;
d. law enforcement apparatus;
e. educational institutions;
f. health institutions;
g. religious institutions/organizations
h. social community institutions; and
i. business sector and other institutions.
(3) Prevention of acts of Violence against Women as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted in an integrated manner and coordinated by Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in the field of Women empowerment and Children protection.

Article 8
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to formulate Prevention programs or activities as referred to in Article 7 in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan.
(2) Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) are to support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Third Part
Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 9
(1) Regional Government implements integrated services for Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (2) letter b through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. Counseling;
d. psychological services;
e. spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation services;
g. legal aid and assistance services;
h. safe house services; and/or
i. repatriation and social reintegration.
(2) In the event that the Regional Government does not yet have counseling personnel as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, it may request assistance from social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors.
(3) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms in police lines;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and Safe Houses; and/or
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for the recovery of victims including perpetrators.
(4) Implementation of services for Victims of acts of Violence is carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A with other social institutions.
(5) P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner.
(6) Integrated Services for Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3), paragraph (4) and paragraph (5) are implemented in accordance with standard operating procedures.

Article 10
(1) Complaint services as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) letter a are implemented to receive reports of acts of Violence.
(2) Reports as referred to in paragraph (1) may originate from: a. victims;
b. referrals; or
c. outreach.

Article 11
(1) Health services as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) letter b, shall be implemented using health facilities owned by the Regional Government or other referral hospitals by providing treatment services and health recovery for Victims.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be performed by health workers to Victims in accordance with professional standards, standard operating procedures and the medical needs of Victims.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1), through efforts to:
a. conduct anamnesis to Victims;
b. conduct examination of Victims;
c. provide first aid;
d. restore health both physical and psychological, carry out efforts to prevent disease and other health disorders;
e. provide counseling;
f. refer to more adequate health service facilities if necessary, may refer to other parties with a multidisciplinary approach, including health services, medicolegal, psychosocial assistance and legal aid; and/or
g. provide information to the police.
(4) In addition to the efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) for certain cases, health workers may provide reproductive health services in accordance with medical needs.
(5) In providing services as referred to in paragraph (3) and paragraph (4), health workers must create medical records in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(6) For every medical action to be performed by health workers, there must be consent for medical action from the Victim or their family in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(7) For the purposes of investigation, authorized health workers must prepare a visum et repertum and/or visum et repertum psichiatricum or prepare a medical certificate.
(8) Health workers have the right to obtain legal protection. Article 12 Legal aid and protection services as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) letter g include:
a. providing protection in Safe Houses;
b. providing legal information to Victims;
c. providing assistance for Victims as witnesses from the investigation process until the verdict;
d. providing special legal protection for Child Victims of acts of Violence which may be carried out by appointing guardianship in accordance with laws and regulations.

Article 13
(1) Repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) letter i shall be implemented with the following principles: a. voluntary;
b. safe and dignified;
c. respect for rights.
(2) In the event that the regional government is not yet able to implement Repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1), it may request assistance from related parties.
(3) Social services to provide social welfare for Children in conflict with the law shall be carried out by the Regional Government together with LPKS and other social institutions.
(4) LPKS and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) are rehabilitation and temporary shelter facilities for Children in conflict with the law before repatriation and social reintegration are implemented.

Fourth Part
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 14
(1) Empowerment of Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (2) letter c conducted by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and c. capital assistance.
(2) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

CHAPTER IV
CHILD PROTECTION
Part One
Protection of Child Victims of Acts of Violence

Paragraph 1
Stages of Protection for Child Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 15
The stages of protection for Child Victims of acts of Violence, include:
a. prevention of acts of Violence against Children;
b. handling of Child Victims of acts of Violence; and
c. rehabilitation of Child Victims of acts of Violence.

Paragraph 2
Prevention of Violence Against Children

Article 16
(1) Prevention of acts of Violence against Children as referred to in Article 15 letter a shall be implemented by means of:
a. forming a working network in efforts to prevent Violence against Children;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of Violence prevention based on partnership patterns with the community, private sector and Non-Governmental Organizations; and
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of Child Victims of Violence.
(2) Prevention of acts of Violence against Children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner and coordinated by Regional Apparatus having principal duties and functions in the field of Women's empowerment and Child protection.

Article 17
Prevention of acts of Violence against Children in addition to being implemented by regional apparatus as referred to in Article 16 paragraph (2), also involves:
a. parents and/or family;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. Child social welfare institutions; and/or
e. other institutions engaged in the field of Child protection care.

Paragraph 3
Handling of Child Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 18
The Handling of Child Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 15 letter b shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Rehabilitation of Child Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 19
(1) Rehabilitation of Child Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 15 letter c shall be carried out in the form of:
a. legal aid services;
b. health rehabilitation services;
c. social rehabilitation services; and/or
d. repatriation and social reintegration services.
(2) In the provision of rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. vertical agencies;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;village government;
d. non-governmental organizations;
e. private parties;
f. the community; and/or
g. families.

Second Part
Special Protection of Children

Article 20
(1) Special protection for Children as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (3) letter b is provided to:
a. Child Victims of physical, psychological, sexual violence and neglect; b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from Minority and Isolated Groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually; e. Children who become Victims of Pornography;
f. Child Victims of Sexual Crimes;
g. Children who become Victims of Narcotics, Alcohol, Psychotropic and Other Addictive Substance Abuse;
h. Children with HIV/AIDS;
i. Children with Disabilities;
j. Child Victims of maltreatment and neglect;
k. Children with Deviant Social Behavior;
l. Child Victims of Terrorism Networks;
m. Child Victims of Kidnapping, Sale and/or Trafficking; and n. Children who become Victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
(2) Regional Governments in implementing the handling of special protection for Children as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER V
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER FOR THE PROTECTION OF
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 21
(1) In the context of services for Victims of acts of Violence, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A.
(2) The appointment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Article 22
(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 21 has the duties to: a. provide services;
b. provide protection to Victims of acts of Violence, reporters and witnesses; and
c. conduct empowerment of Victims of acts of Violence.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a include: a. receive complaints/reports of Violence against Women and/or Children, consultation, and counseling;
b. receive and send case referrals from Regional Government of Regency/City or institutions established by Regional Government of Regency/City;
c. provide legal assistance and accompaniment;
d. health;
e. social rehabilitation;
f. legal services; and
g. repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER VI
COOPERATION, OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Cooperation

Article 23
In handling Child Victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 18, the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. vertical agencies;
b. provincial government;
c. other regency/city governments;
d. village government;
e. non-governmental organizations; and
f. private parties;

Article 24
(1) In certain circumstances the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with:
a. other regional governments;
b. Police;
c. Advocates;
d. health workers;
e. psychologists;
f. social workers;
g. Companion volunteers;
h. spiritual counselors;
i. other law enforcers, to assist Victims in the court hearing process;
j. National Commission on Violence Against Women;
k. Indonesian Child Protection Commission or Child Protection Institution; and/or
l. certain parties desired for the benefit of Victims.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. exchange of data and information
b. socialization;
c. provision of legal aid;
d. health services;
e. mental/psychological services;
f. victim assistance;
g. Counseling;
h. social rehabilitation;
i. spiritual guidance; and/or
j. repatriation and social reintegration.

Second Part
Obligations and Responsibilities

Article 25
The obligation and responsibility in providing protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence is the shared responsibility of the Regional Government and the Community.

Article 26
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Governments as referred to in Article 25, include:
a. establishing, implementing policies, programs, and conducting cooperation activities in the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
b. facilitating the establishment of institutional protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence and providing support for facilities and infrastructure;
c. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence in accordance with regional financial capacity;
d. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
e. providing protection services for Women and Child Victims of acts of Violence;
f. encouraging and increasing community participation; and g. appointing parents and/or substitute family caregivers as a protection measure for Children who are Victims of acts of Violence.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION
Article 27
(1) Every person may participate in providing protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by:
a. preventing and stopping the occurrence of acts of Violence; b. providing protection to Victims;
c. providing first aid to Victims of acts of Violence; d. reporting acts of Violence against Women and/or Children; e. independently disseminating the rights of Women and Children; f. strengthening community social institutions in handling acts of Violence against Women and Children; and/or g. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to acts of Violence against Women and Children.

Article 28
(1) The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of: a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of Violence against Women and Children; and b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VIII
INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM
Article 29
(1) The Regional Government prepares and develops an information and reporting system for the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) The information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 30
(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of P2TP2A.
(2) Guidance and supervision are carried out by the Regional Apparatus tasked and responsible in the field of Women's empowerment and Child protection.
(3) The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) must be reported to the Regional Government.

BAB X
FUNDING
Article 31
Funding for the Protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence may be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other lawful sources that are non-binding in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 32
(1) Regional Governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations that carry out protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 33
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tolitoli Regency.
Enacted in Tolitoli on 24 May 2023

REGENT OF TOLITOLI,
AMRAN HI. YAHYA
Promulgated in Tolitoli on the 24th of May 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TOLITOLI REGENCY,
MOHAMMAD ASRUL BANTILAN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TOLITOLI REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 102
NOREG 28 REGIONAL REGULATION OF TOLITOLI REGENCY
CENTRAL SULAWESI PROVINCE: (02/2023)
ELUCIDATION
ON
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TOLITOLI REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
The Preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia states that the State has the obligation to provide protection to every citizen. Article 28 G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia explicitly states that: every person has the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which is a human right. Violence is a manifestation of human emotional behavior, rather than rational behavior.

In the context of protection for victims of crime, there are preventive and repressive efforts carried out, both by the community and the government (through its law enforcement apparatus), such as providing protection or supervision from various threats that may endanger the victim's life, providing adequate medical and legal assistance. Protection means sheltering something from dangerous things, that something can be an interest or an object or goods. In addition, protection also contains the meaning of shelter provided by someone to someone who is weaker. Thus, legal protection can be interpreted as all government efforts to guarantee legal certainty to provide protection to its citizens so that their rights as citizens are not violated, and for those who violate them, sanctions can be imposed in accordance with applicable regulations.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Letter a What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or defects on a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
Letter b What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
Letter c What is meant by "economic violence" is an act that restricts a person from working inside or outside the home to earn money and goods, including allowing a person who works to be exploited, while someone does not fulfill the economic needs of the family.
Letter d What is meant by "social violence" is an act of a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life of a person or can cause physical damage or damage to another person's property.
Letter e What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering in a person.
Letter f What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is: a. actions that result in the non-fulfillment of; b. the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
c. actions of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be; d. actions that neglect people within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
e. actions that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h What is meant by "threat of certain actions" is any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that create fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by "complaint services" is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.
Letter b What is meant by "health services" is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and development for humans so that it can provide tranquility, peace and coolness of heart to humans by continuously providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, trust in God and continue to carry out their obligations.
Letter f What is meant by "social rehabilitation services" is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
Letter g What is meant by "legal aid and assistance services" is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that is gender sensitive.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i What is meant by "repatriation and reintegration" is efforts to return women and child victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a.
What is meant by "anamnesis" is information about a person's (patient's) life obtained through interview.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (7) What is meant by "visum et repertum or visum et repertum psychiatricum" is a written statement made by a doctor in forensic medicine at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of medical examination of a human being, whether living or dead or parts or suspected parts of a human body, based on their scientific knowledge and under oath, for the purposes of pro justitia.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TOLITOLI REGENCY NUMBER 235