REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN
PROVINCE OF WEST SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PADANG PARIAMAN REGENCY
NUMBER 6 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN,

Considering : a. that to guarantee Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with human dignity and to receive Protection from Violence, discrimination and other violations, legal certainty is necessary;
b. that to provide legal certainty in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as well as to carry out mandatory regional government affairs, regulation in the form of Regional Regulation is necessary;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 12 Year 1956 concerning the Establishment of Autonomous Regional Regencies within the Provincial Region of Central Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 25));
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 397, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5.Law.......
5. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 ((State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 Concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
7. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 Year 2011 Concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies;

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PADANG PARIAMAN REGENCY and

REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Padang Pariaman Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Padang Pariaman Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Padang Pariaman Regency.
4. Regional Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Work Unit within the Government of Padang Pariaman Regency.
5. Women's Empowerment is an effort of Protection, strengthening of human rights, improvement of quality of life, and enhancement of women's participation in development.
6. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, as well as receive Protection from Violence and discrimination.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a Child who is still in the womb and is not yet married.
8. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the Regional Government, community and parents and/or family to prevent violations of the rights of women and Children.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Children's Forum is a forum for Children's participation formed with the aim of facilitating Children's involvement in decision-making processes and enjoying changes relating to their lives either directly or indirectly, which is carried out with the consent and will of all Children based on awareness and understanding, in accordance with age and level of maturity of thinking.
11. Child-Friendly Regency hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a Regency that has a Child rights-based development system through the integration of commitment and resources of government, community and business world that is planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of Children's rights.
12. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development program policies.
13. Community is individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Women Victims of Violence are women who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
15. Child Victims of Violence are Children who experience actions that result in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically or neglect that threatens life, body and degrades human dignity.
16. Human trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of Violence, use of Violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the Country or between Countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
17. Complaint handling is a series of actions taken by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of Violence against women and Children, submitted by victims, families or the community.
18. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
19. Law enforcement is action by officials authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
20. Legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out the process of assisting witnesses and/or victims of Violence against women and Children that is gender sensitive.
21. Repatriation is an effort to return women and Child victims of Violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving Region to the Region of origin.
22. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
23. Safe house is a temporary shelter that aims to provide Protection and a sense of security to victims of Violence.
24. Shelter house is a forum for guidance and welfare services for street Children that carries out activities of social assistance/guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health, skills guidance in order to ensure that Children do not carry out activities on the streets so that they can grow and develop normally.
25. Spiritual Guidance is an effort to restore mental health through strengthening the religion adhered to by the victim.
26. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the Region.
27. Gender responsive is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers in achieving gender equality.
28. Gender Sensitivity or Gender Awareness is the ability to identify gaps in power relations between women and men in the family and in the community, the impact of gender-based division of labor on women and men, and that the experiences, problems, needs, interests and aspirations of women and men are different.
29. Public service provider is every state organizing institution, corporation, independent institution formed based on Law for public service activities, and other legal entities formed solely for public service activities.
30. Community Organization is an organization established and formed by the community voluntarily based on common aspirations, will, needs, interests, activities and goals to participate in development for the achievement of the objectives of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila.
31. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
32. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their Child, or father and his Child, or mother and her Child, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
33. Customs are patterns of behavior that are eternal and passed down from one generation to another generation as heritage, so that they are strongly integrated with community behavior patterns.

Article 2
The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is based on the principles of:
a. the best interests of women and Children;
b. gender justice and gender equality;
c. local wisdom;
d. law enforcement and legal certainty.
e. non-discrimination;
f. the right to life, survival, and development; g. respect for the opinion of Children; and
h. law enforcement and legal certainty.

Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and Children in the Region
b. serve as a guideline for the Region in planning, policies and strategies for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
c. protect and prevent women and Children from actions, decisions and policies that violate the rights of women and Children;
d. enhance the role and value of local wisdom as well as the role of customs in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

Article 4
The scope of regulation for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection includes:
a. improvement of women's quality of life;
b. Protection of women;
c. gender and Child data system;
d. fulfillment of Child rights;
e. Child Protection;
f. community participation; and
g. guidance and supervision.

CHAPTER II
IMPROVEMENT OF WOMEN'S QUALITY OF LIFE
Part One
General

Article 5
(1) In order to improve the quality of life of women, the regional government is responsible for:
a. respecting and guaranteeing the rights of women without discrimination in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Region;
c. establishing a Gender Mainstreaming working group in the Region;
d. enhancing Women's Empowerment in roles, quality and capacity in the fields of:
1. politics;
2. law;
3. social; and
4. economy.
e. strengthening and developing service provider institutions for Women's Empowerment in the Region;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Second Part
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions

Article 6
(1) The Regent is responsible for the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Region.
(2) The responsibility of the Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated to the Vice Regent.

Article 7
In implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Region as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter b, the Regent shall designate the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment as the coordinator for the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming.

Third Part
Formation of Gender Mainstreaming Working Group in the Region

Article 8
(1) In the effort to accelerate the institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming in all Regional SKPD, a Gender Mainstreaming working group is formed in the Region.
(2) Members of the Gender Mainstreaming working group are all heads/leaders of SKPD.
(3) The Regent appoints the head of Bappeda as chairman of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group and the head of SKPD whose field covers Women's Empowerment as head of the secretariat of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group.
(4) The establishment of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group is determined by Regent's decree.

Article 9
The Regional Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in Article 14 has the following duties:
a. to promote and facilitate Gender Mainstreaming to each SKPD;
b. to conduct socialization and advocacy of Gender Mainstreaming to sub-district heads and wali nagari;
c. to prepare work programs every year;
d. to encourage the realization of gender-Responsive planning and budgeting;
e. to prepare the work plan of the Gender Mainstreaming working group every year;
f. to be accountable to the Regent through the Vice Regent;
g. to formulate policy recommendations to the Regent;
h. to prepare the Regional Gender profile;
i. to monitor the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in each agency;
j. to establish a technical team to conduct analysis of the Regional budget;
k. to prepare a regional action plan for Regional Gender Mainstreaming; and
l. to encourage the implementation of selection and appointment of focal points in each SKPD.

Article 10
(1) The Technical Team as referred to in Article 9 letter j shall consist of apparatus who understand gender responsive budget analysis.
(2) The regional action plan for Regional Gender Mainstreaming as referred to in Article 9 letter k shall contain:
a. Gender Mainstreaming in laws and regulations in the Region;
b. Gender Mainstreaming in the development cycle in the Region;
c. institutional strengthening of Gender Mainstreaming in the Region; and
d. strengthening of community participation in the Region.

Article 11
(1) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point in each SKPD consists of officials and/or staff whose field covers planning and/or program duties.
(2) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), has the following duties:
a. promoting Gender Mainstreaming in the work unit;
b. facilitating the preparation of work plans and budgeting of SKPD that are gender responsive;
c. implementing training, socialization, advocacy of Gender Mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the SKPD;
d. reporting the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to the leadership of SKPD;
e. encouraging the implementation of gender analysis on policies, programs, and activities in the work unit; and
f. facilitating the preparation of gender data in each SKPD;
(3) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be selected and determined by the leadership of SKPD.

Fourth Part
Enhancement of the Role, Quality, and Capability of Women in the Political Field

Article 12
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the political field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 1 include:
a. implementing socialization to increase women's political participation in general elections;
b. implementing programs that encourage the level of women's involvement in political processes and public positions;
c. providing facilitation for women's self-development in organizing, associating and assembling;
d. involving women in decision-making concerning women's interests;

Part Five
Enhancement of the Role, Quality, and Capability of Women in the Legal Field

Article 13
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the legal field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 2 include:
a. conducting socialization to increase legal knowledge and awareness of women;
b. conducting mapping and reviewing gender-biased policies;
c. involving women's organizations in the process of drafting and discussing Regional legal products related to women's participation;

Sixth Part
Enhancement of the Role, Quality, and Capability of Women in the Social Sector

Article 14
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the social field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 3 include:
a. enhancement of knowledge and skills to encourage the fulfillment of education in accordance with existing potential;
b. enhancement and fulfillment of health quality for women;
c. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
d. enhancement of women's awareness of the impact of early marriage;
e. facilitating and endeavoring to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women;
f. conducting enhancement of women's awareness and knowledge regarding independent, healthy and prosperous family planning;
g. conducting programs to reduce maternal mortality rates;
h. encouraging the establishment of women's organizations in the Region;

Seventh Part
Enhancement of the Role, Quality, and Capability of Women in the Economic Field

Article 15
Efforts to enhance the role, quality and capability of women in the economic field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 4 include:
a. implementing programs, activities, training for improving the skills and expertise of women in order to realize the improvement of women's welfare;
b. facilitation of business capital strengthening for women with weak economic capacity;
c. marketing of products resulting from businesses of women with weak economic capacity;
d. training for developing women's capabilities through economic empowerment of pre-prosperous families;
e. comprehensive entrepreneurship training for women.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 16
(1) Regional Government in the effort of Protection of women is responsible for: a. establishing and implementing policies, programs and activities for the Protection of women;
b. undertaking prevention efforts against acts of Violence against women including criminal acts of trafficking in persons;
c. improving the effectiveness of services for women victims of acts of Violence;
d. improving Protection efforts for female workers;
e. strengthening and developing institutions providing Protection services for women;
f. conducting cooperation with the Government, other Regional Governments, private parties, business sector and/or NGOs in efforts to prevent acts of Violence against women;
g. involving the active role of families, ninik mamak, bundo kanduang, customary leaders, religious leaders, communities, and institutions in the field of Protection of women;
(2) The responsibility of Regional Government in the effort of Protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions and may coordinate with relevant agencies.

Part Two
Prevention of Acts of Violence against Women

Article 17
In order to prevent acts of Violence against women, the Regional Government:
a. conducts socialization regarding the prevention of Violence against women by optimizing the role of customary, cultural, religious institutions and community organizations;
b. builds networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children victims of Violence;
c. provides public facilities that are comfortable and safe for women;

Third Part
Effectiveness of Services for Women Victims of Acts of Violence

Paragraph 1
General

Article 18
(1) Protection of women victims of acts of Violence is implemented through integrated services.
(2) The provision of integrated services to women victims of acts of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) uses the principles of:
a. gender responsive;
b. non-discrimination;
c. equal and respectful relationships;
d. maintaining confidentiality;
e. providing a sense of security and comfort;
f. respecting individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respecting the choices and decisions of victims;
i. sensitive to the background and condition of victims and the use of language that is appropriate and understood by victims;
j. fast and simple;
k. empathy; and
l. fulfillment of women's rights.

Article 19
The form of integrated services for women victims of acts of Violence includes:
a. complaint handling;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. law enforcement and legal assistance; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration.

Paragraph 2
Handling of Complaints

Article 20
Integrated complaint handling services as referred to in Article 19 letter a shall be implemented by:
a. hospitals;
b. community health centers;
c. women and children service units;
d. trauma center shelters;
e. women crisis centres;
f. advisory board for marriage guidance and preservation;
g. police;
h. prosecutor's office;
i. courts;
j. ministry of religious affairs; and/or
k. legal aid institutions;

Article 21
(1) Complaints of acts of Violence against women can be made by reporters consisting of:
a. victims,
b. family,
c. community; and/or
d. community organizations in the field of Protection of women and Children, such as: P2TP2A, Safe Houses etc.)
(2) Reporters as referred to in paragraph (1) can make complaints:
a. directly;
b. by telephone; and/or
c. by letter.
(3) In addition to handling complaints submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions as referred to in Article 20, are also authorized to handle victims of acts of Violence against women obtained through other information.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for complaint handling services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3
Health Rehabilitation

Article 22
(1) Health rehabilitation as referred to in Article 19 letter b constitutes efforts that include aspects of:
a. promotive;
b. preventive;
c. curative; and
d. rehabilitative.
(2) Health rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted comprehensively, accessible 24 (twenty-four) hours, with quality and carried out in accordance with health service standards.
(3) Women victims of acts of Violence have the right to free health services, including:
a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial counseling; and
d. visum.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing health services as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 4
Social Rehabilitation

Article 23
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 19 letter c is intended to restore and develop the capabilities of women victims of acts of Violence who experience social dysfunction to be able to carry out their social functions in society properly.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes services:
a. counseling;
b. provision of safe houses; and
c. spiritual guidance.
(3) The implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by:
a. SKPD that has duties and functions in the social field;
b. SKPD that handles Women's Empowerment, and may cooperate with integrated service centers, women crisis centres or social community organizations that already exist; or
c. the ministry of religion.

Article 24
(1) Counseling services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a aim to:
a. assist female victims of acts of Violence in recognizing their problems and finding effective ways to overcome them themselves;
b. empower female victims of acts of Violence to determine their future;
c. provide moral support to female victims of acts of Violence in facing the process they are undergoing; and
d. make female victims of acts of Violence feel accepted in the community environment.
(2) Counseling services are carried out by social rehabilitation officers who are gender responsive, consisting of:
a. counselors;
b. psychologists; and
c. psychiatrists.
(3) Counseling services are carried out in places that guarantee a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information from female victims of acts of Violence.
(4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; and
d. site visits.

Article 25
(1) Regional Government may provide safe houses for women victims of acts of Violence.
(2) The provision of safe house services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b aims to protect women victims of acts of Violence from intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.
(3) The location of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.
(4) The criteria for women victims of acts of Violence who require safe houses include:
a. their life is threatened;
b. receiving rejection from family or community;
c. requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far away; and/or
d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house.
(5) The implementation of safe house services is carried out by social rehabilitation officers who have gender sensitivity or gender awareness, consisting of:
a. social workers/volunteers;
b. security officers; and/or
c. community leaders.
(6) Further provisions regarding the implementation of safe house services shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 26
(1) Spiritual guidance as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c aims for psychological recovery.
(2) Spiritual guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on the principles of:
a. not imposing any religion or belief; and
b. leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self determination).
(3) Spiritual guidance is conducted by spiritual guidance officers.
(4) Spiritual guidance officers as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of consultants from the Marriage Advisory, Development and Preservation Board (BP4), Officers of the Religious Affairs Office, Ustad/Ulama, Priests, Pastors and other religious leaders who have gender sensitivity or gender awareness.

Paragraph 5
Enforcement and Legal Assistance

Article 27
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in Article 19 letter d constitute actions by law enforcement officials to implement laws and regulations in the context of handling cases of acts of Violence against women, especially to impose sanctions on perpetrators and provide Protection for witnesses and/or victims.
(2) Law enforcement and legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by prioritizing the best interests of victims.

Article 28
(1) Law enforcement and legal aid services are intended to provide assistance and Protection to women victims of acts of Violence and witnesses with a gender-responsive approach so that victims obtain justice and legal certainty.
(2) Types of legal aid services include:
a. legal aid in the reporting process and preparation of official examination reports;
b. legal aid in the prosecution process at the prosecutor's office;
c. legal aid in the examination process at court;
d. legal aid in the court hearing decision process until there is a final legal decision; and
e. legal aid in the mediation process.
(3) The Regional Government provides legal aid to women victims of acts of Violence based on the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) In providing legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3), the Regional Government may cooperate with legal aid institutions, women crisis centers, advocates and/or other legal assistants who are gender sensitive.

Paragraph 6
Repatriation and Social Reintegration

Article 29
(1) Repatriation is intended to return women victims of acts of Violence to their region of origin.
(2) Repatriation of women victims of acts of Violence is accompanied by social reintegration efforts.

Article 30
(1) Social reintegration is carried out in the context of reuniting women victims of acts of Violence with family, substitute family, or community that can provide Protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
(2) Social reintegration is aimed so that:
a. women victims of acts of Violence can resume their social life; and
b. women victims of acts of Violence can have a decent life.
(3) Social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out after victims receive social rehabilitation services.

Article 31
The Regional Government implements repatriation and social reintegration of women victims of acts of Violence in accordance with laws and regulations.

Fourth Part
Employment Protection

Article 32
(1) Employers who employ women are obligated to maintain decency, safety and security while in the workplace.
(2) Employers are obligated to place female workers in places that are safe for women's reproductive health.
(3) Employers are obligated to fulfill the rights of female workers to receive wages in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) Employers are obligated to provide special breastfeeding facilities at their company.

Article 33
(1) Female workers/laborers under the age of 18 (eighteen) years are prohibited from being employed between 23.00 WIB until 07.00 WIB.
(2) Employers are prohibited from employing pregnant female workers/laborers who according to a doctor's statement would endanger the health and safety of their pregnancy.
(3) Employers who employ female workers/laborers between 23.00 WIB until 07.00 WIB, are obligated to:
a. provide nutritious food and beverages; and
b. maintain decency and security while at the workplace.
(4) Employers are obligated to provide shuttle transportation for female workers/laborers who depart for and return from work between 23.00 WIB until 05.00 WIB.

CHAPTER V
IMPROVEMENT OF FAMILY QUALITY
Article 34
(1) In order to improve family quality, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. conducting efforts to improve family quality to realize gender equality and the rights of Children;
b. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and the rights of Children.
c. strengthening and developing service provider institutions for family quality improvement in the Region; and (2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with its duties and functions.

Article 35
Regional Government undertakes efforts to improve family quality as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) letter a including:
a. coaching;
b. guidance;
c. supervision;
d. facilitation of family development implementation;
e. improving the health quality of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers;

Article 36
Guidance as referred to in Article 35 letter a, includes:
a. growth and development of Children under five years of age;
b. Protection of adolescent reproductive health;
c. Maturation of marriage age;
d. Birth regulation; and
e. Population management.

Article 37
Guidance as referred to in Article 35 letter b includes:
a. conducting counseling on improving the quality of life of women;
b. conducting premarital counseling;

Article 38.
Supervision as referred to in Article 35 letter c includes: a. Conducting evaluation of growth and development data of children under five years old;
b. Conducting evaluation of post-marriage data;

Article 39
The provision of services for families as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) letter b includes:
a. communication, information and education;
b. contraceptive devices and medicines;
c. recording and reporting of family planning services;
d. adequate health service facilities and infrastructure;
e. breastfeeding corners in every public facility.

Article 40
Communication, information and education as referred to in Article 39 letter a constitutes communication activities to increase knowledge and improve the attitudes and behavior of families and communities in the Population and family planning Program.

Article 41
(1) In addition to Regional Governments, private parties (private parties include, among others, PTs that provide public services) are obligated to provide breastfeeding corner rooms.
(2) Breastfeeding corner rooms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be proper and adequate rooms.
(3) Private parties that do not provide breastfeeding corner rooms as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. restriction of business activities;
c. suspension of business activities;
d. administrative fine; and/or
e. revocation of permit.

CHAPTER VI
FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General

Article 42
(1) Regional Government in the effort to fulfill the rights of Children is responsible for:
a. establishing and implementing policies and programs/activities for the fulfillment of Children's rights;
b. respecting and guaranteeing the human rights of every Child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the Child, birth order of the Child, and physical and/or mental condition;
c. strengthening and developing family quality improvement service provider institutions in realizing Children's rights;
d. guaranteeing the Protection, care, and welfare of Children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons who are legally responsible for the Child;
e. providing facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of the fulfillment of Children's rights;
f. guaranteeing the right of Children to express opinions in accordance with the age and level of intelligence of the Child;
g. conducting supervision and guidance in the context of implementing the fulfillment of Children's rights;
h. conducting cooperation with private parties and/or NGOs in the implementation of Child Protection;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in the effort of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by SKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.

Second Part
Birth Registration

Article 43
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to administer the registration of the birth of Children with the issuance of birth certificates.
(2) Birth certificates as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be administered free of charge.

Third Part
Education

Article 44
The Regional Government guarantees the implementation of the 9 (nine) year compulsory education program for Children aged 7 (seven) to 15 (fifteen) years.

Article 45
(1) Every organizer of an education unit is obligated to provide opportunities to Children to obtain educational services without discrimination.
(2) Every organizer of an education unit is prohibited from expelling Children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the Child's education.
(3) In the event that a Child victim of an act of Violence experiences dropping out of school, the organizer of the education unit is obligated to coordinate with relevant agencies.

Article 46
(1) Every Child has the right to obtain education and teaching in the context of developing their personality and level of intelligence in accordance with their interests and talents.
(2) Every Child has the right to obtain Protection in educational units from sexual crimes and Violence committed by educators, educational personnel, fellow students, and/or other parties.

Article 47
(1) Children with disabilities and Children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including inclusive education programs.
(2) Regional governments provide educators for inclusive education at every education unit.

Fourth Part
Health and Social

Article 48
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to provide comprehensive health services for Children, so that every Child obtains optimal health status from the time they are in the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b. exemption from cost burden for malnourished Children, Children with disabilities, Children with special needs, Children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, Children who are victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances and other addictive substances, Children who become victims of Violence, and Children who are victims of human trafficking; and (3) Regional Governments, communities, families and parents are obligated to ensure that Children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.

Article 49
(1) Promotive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at improving health status more optimally.
(2) Promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by providing socialization or counseling to the community regarding healthy lifestyle patterns which include:
a. the importance of exclusive breastfeeding for infants;
b. the importance of immunization for toddlers;
c. clean living patterns;
d. the importance of nutritious food;
e. the dangers of narcotics and smoking; and (3) In addition to promotive efforts as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government may carry out other activities in the context of health service provision.

Article 50
(1) Preventive efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing the occurrence of disease or health problems.
(2) The efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by: a. obligating mothers to provide exclusive breastfeeding to infants up to 6 (six) months of age;
b. providing free immunization and vitamins to infants and toddlers; c. providing nutritious food to toddlers from underprivileged families; d. optimizing the role of posyandu for health services for mothers and toddlers;
e. conducting periodic health examinations; and
f. providing sanitation facilities and clean water at every school.

Article 51
(1) Curative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing diseases from becoming more severe through treatment.
(2) Treatment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented free of charge for Children who come from underprivileged families.

Article 52
(1) Rehabilitative efforts for basic health services as referred to in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are intended to maintain and restore conditions after illness.
(2) Rehabilitative efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through periodic health examinations.

Article 53
(1) Regional Government is obligated to provide Social Welfare for: a. Children in conflict with the law;
b. Child victims of Violence who are exploited economically and sexually, Neglected children, Child victims of abduction and Child victims of human trafficking;
c. Children who do not have parents and are cared for by parties or families who are unable;
d. Child victims of natural disasters or social disasters; and
e. Children with disabilities;
(2) Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of provision of services:
a. health;
b. education;
c. legal aid;
d. assistance;
e. social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation; and/or
g. reintegration.

Fifth Part
Employment

Article 54
The Regional Government conducts periodic supervision of every person/entity that employs Children in an effort to Protect child workers.

Article 55
Every person/entity that employs a Child must pay attention to the requirements:
a. minimum age of 15 (fifteen) years;
b. obtain written consent from the parent/guardian of the Child worker;
c. have a written employment agreement between the employer and the parent/guardian of the Child worker and obtain validation from the authorized agency;
d. not employ the Child at night;
e. maximum working time of 3 (three) hours per day;

Article 56
In the event that a Child is employed together with adult workers, then the workplace of the Child must be separated from the workplace of adult workers.

Article 57
(1) Every person/entity is prohibited from employing and involving Children in the worst forms of work.
(2) The worst forms of work referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. all work in the form of slavery or similar practices; b. all work that exploits, provides, or offers Children for prostitution, pornography production, pornographic performances, or gambling;
c. all work that exploits, provides, or involves Children for the production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances; and/or
d. all work that endangers the health, safety, or morals of Children.

Sixth Part
Facilitation of the Juvenile Justice System

Article 58
(1) Facilitation of the Child justice system includes criminal and civil justice. (2) Facilitation of the criminal justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision of companions or Child volunteers at the time of examination by investigators;
b. provision of legal and psychological assistance services;
c. involving members/investigators of the local police in efforts to prevent criminal acts committed by Children as well as Children as victims;
d. realizing restorative justice processes for Children in conflict with the law; and
e. rehabilitation and social reintegration services;
(3) Fulfillment of Children's rights in the civil justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the provision and delivery of consultation and legal assistance services during the judicial process.
(4) In facilitating the Child justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), the authorized SKPD is the SKPD in charge of Women and Child Protection

Seventh Part
Children's Forum

Article 59
(1) In organizing the fulfillment of Children's rights to express opinions and participate, the Regional Government facilitates the establishment of a Children's Forum.
(2) The Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a representation of Children in the Region, both representation of Children's geographical domicile, components of Children's socio-cultural groups and Children's educational background.
(3) In every formulation of policies related to Children, the Regional Government is obligated to consider and accommodate the opinions of Children conveyed through the Children's participation Forum.
(4) Further provisions regarding the establishment of the Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (3) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

Eighth Part
Child-Friendly Regency

Article 60
(1) In order to fulfill the rights of Children in an integrated, systematic and sustainable manner, the Regional Government establishes a policy for the Development of KLA.
(2) The KLA Development policy contains:
a. the KLA concept concerning objectives, strategies and roles of related parties;
b. the rights of Children; and
c. the KLA development approach.

Article 61
(1) The policy for the development of KLA is directed towards the fulfillment of Children's rights which are divided into 5 (five) groups, comprising:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, utilization of leisure time, and cultural activities; and e. Special protection.
(2) Further provisions regarding the policy for the development of KLA as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 62
(1) In order to ensure the effectiveness of the implementation of KLA policy in the Region, a KLA Task Force shall be established.
(2) The establishment and membership composition of the KLA Task Force shall be determined by Regent's Decree.
(3) The KLA Task Force shall be domiciled at the Office of Women's Empowerment and Family Planning.
(4) The KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), shall have the following principal duties:
a. coordinating the implementation of policies and development of KLA;
b. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication of information and education on KLA policy;
c. collecting baseline data for KLA development;
d. conducting needs analysis sourced from baseline data;
e. conducting dissemination of baseline data;
f. determining the focus and priority of programs in realizing KLA, which shall be adjusted to regional potential;
g. preparing a 5 (five) year regional action plan for Child Friendly City and work mechanisms; and
h. conducting monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once every 1 (one) year.

Article 63
In carrying out its duties, the KLA Task Force may coordinate and cooperate with PPT institutions and other institutions that provide Child Protection services.

CHAPTER VII
CHILD PROTECTION
Article 64
Regional Government, in the context of providing protection to Children: a. implements and supports national policy in the implementation of Child Protection in the Region;
b. guarantees Children to exercise their rights in expressing opinions in accordance with the age and intelligence level of the Child;
c. conducts prevention of Violence against Children by optimizing the role of customary institutions;
d. conducts socialization, seminars and counseling regarding Protection and rights of Children;
e. develops child-friendly school models;
f. provides public facilities that are friendly and safe for Children
g. encourages community awareness of the importance of Protection for Children;

Article 65
Service efforts carried out by Regional Governments for child victims of acts of Violence as referred to in Article 42 through Article 64 apply mutatis mutandis to service efforts for Child victims of acts of Violence.

CHAPTER VIII
PARTICIPATION OF THE COMMUNITY, AND PARENTS AND/OR FAMILY
Part One
Community

Article 66
(1) Community participation in efforts to Protect women and Children:
a. participate in prevention and provide support for the development of programs to prevent violations of the rights of women and Children;
b. provide information and/or report violations of the rights of women and Children to the competent authorities; and
c. monitor the law enforcement process regarding cases of violations of the rights of women and Children.
(2) Ninik mamak, alim ulama and cadiak pandai as well as bundo kanduang are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and Children.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is based on laws and regulations and the values of local wisdom of the local community.

Article 67
(1) In the context of preventing violations of women's rights, the community:
a. monitors various conditions occurring in their environment that may lead to violations of women's rights;
b. increases awareness of violations of women's rights;
c. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment;
d. conducts supervision of the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection organized by the Regional Government through the mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or the Regional House of Representatives;
(2) In the context of preventing violations of children's rights, the community:
a. monitors various conditions occurring in their environment that lead to violations of children's rights;
b. increases awareness of violations of children's rights;
c. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment; and prevents the occurrence of marriage at an early age.

Second Part
Parents and/or Family

Article 68
The family in efforts to Protect the rights of women has the role to:
a. protect women from conflict and Violence in the household that degrades the dignity of women;
b. provide equal opportunities to women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural; and
c. prevent the occurrence of violations against the rights of women in the household.

Article 69
(1) Parents in the effort of Protection of the rights of Children have the role of:
a. caring for, maintaining, educating, and protecting Children;
b. developing Children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. providing formal and non-formal education;
d. providing character education and instilling moral values in Children;
e. guiding Children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics and morals as well as customs; and
f. preventing the occurrence of marriage at an early age.
(2) In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family.

CHAPTER IX
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPERVISION
Article 70
(1) Regional Government is obligated to conduct development and supervision of the implementation of Protection for women and Child victims of Violence.
(2) Development as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Development as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of Protection for women and Child victims of Violence in accordance with minimum service standards.

Article 71
(1) Supervision of the implementation of Child Protection as regulated in this Regional Regulation is carried out by the Regional Government Supervisory Agency of Padang Pariaman Regency and P2TP2A;
(2) In carrying out supervision, P2TP2A has the authority to recommend cases to law enforcement officials, government agencies and other community institutions as regulated in the Law (3) Recommendations submitted by P2TP2A must be followed up by law enforcement officials, government agencies, community institutions and other related individuals.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 72
Financing for the implementation of programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection is sourced from:
a. regional revenue and expenditure budget; and
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 73
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 74
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation, so that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Padang Pariaman Regency.
Enacted in Parit Malintang on 30 March 2017

REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN,
ALI MUKHNI
Promulgated in Parit Malintang on the 31st of March 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY
PADANG PARIAMAN REGENCY,
JONPRIADI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PADANG PARIAMAN REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 6