1 2015

REGIONAL GAZETTE
BANTUL REGENCY
No.15,2015 Family Welfare Agency, Women's Empowerment and Family Planning of Bantul Regency.
Amendment, Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency, Protection, children and women, victims of violence.

REGENT OF BANTUL
SPECIAL REGION OF YOGYAKARTA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2015
CONCERNING
AMENDMENT TO REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY NUMBER 15 OF 2013 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF BANTUL,
Considering : a. that based on clarification from the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta, several provisions in Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence need to be improved through amendment of the Regional Regulation;
b. that based on the consideration as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence;
2 2015 In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 15 of 1950 concerning Formation of Regency Regions Within the Special Region of Jogjakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 44);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606).
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
7. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
8. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
3 2015
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Government Regulation Number 32 of 1950 concerning Determination of the Effective Date of Laws of 1950 Number 12, 13, 14 and 15 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 59);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
4 2015
18. Regional Regulation of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Number 3 of 2012 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Year 2012 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of the Special Region Province of Yogyakarta Number 3);
19. Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of Bantul Regency Year 2013 Number 15, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bantul Regency Number 28);
With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANTUL REGENCY, and

REGENT OF BANTUL,
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING AMENDMENT TO REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY NUMBER 15 OF 2013 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

Article I
Several provisions in Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of Bantul Regency Year 2013 Number 15, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Bantul Regency Number 28), are amended as follows:
1. The provisions of Article 1 are amended, to read as follows: Article 1
1. Government is the Central Government.
2. Region is Bantul Regency.
3. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
5 2015
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bantul Regency as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Regent is the Regent of Bantul.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the regional apparatus work unit of Bantul Regency.
7. Woman is a person who is female by sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
9. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, and psychological, threat of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life against the victim.
10. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
11. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, economically, and other violence.
12. Physical Violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causes death.
13. Psychological Violence is any act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
14. Sexual Violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
15. Economic Violence is any act that neglects family members in the form of not providing proper living care or maintenance.
16. Exploitation of Children is any act involving children in activities that may harm their welfare and development or endanger the safety of children with the aim of enabling others to obtain economic, sexual, social, or political benefits, including if there is restriction or elimination of opportunities for children to obtain their rights.
6 2015
17. Sexual harassment is any action with sexual nuances conveyed through physical or non-physical contact that targets sexual body parts or a person's sexuality, including by using whistles, winking, comments or statements with sexual nuances, displaying pornographic materials and sexual desires, pinching or touching body parts, movements or gestures of a sexual nature resulting in feelings of discomfort, offense, feeling degraded in dignity, and possibly causing health and safety problems.
18. Victim is a Child and Woman who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence occurring in the area of Bantul Regency.
19. Prevention is direct efforts made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
20. Protection is all service actions to guarantee and protect the rights of victims of violence organized by the Integrated Service Center.
21. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security for women carried out by family members, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
22. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
23. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
24. Women's Empowerment is any effort to improve physical, mental, spiritual, social abilities, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
25. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of violence victims.
26. Spiritual guidance is accompaniment in the form of services for spiritual strengthening so that sick people can rise to be closer to God so that feelings of calm, security arise, and mental health is achieved.
27. Judicial body is a general court that has the authority to receive, examine, and adjudicate, as well as resolve every case submitted to it, to realize law enforcement and justice.
7 2015
28. Prosecution is the action of a public prosecutor to transfer a case to the competent district court in the manner and according to the procedures regulated by law with a request that it be examined and decided by a judge in a court session.
29. Lawsuit is notification accompanied by a request by an interested party to a judge to take action according to law against someone who has harmed them in a civil manner.
30. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance to victims of violence.
31. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
32. Regional Action Plan is the foundation and guideline for relevant agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in carrying out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of children and women victims of violence.
33. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers from perpetrators in accordance with predetermined standards.
34. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
35. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, rehabilitation, health, social rehabilitation, legal services up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
36. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
37. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, breastfeeding, foster care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
38. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
39. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Bantul Regency
40. Gender responsive budget is a budget that provides and accommodates justice and equality for women and men to access and obtain access, as well as benefits from development programs and participate in decision-making processes and have control over resources.
8 2015
41. Violence Victim Protection Forum hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against Children and Women whose implementation is carried out in a networked manner.
2. The provisions of Article 2 are amended, to read as follows: Article 2 The principles of organizing protection of children and women from acts of violence are:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights; b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment.
3. The provisions of Article 3 are amended, to read as follows: Article 3 (1) Forms of violence, include:
a. physical;
b. psychological;
c. sexual;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.
(2) The objectives of protection of Children and Women from acts of violence are:
a. to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against children and women occurring in the family and community environment;
b. to seek recovery and social reintegration of children and women victims of violence;
c. to provide services to children and women victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
d. to empower women victims of violence; and
e. to increase community participation.
(3) The organization of protection of children and women from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), includes aspects of: a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. social reintegration; and
d. empowerment.
9 2015
4. The provisions of Article 6 are amended, to read as follows: Article 6 The organization of protection of children and women victims of violence is the obligation of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Village Government;
c. community;
d. family; and
e. parents.
5. The provisions of letter d and letter e paragraph (1) of Article 7 are amended, to read as follows:

Article 7
(1) To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 6 letter a, the Regional Government carries out victim protection efforts, in the form of:
a. formulating policies regarding the protection of Children and Women from all forms of violence and discrimination;
b. preparing program and activity planning;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure;
d. allocating special gender-responsive budgets that support the protection of children and women victims of violence;
e. establishing and facilitating PPT;
f. establishing and facilitating FPKK; and
g. conducting monitoring and evaluation.
(2) In the implementation of the Regional Government's obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government prepares a Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD in implementing protection for victims.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.
6. The title of Part One CHAPTER IV is deleted.
10 2015
7. The provisions of Article 13 are amended, to read as follows: Article 13 (1) In order to provide services and protection to victims of violence, the Regional Government establishes PPT.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duties, principal tasks, and functions of providing protection to Children and Women from acts of violence, which consist of fields.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is tasked with providing services and protection to children and women victims of violence.
(4) In the event that PPT does not have facilities to provide services and protection as referred to in paragraph (3), then children and women victims of violence are referred through a network system within the FPKK forum.
(5) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be stipulated by Regent Regulation.
8. The provisions of Article 24 are amended, to read as follows: Article 24 Further provisions regarding the development, mechanisms and networked working relationships of PPT as referred to in Article 13 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
9. The provisions of Article 26 are amended, to read as follows: Article 26 Prevention efforts are also carried out by:
a. the community;
b. the family; and
c. educational institutions.
11 2015
10. The provisions of paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (5) of Article 40 are amended, to read as follows:

Article 40
(1) In an effort to provide and organize handling of services and protection for victims, the Regional Government and Village Government establish FPKK.
(2) FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to: a. carry out efforts to prevent the occurrence of cases of violence; b. coordinate and synchronize the handling of PPT services;
c. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and d. collect, compile and present reports on cases of violence.
(3) The management and membership of the Regency FPKK shall be determined by Regent's Decree and the Village FPKK shall be determined by Village Head's Decree.
(4) The membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be grouped into the following roles:
a. health role;
b. psychology role;
c. legal role;
d. social role; and
e. economic role.
(5) Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties, and functions as well as membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.
11. The provisions of Article 44 are amended to become Article 43, so as to read as follows:

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 43
(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision on the implementation of Minimum Service Standards for PPT.
12 2015 (2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a covers aspects related to planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b covers aspects related to planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted by SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted periodically.
12. The provisions of Article 43 are amended to become Article 44, so as to read as follows:

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING
Article 44
(1) PPT and FPKK shall prepare reports on the protection of Children and Women victims of acts of violence to the Regent.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
13 2015
13. Added explanation of Article 16 letter c, so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
14. Explanation of Article 25 is amended, so as to read as stated in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
15. Explanation of Article 27 is amended, so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
16. Explanation of Article 28 is amended, so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
17. Explanation of Article 30 is amended, so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
18. Added explanation of Article 31 letter b, so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
19. Added explanation of Article 43 paragraph (6) so as to read as set forth in the explanation of this Regional Regulation.
14 2015

Article II
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Bantul Regency.
Enacted in Bantul on the date of 30 December 2015

ACTING REGENT OF BANTUL,
signed.

SIGIT SAPTO RAHARJO
Promulgated in Bantul on the date of 30 December 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BANTUL REGENCY,
sgd.

# RIYANTONO
LOCAL GAZETTE OF BANTUL REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 15
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY,
SPECIAL REGION OF YOGYAKARTA : (16 /2015)
1 2015

SUPPLEMENT
REGIONAL GAZETTE
BANTUL REGENCY
No.56,2015 Agency for Family Welfare, Women's Empowerment and Family Planning of Bantul Regency.
Amendment, Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency, Protection, children and women, victims of violence.

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY
NUMBER 15 OF 2015
CONCERNING
AMENDMENT TO REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANTUL REGENCY NUMBER 15 OF 2013 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AND WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
As a manifestation of the Regional Government's responsibility in taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against children and women, Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence has been established.
Up to the present time, the said Regional Regulation has been implemented in the administration of government in the Region. However, in accordance with the supervisory mechanism for regional legal products, the Regional Government of the Special Region of Yogyakarta has provided clarification on Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence. From the results of the said clarification, there are several substantive changes that must be followed up with an Amendment to the Regional Regulation.
2 2015 Based on the aforementioned considerations, Regional Regulation of Bantul Regency Number 15 of 2013 concerning Protection of Children and Women Victims of Violence needs to be amended in its Articles and explanations.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article I
Number 1

Article 1
Sufficiently clear Number 2

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of victims' rights" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and ensure the fulfillment of victims' rights.
Letter b What is meant by "gender justice and equality" is a process to be fair to men and women and equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, National defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is that all actions of recovery, rehabilitation, reunification concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.
3 2015 Letter e What is meant by "empowerment" is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work and do business independently after they have been recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
Number 3

Article 3
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a What is meant by the "prevention" aspect is a protection strategy effort through:
a. Primary prevention, all people, families, communities and the state in efforts to increase the ability of knowledge, understanding and ensure that violence against women and children does not occur, including policy socialization, adequate services, supportive workplace policies, and life skills training for women and children. What is meant by life skills training includes conflict resolution without violence, stress management skills, resource management, effective decision making, effective interpersonal communication, guidance on psychosocial development of women and children.
4 2015
b. Secondary prevention, aimed at community groups with high risk in efforts to increase skills, including training and victim services to ensure that violence against women and children does not occur in the next generation.
Activities carried out here include conducting home visits for parents who have just had children to conduct self assessment whether they are at risk of committing violence against children in the future.
c. Tertiary prevention, intended to increase parenting abilities that ensure that violence against women and children does not recur, what is done here is integrated services for women and children who are victims of violence, through counseling, stress management training.
Letter b What is meant by the "service and assistance" aspect is immediate activities and actions carried out by professionals and assistants in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by the "empowerment" aspect is the process of increasing the role of the community to participate in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence which aims to obtain access and participation in the process of protection for women and children broadly.
5 2015 Number 4

Article 6
Sufficiently clear Number 5

Article 7
Sufficiently clear Number 6 Sufficiently clear Number 7

Article 13
Sufficiently clear Number 8

Article 24
Sufficiently clear Number 9

Article 26
Letter a Prevention efforts in the community include: fostering environmental awareness of acts of violence occurring in their environment.
Letter b Prevention efforts in the family and/or closest relatives can be carried out by strengthening resilience within the household such as: practicing religious values, managing household time, and communication among family members Letter c Educational institutions can participate in efforts to provide punishments that are educational in nature, endeavoring to eliminate provisions that do not side with victims of violence.
Number 10

Article 40
Sufficiently clear Number 11

Article 43
Sufficiently clear Number 12

Article 44
Sufficiently clear 6 2015 Number 13

Article 16
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Visum et Repertum is a Statement provided by a Doctor regarding matters required to clarify a case for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Visum et Psikiatrikum is a statement provided by a Psychiatric Doctor regarding the mental health condition of a person required to clarify a case for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f Sufficiently clear Number 14

Article 25
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by "network" includes family partners, dasawisma, family groups that exist in the community.
What is meant by "coordination" includes planning, implementation and monitoring of violence prevention programs.
Point b What is meant by "violence prevention system" includes mapping of locations or areas prone to violence and conducting promotive and preventive efforts to the community.
7 2015 Point c What is meant by "Critical education about the rights of children and women" is an effort to build awareness of children and women about their rights.
The purpose of implementing critical education is to be able to help decision-making and not become victims of repeated violence.
Forms of critical education for the community consist of: trainings on gender equality and justice, education on reproductive health for women, and provision of understanding of laws and regulations on the Elimination of Domestic Violence and Child Protection.
Point d Socialization can be conducted through mass media, electronic media, and direct counseling to the community.
Number 15

Article 27
Sufficiently clear Number 16

Article 28
Letter a What is meant by "no fees charged" is that the activities of service provision and assistance carried out by PPT are not charged to victims who come from underprivileged families.
Letter b What is meant by "fast" is immediate action taken without complications or simplified procedures.
Letter c What is meant by "safe and comfortable" is a guarantee of service protection that feels comfortable, undisturbed, and served in a friendly manner, with respect and appreciation.
Letter d What is meant by "empathy" is actions of appreciating, respecting, caring, being friendly, and making happy that aim to please and calm the victim's heart.
8 2015 Letter e What is meant by "non-discrimination" means not making distinctions for any reason or in any way, whether concerning religion and beliefs, ethnicity, race, gender, skin color, language, and politics.
Letter f Sufficiently clear Letter g What is meant by "easily accessible" is the provision of services and assistance for all people regardless of their social status, so that such services are affordable for the underprivileged or relatively adequate for the privileged.
Letter h What is meant by "guarantee of confidentiality" is an effort to guarantee certainty for victims that their identity, medical treatment and legal handling will not be disseminated.
Number 17

Article 30
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Number 18

Article 31
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b Medicolegal is a medical examination or analysis for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f Sufficiently clear Letter g Sufficiently clear 9 2015 Number 19

Article 43
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Periodically includes monthly, semester, and/or annual monitoring and evaluation.

Article II
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANTUL REGENCY NUMBER 56
Copy in accordance with the original
on behalf of the Regional Secretary of Bantul Regency
for Assistant of Government Head of Legal Division GUNAWAN BUDI SANTOSO.S.Sos,M.H

NIP. 19691231 199603