REGIONAL GAZETTE
GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY
( Official News of the Gunungkidul Regency Government ) Number : 16 Year : 2012 Series : E

REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY NUMBER 25 OF 2012
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF GUNUNGKIDUL,
Considering : a. that all forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
b. that in addition to protection efforts, prevention, services, and empowerment are needed for women and children victims of violence;
c. that there is a need for regulation of efforts as mentioned in letter b in the region;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 15 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas within the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 44);
3. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4844);
4. Government Regulation Number 32 of 1950 concerning the Determination of the Effective Date of Law Year 1950 Numbers 12, 13, 14 and 15 regarding the Establishment of Regency areas within Central Java Province, West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 59);
5. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604;
6. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
7. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 05 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
8. Special Regional Regulation of Yogyakarta Number 3 of 2012 concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of the Special Region of Yogyakarta Province Year 2012 Number 3);
9. Regional Regulation of Gunungkidul Regency Number 2 of 2008 concerning Regional Government Affairs (Regional Gazette of Gunungkidul Regency Year 2008 Number 01 Series E) as has been amended by Regional Regulation of Gunungkidul Regency Number 8 of 2010 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Gunungkidul Regency Number 2 of 2008 concerning Regional Government Affairs (Regional Gazette of Gunungkidul Regency Year 2010 Number 07 Series

E);
With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY
REGENT OF GUNUNGKIDUL,
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part One
Definitions

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. Region is Gunungkidul Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and regional apparatus as elements of regional government administration. 3. Regent is the Regent of Gunungkidul.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution as an element of regional government administration.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
6. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
7. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, and psychological to the victim.
8. Violence against Women is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain acts, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
9. Violence against Children is any act that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
10. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence that occurs in the Special Region of Yogyakarta.
11. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
12. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
13. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against women and children will, is or has occurred.
14. Behavior Change Counseling is psychological counseling provided to male perpetrators of domestic violence to help stop violence and become a person who can respect their partner, so that they can establish a better relationship with their partner and children.
15. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a functional work unit that organizes integrated services for victims of violence.
16. Networked Integrated Service Center for Women and Child Empowerment hereinafter referred to as Networked P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Center in Gunungkidul Regency that organizes networked integrated services for women and children victims of violence, which is established by Decree of the Regent of Gunungkidul.
17. Forum for Handling Victims of Violence against Women and Children abbreviated as FPK2PA is a coordination forum for handling victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is networked and established at the regency and sub-district levels.
18. Safe House is a shelter for victims, during the assistance process, for the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators.
19. Standard Operating Procedure hereinafter abbreviated as SOP is standard steps that must be taken in protecting victims starting from complaints/identification, health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, legal services, up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or victims.
20. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
21. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relationships due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, and representation, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
22. Gender Mainstreaming in the Region is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the region.
23. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles, functions, and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural circumstances of society.
24. Gender Equality is equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural activities, national defense and security, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
25. Gender Justice is a process to be fair to men and women.
26. Disaggregated data is data disaggregated by sex and status and conditions of women and men in all fields of development including health, education, economy and employment, politics and decision-making, law and socio-culture and violence.
27. Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting is a series of approaches to integrate gender perspectives in the planning and budgeting process, gender responsive planning is planning to achieve gender equality and justice, which is carried out through integrating experiences, aspirations, needs, potentials, and problem solving of women and men.
28. Women and Child Supervision and Service Institution in Villages or Sub-Districts or by Other Names is an institution established by village communities that functions to serve victims of violence with members consisting of local community leaders.

Part Two
Principles, Objectives, and Scope

Article 2
The principles of Victim protection are:
a. respect for and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment.

Article 3
The purpose of protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide a reference for protection and services for the best interests of women and children victims of violence in the domestic sphere and/or public sphere.

Article 4
The scope of protection for Victims includes prevention efforts, services for victims of violence, rehabilitation, and empowerment of victims of violence in the Region.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 6
Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or causing death.

Article 7
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 8
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.

Article 9
Neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 10
Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter (e) is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse

Article 11
Other violence as referred to in Article 5 letter f is caused by:
a. threat of violence includes any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER III
INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER
Article 12
(1) PPT is established by the Regional Government, Vertical Agencies in the Region, or community institutions.
(2) The Regional Government establishes the Networked P2TP2A as an integrated service center by Regent's Decree.
(3) The Networked P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (2) is a functional work unit that has the duties and functions of providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(4) In carrying out the duties as referred to in paragraph (3), the Networked P2TP2A may provide services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house.
(5) In the event that the Networked P2TP2A does not have a safe house (shelter) as referred to in paragraph (4), then victims of violence are referred to a PPT that has a safe house.

Article 13
(1) The organizational structure of the Networked P2TP2A as referred to in Article 12 paragraph (2) consists of:
a. General Chairperson;
b. Executive Chairperson who oversees the divisions; c. Secretary; and
d. Treasurer.
(2) The divisions as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, at minimum include:
a. complaints service division;
b. health service division;
c. social rehabilitation service division;
d. repatriation and social reintegration division; and
e. legal aid service division.

Article 14
The General Chairperson as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (1) letter a has the duties of:
a. coordinating the formulation of policies, strategies, programs, and activities as well as necessary measures in the implementation of Networked P2TP2A;
b. conducting supervision and guidance over the implementation of protection and handling of victims of violence;
c. implementing policies established by the Regent; and d. being responsible for the entire process of implementing protection and handling of violence against victims of violence.

Article 15
The chief executive as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (1) letter b has the duties of:
a. coordinating the duties and functions of each service field;
b. controlling the implementation of protection and handling programs for victims of violence;
c. conducting coordination and cooperation with related external parties;
d. collecting and utilizing resources effectively and efficiently for protection and handling activities for victims of violence; and
e. providing periodic reports to the Regent, specifically for victims of the criminal act of human trafficking, copies of reports shall also be provided to the task force for prevention and handling of the criminal act of human trafficking.

Article 16
The Secretary as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (1) letter c has the duties:
a. to assist in the implementation of duties of the General Chairperson;
b. to assist in preparing coordination activities and follow-up on protection, handling of victims of violence;
c. to assist in preparing the work program plan of the central task force;
d. to provide administrative services in the cooperation of the Central Task Force with Ministries/Institutions and Community Organizations that are members of the Central Task Force;
e. to organize service activities for the collection, processing, and presentation of data as well as the preparation of secretariat activity reports; and
f. to foster and implement working cooperation with Ministries/Institutions and related Community Organizations in the implementation of prevention and handling of criminal acts of human trafficking.

Article 17
The Treasurer as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (1) letter d has the duties:
a. to assist the general chairperson in managing the finances of the Networked P2TP2A;
b. to carry out all matters related to financial receipts and expenditures; and
c. to prepare financial reports submitted to the Executive Chairperson and General Chairperson.

Article 18
The complaint service sector as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter a has the following duties:
a. conducting interviews and observation of the victim's condition; b. making recommendations for follow-up services;
c. conducting coordination and referrals to follow-up services and related parties; and
d. carrying out administration of the complaint process.

Article 19
The health service sector as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b has the following duties:
a. to conduct examination, treatment, and follow-up care for victims;
b. to coordinate the implementation of health rehabilitation and medico-legal services;
c. to conduct medico-legal examination including the collection of evidence from victims and the preparation of visum et repertum;
d. to conduct supporting examinations and laboratory testing of evidence;
e. to conduct consultation with specialist doctors or make referrals; and
f. to prepare case reports.

Article 20
The field of social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter c has the following duties:
a. to provide assistance during the case handling process; and
b. to provide counseling to victims and/or perpetrators of violence.

Article 21
The field of repatriation and social reintegration as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter d has the following duties:
a. coordinate with relevant agencies for the repatriation of victims;
b. prepare progress reports on the assistance process for repatriation and social rehabilitation; and
c. conduct monitoring for at least three months after the victim is returned to their family.

Article 22
The field of legal aid services as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter e has the duties:
a. to accompany every legal service process; and b. to prepare reports on the progress of legal handling.

Article 23
The organizational structure of PPT formed by Vertical Agencies in the Regions and community institutions, shall be established in accordance with the respective needs of each agency.

Article 24
(1) Networked P2TP2A shall have at least three counselors.
(2) Counselors as referred to in paragraph (1) include: a. counselors in the field of law;
b. counselors in the field of health; and
c. counselors in the field of psychology.
(2) The implementation of counseling conducted by Networked P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing behavioral change counseling.

Article 25
(1) In addition to establishing a Networked P2TP2A, the Regional Government shall establish a Forum for Handling Victims of Violence against Women and Children (FPK2PA).
(2) FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of regency FPK2PA and sub-district FPK2PA.
(3) The Organizational Structure of FPK2PA consists of:
a. Patron;
b. Advisor;
c. Steering Committee;
d. Chairperson;
e. Vice Chairperson;
f. Secretary;
g. Field Coordinator;
h. Members; and
i. Secretariat Staff.
(4) The establishment of Regency FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.
(5) The establishment of Sub-district FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Sub-district Head's Decree.
(6) The Duties and Functions of FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) are:
a. coordinating and synchronizing the handling of PPT services;
b. maintaining and developing networks and referral systems; and
c. collecting, compiling, and presenting reports on violence.
(7) FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (2) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.
(8) Members of FPK2PA as referred to in paragraph (3) letter h consist of Regional Work Units that have duties and functions in the fields of social affairs, handling of women and children, health, education, youth and sports, religion, population, manpower, and/or industry and trade, as well as Vertical Institutions and community institutions that are grouped in the following fields:
a. health field;
b. psychology field;
c. legal field;
d. social field; and
e. economic field.

CHAPTER IV
PREVENTION EFFORTS AGAINST VIOLENCE TOWARD
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
Prevention Efforts Against Violence toward Women
Article 26
(1) Every person has the obligation to prevent the occurrence of violence toward women.
(2) The Regional Government in efforts to prevent violence toward women implements gender mainstreaming to realize gender equality and justice in the fields of education, economy, health, law, politics, religion, and socio-culture.
(3) Gender mainstreaming as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out based on disaggregated data as eye-opening data in analyzing gender responsive budgeting planning.
(4) Further provisions regarding Gender Mainstreaming and Gender Responsive Budgeting Planning are regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Efforts to Prevent Violence Against Children

Article 27
(1) Regional Government and society conduct prevention of violence against children.
(2) Prevention of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes fulfillment of children's basic rights in accordance with their needs.
(3) Further regulation regarding fulfillment of children's basic rights is regulated in Regent Regulation.

BAB V
EFFORTS OF SERVICES FOR WOMEN
AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
First Section
Service Principles

Article 28
Principles of service delivery to victims:
a. prompt;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 29
In the implementation of integrated services, every victim shall receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity respected as a human being;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of their identity;
f. the right to social rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling;
h. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
i. the right to assistance.

Second Part
Service Efforts for Women Victims of Violence Article 30 (1) The Regional Government provides services to women victims of violence.
(2) Services carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Networked P2TP2A, in accordance with the type of service needed.

Part Three
Service Efforts for Child Victims of Violence Article 31 (1) The Regional Government provides services to child victims of violence.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by the Networked P2TP2A, according to the type of service needed.

CHAPTER VI
EMPOWERMENT EFFORTS FOR
WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
Empowerment Efforts for Women Victims of Violence Article 32 (1) The Regional Government implements empowerment for women victims of violence.
(2) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Networked P2TP2A and may cooperate with all parties.

Second Part
Empowerment Efforts for Child Victims of Violence. Article 33 (1) The Regional Government provides empowerment for child victims of violence.
(2) Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Networked P2TP2A and may cooperate with all parties.

CHAPTER VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Article 34
Implementation of Protection is carried out in an integrated and coordinated manner within the framework of Networked P2TP2A and FPK2PA as referred to in Article 25.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 35
(1) Every person shall participate in providing protection to women and children victims of violence.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. establishing institutions for the protection of women and children at the village level with the duties of conducting prevention, services, and supervision;
b. conducting socialization of the rights of women and children;
c. providing assistance to victims;
d. reporting and referring to the authorized agency/institution at the Sub-district level if violence against victims occurs in their environment; and
e. The authorized Agency/Institution at the Sub-district level, if necessary, may refer to other Agencies/institutions.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 36
Funding for victim protection activities carried out by Regional Governments shall be charged to the APBD, and/or other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION.
Article 37
(1) The Regent conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, through the Regional Work Unit that has duties and functions in the field of women and child empowerment.
(2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 38
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Gunungkidul Regency.
Enacted in Wonosari on 28 December 2012

REGENT OF GUNUNGKIDUL,
BADINGAH
Promulgated in Wonosari on the 28th of December 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY
GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY,
BUDI MARTONO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 16 SERIES E.

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF GUNUNGKIDUL REGENCY NUMBER 25 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.
In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Gunungkidul Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades their degree and human dignity, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of regional regulations.
Thus far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not yet regulated protection efforts at the Regional level, therefore institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee their implementation.
This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in Gunungkidul Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of victims' rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of victims' basic rights.
Letter b What is meant by "justice" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare;
What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of victims" is all best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, therefore the best interests of victims must be the primary consideration.
Letter e What is meant by "empowerment" is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work independently and work on their own after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "community institution" is an institution formed by members of the community who are Citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, which consists of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) What is meant by "safe house" is a temporary shelter intended to provide protection and a sense of security to victims of violence. Temporary protection is provided for a period of up to 14 (fourteen) days and can be extended according to the condition of the victim. PPTs that do not have shelters can network with PPTs that have shelters.
Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
What is meant by "medico-legal" is medical services to provide optimal professional assistance in utilizing medical science for the purposes of law enforcement and justice. Medico-legal services include, among others: visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum.
What is meant by "visum et repertum" is a written statement made by a doctor in forensic medical science at the request of an authorized investigator regarding the results of a medical examination of a victim based on their scientific knowledge and under oath, for the purposes of judicial proceedings.
What is meant by "visum et psikiatrikum" is a statement given by a Psychiatric Specialist Doctor regarding the mental health condition of a victim that is required to clarify a case and for the purposes of judicial proceedings.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (6) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (7) What is meant by "other service units" is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence.
This service unit can be located at Integrated Service Centers (PPT) and Integrated Crisis Centers (PKT) based in Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Women and Children Service Units (UPPA), Trauma Center Shelters (RPTC), Children's Social Shelters (RPSA), BP4, and other religious institutions, prosecutor's offices, courts, Women Crisis Centers (WCC), and other similar institutions. These services can be in the form of one roof (one stop crisis center) or in the form of a network, depending on the needs in each region.
Paragraph (8) Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Letter a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity respected as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or their explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by "the right to social rehabilitation" includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.
Letter g What is meant by "the right to complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i What is meant by "the right to assistance" includes among others: psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious leaders, advocates, and family members.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.
---///---