ONE AND ONLY
REGENT OF POHUWATO
GORONTALO PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF POHUWATO REGENCY NUMBER 6 YEAR 2018
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF POHUWATO,
Considering : a. that in order to restore the dignity and honor of women and children victims of violence and to restore their social function, it is necessary to undertake protection efforts, women's empowerment, and rehabilitation of children victims of violence;
b. that based on Article 12 of Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection constitute mandatory governmental affairs for regional governments;

C.
that based on the considerations as referred to in point a and point b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.
: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 38 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of Gorontalo Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 258, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4060);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
5606) As amended by Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 17 of 2016 Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
4. Law Number 6 of 2003 concerning the Establishment of Bone Bolango Regency and Pohuwato Regency in Gorontalo Province) State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 26, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4269);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, (Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as last amended by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 64);
With mutual agreement,

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF POHUWATO REGENCY
REGENT OF POHUWATO
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGULATION

REGION
REGARDING
PROTECTION
OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regent Regulation, what is meant by:
1.
Region is Pohuwato Regency.
2.
Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3.
Regent is the Regent of Pohuwato.
4.
Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in administering government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Regional Long-Term Development Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RPJPD, is a regional planning document for a period of 20 (twenty) years.
7.
8.
9.
Regional Medium-Term Development Plan, hereinafter abbreviated as RPJMD, is a regional planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and verbal that causes danger to life, body and/or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
11. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
12. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion, whether direct or indirect, based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that results in reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
13. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud and abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in a person being exploited.
14. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.
15. Victim of violence is a woman and child who experiences suffering whether physical, mental or emotional, economic loss, or experiences neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights.
16. Prevention is direct efforts carried out by the Regional Government and/or community to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
17. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to provide services and rehabilitation to women and children who are victims of violence comprehensively including information services, assistance and legal aid, counseling services, medical services and safe houses through referral.
18. Task Force for Prevention and Handling of Criminal Acts of Human Trafficking, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, is a coordinating institution tasked with coordinating prevention and handling efforts of criminal acts of human trafficking in Pohuwato Regency.
19. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
victim
20. Social reintegration is a process of preparing the community and victims that supports reunification into the family environment, school environment, work environment and community environment that can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
21. Victim recovery is services provided in the form of strengthening and developing the capabilities of a person who experiences acts of violence against women and children to be more empowered physically, psychologically, sexually, economically and socially.
22. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of self-strengthening of women and children from acts of violence to resolve the problems faced.
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward to the third degree.
24. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
25. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.

Article 2
The protection of women and children from acts of violence is organized based on the principles of
a. Humanity;
b. Justice and gender equality;
c. Non-discrimination;
d. Order and legal certainty;
e. Transparency;
f. Protection.

Article 3
The purpose of protection of women and children from acts of violence, is to:
a. Prevent acts of violence against women and children including trafficking in persons;
b. Eliminate all forms of acts of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. Protect, provide a sense of security for women and children;
d. Provide services to women and children from acts of violence, reporters, and witnesses; and
e. Empower women and children victims of acts of violence to be more empowered, physically, psychologically, socially, and economically.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Forms of violence include:
a. Physical violence;
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Neglect;
e. Maltreatment;
f. Exploitation; and/or
g. Other violence.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Women and children victims of acts of violence shall receive the following rights:
a. The right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. The right to recovery;
c. The right to determine their own decisions;
d. The right to obtain information;
e. The right to confidentiality;
f. The right to social rehabilitation;
g. The right to complaint handling that is prompt, appropriate, comfortable and in accordance with needs;
h. The right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
i. The right to assistance; and
j. The right to a sense of security.

Article 6
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 5, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. Right to survival, growth and development;
b. Right to basic population services;
c. Right to equal protection;
Right to be free from various stigma; and Right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
Obligations and responsibilities in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Community.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in Article 7 letter a, include:
a. establishing, implementing policies, programs, and conducting cooperation of activities in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
b.

C.
d.
e.
f.
facilitate the establishment of institutional protection for women and children from acts of violence and provide support for facilities and infrastructure;
allocate budget for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity;
foster and supervise the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
provide protection services for women and children victims of acts of violence;
encourage and increase community participation; and
g. appoint parents and/or substitute family caregivers as a protection measure for children who are victims of acts of violence.
(2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women and children in one Regional Action Plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 9
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in (2)

Article 7 letter b, is implemented in the form of community participation.
The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children;
b. providing protection to women and children from acts of violence;
c. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
d. participating in the handling of victims of acts of violence.
(3) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 10
Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence against women and children is obligated to make efforts in accordance with their capabilities to:
a. Prevent and stop the ongoing act of violence;
b. Provide protection to the victim;
c. Provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. Assist in the process of submitting an application for protection determination

CHAPTER VI
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 11
(1) The Regional Government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is established at the Regency and Sub-district levels.
(3) The membership of the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Organization and Work Procedures of the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 12
In addition to establishing the PPT as referred to in Article 11, in order to support the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence, the Regent shall establish:
a. Task force on human trafficking;
b. Regional action committee for the elimination of the worst forms of child labor.

Article 13
(1) The task force as referred to in

Article 12 letter a,
consisting of representatives from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics.
(2) The task force as referred to in paragraph (1), is a coordinative institution tasked with coordinating the prevention and handling of human trafficking.
(3) Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties, and functions of the task force as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14
(1) The Committee as referred to in Article 12 letter b, consists of elements from the Regional Government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, researchers and academics.
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties and functions of the committee as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

BAB VII
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 15
(1) Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), it is implemented by means of:
a. providing materials on the prevention of acts of violence against women and children in both formal and informal education;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services in accordance with applicable provisions;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, educational institutions, and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. opening an integrated service system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence in every kelurahan.

Article 16
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 15, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. population and civil registration;
f. law;
g. women's empowerment and child protection;
h. cooperatives and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;
i. mental and spiritual; and
j. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Second Part Legal Protection
Legal protection includes:

Article 17
a. Providing protection in a safe house (shelter);
b. Providing legal information to victims;
c. Providing assistance for victims as witnesses from the investigation process until the verdict;
d. Providing special legal protection for child victims of acts of violence can be carried out through the appointment of guardianship in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Third Part
Recovery

Article 18
Recovery includes:
a. Providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. Providing medicolegal services;
c. Assisting the repatriation of victims;
d. Providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters);
e. Providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. Providing spiritual guidance services;
g. Preparing the family, school, work and community environment, as well as economic empowerment.

Part Four
Coordination

Article 19
Coordination includes:
a. Conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated service institutions;
b. Conducting coordination and cooperation in handling violence cases with integrated services across regions

Part Five
Community Participation

Article 20
Community Participation is carried out by means of:
a. Fostering community awareness of cases of violence against women and children;
b. Encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting acts of violence against women and children;
c. Fostering local wisdom in handling cases of violence;
d. Organizing strengthening of community groups in handling acts of violence against women and children;
e. Disseminating information about laws and regulations related to acts of violence against women and children.

CHAPTER VIII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 21
(1) The Regional Government develops cooperation patterns in order to achieve the objectives of protecting women and children from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted between the Regional Government and:
a. Central Government;
b. Provincial Government;
c. Other Regency/City Government;
d. Higher Education Institutions;
e. Social and religious institutions;
f. Non-Governmental Organizations; and/or
g. Media.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations

Second Part
Partnership

Article 22
(1) Regional Government may organize partnerships with the business sector in the protection of women and children from acts of violence; (2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are conducted through:
a. notification of employment opportunity information for women victims of acts of violence;
b. education and training for women victims of acts of violence;
c. educational assistance for women and children victims of acts of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence of women victims of acts of violence.
(3) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), are implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER IX
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 23
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and standards of fulfillment;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. coordination;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.

Article 24
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or to the DPRD.

Article 25
Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 23 and Article 24 shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 26
Financing for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence may be sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget
b. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Non-binding community contributions;
d. Non-binding foreign aid; and/or
e. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 27
(1) Regional Governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations or non-governmental organizations that implement protection of women and children from discrimination and acts of violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity, and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 28
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pohuwato Regency.
Promulgated in Marisa Enacted in Marisa on the date, 19 JULY 2018

✔REGENT OF POHUWATO,
SYARIF MBUINGA
on the date, 19 JULY

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF POHUWATO REGENCY,
DJONI NENTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF POHUWATO REGENCY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 205
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF REGENCY
GORONTALO NUMBER...6./23/2018
POHUWATO
PROVINCE