REGENT OF BUNGO
JAMBI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN IN BUNGO REGENCY
+

LEGAL SECTION
REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF BUNGO REGENCY
YEAR 2022
Considering:

REGENT OF BUNGO
JAMBI PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF BUNGO,

Considering:
a. that every citizen including women has equal rights to obtain security and freedom from the state to conduct activities in various aspects of life as guaranteed in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that there are still many occurrences of gender-based violence against women and violence that treats women disproportionately in various aspects of life so that there needs to be concrete guarantees for women's rights from the government as state administrator through regional government supported by various parties;
c. that.....2 Noting: 2-
c. that the Bungo Regency Government as regional government administrator does not yet have regional legal products to guarantee women's rights in various aspects of life in Bungo Regency so that there needs to be regulations regarding the protection of women as a legal basis;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women;

Noting:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 12 Year 1956 concerning the Formation of Autonomous Regency Regions Within the Central Sumatra Provincial Region (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 25) as amended by Law Number 7 Year 1965 concerning the Formation of Level II Region Sarolangun Bangko and Level II Region Tanjung Jabung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1965 Number 50, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2755);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3277);
4.Law.....3 -3-
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
7. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia.
Number 4720);
8. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Number Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82 Supplement....
Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 13 Year 2022 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 143, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6801);
9. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 5601);
11. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
13. Regulation.....5 5-
13. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036) as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 157);
14. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection. Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Service Standards for Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number
85);
15. Regional Regulation Number 5 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency Year 2016 Number 5), as amended by Regional Regulation Number 12 Year 2019 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation Number 5 Year 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency Year 2019 Number 12);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BUNGO REGENCY
REGENT OF BUNGO
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGULATION

REGION
REGARDING
PROTECTION
OF WOMEN.
CHAPTER I.....6
-6-

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Bungo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regional Government is the Government of Bungo Regency. 4. Regent hereinafter referred to as Regent is the Regent of Bungo.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of governmental affairs that are the authority of the region.
6. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPAA is a regional technical implementation unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for women who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
7. Protection is a series of fulfillment of the rights of women victims of violence and discrimination starting from prevention efforts, handling and empowerment.
8. Discrimination.....7 -7-
8. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion, whether direct or indirect, based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that result in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and fundamental freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
9. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
10. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic exploitation, social, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
11. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, Forgery.....8 8- forgery, fraud and abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether conducted within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
12. Prevention is an effort made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women.
13. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of the woman.
14. Community is individuals, families, communities, religious leaders, community leaders, traditional leaders, business world and corporations, community organizations, social organizations, women and gender study centers, mass media or other similar entities.
15. Private Sector is Non-Governmental Institutions, Business World and Mass Media.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
(1) The Regional Government organizes the Protection of Women from violence.
(2) Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is organized based on the principles of:
a. humanity.....9
a.
humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. protection;
e. respect for human rights; and
f. best interests of women.

Article 3
The Objectives of Protection of Women by Regional Government include:
a. Preventing all forms of violence against women
b. Providing protection and services to women victims of gender-based violence; and c. Providing services for the recovery of physical, psychological and economic conditions of women victims of violence.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General

Article 4
Every Woman has the right:
a. Right to life;
b. Right to form a family and have descendants;

C.
The right to self-development;
d. The right to obtain justice;
The right to personal freedom, and I The right to security.
Section.....10.
-10-

Second Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 5
Every female victim of violence has: The right to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. The right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. The right to determine her own decisions;
d. The right to obtain information;
e. The right to confidentiality;
f. The right to social rehabilitation;
g. The right to complaint handling;
h. The right of the victim and her family to obtain
i. facilities in the judicial process; and The right to assistance.

CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Article 6
Violence as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1) in the form of:
a. Physical violence,
b. Psychological violence;
c. Sexual violence;
d. Exploitation; and/or
e. Neglect.

Article 7......11
-11-

Article 7
(1) Physical violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a constitutes an act that results in pain accompanied by injury, wounds or disability to the body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes the death of a woman.
(2) Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b constitutes an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feeling of helplessness and/or psychological suffering in a woman.
(3) Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c includes:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced unnatural sexual intercourse, and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
(4) Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter d includes:
a. acts of economic or sexual exploitation with the intention of benefiting oneself or others; and/or
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting.....12 -12- transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or abilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
General

Article 8
The obligation and responsibility for the protection of women in the Region is provided by: a. Regional Government; and
b. Community.

Second Part
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 9
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government in providing Protection for Women as referred to in Article 8 letter a include: establishing policies for the protection of women;
b. implementing policies, protection, of women from acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. conducting protection cooperation in women;
d. providing ΠΑΓΩΤΑ infrastructure support for the protection of women;
e. allocating....13 -13-
e. allocating budget for protection empowerment implementation of women financial capacity of the Region; and
f. fostering and supervising the protection of women.
in accordance implementation (2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regent shall establish programs and action activities for the protection of women in the Regional action plan as a basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing the protection of women.
(3) The Regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be included in the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional action plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 10
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 9 letter b shall be carried out in the form of community participation.
(2) The forms of participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women;
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women to law enforcement or authorized parties; and/or
c. participating.....14 14-
c. participating in the handling of victims of violence. (3) The forms of participation as referred to in the paragraph shall be carried out responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 11
(1) Protection of Women provided by the Regional Government includes:
a. prevention;
b. services;
c. empowerment; and
d. coordination of Protection of Women.
(2) Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government through Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs which are the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment.
(3) Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs which are the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment in providing Protection of Women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall establish UPTD PPA.
(4) Further provisions regarding UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Section.....15 -15-

Part Two
Prevention

Article 12
(1) Prevention as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter a shall be carried out by means of:
a. establishing a cooperation network in efforts to prevent acts of violence with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, the private sector, the community and families;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of prevention of acts of violence based on partnership patterns that can involve the private sector, the community and families;
c. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women's rights from acts of violence;
d. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal;
e. opening accessibility to obtain increased education, training, funding, income and social services;
f. providing critical education about women's rights for the community;
g. opening employment opportunities for women;
h. building community participation and concern towards the prevention of protection of women from acts of violence;
i. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system; and
j. opening complaint posts for the protection of women from acts of violence in every sub-district.
(2) Prevention.....16 -16- (2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by coordinating with relevant Regional Apparatus and/or authorized agencies.

Third Part
Services

Article 13
(1) Services as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter b shall be conducted quickly, safely, comfortably, with empathy, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, free of charge, and guaranteed confidentiality.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. complaints, consultation, and counseling;
b. assistance;
c. health;
d. social rehabilitation;
e. legal and/or legal aid; and/or repatriation and social reintegration.
Complaints, consultation,

Article 14
Counseling as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. Identification or initial recording of victims; and
b. Consent to carry out actions.

Article 15
(1) Assistance as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b includes:
a. assisting victims during the examination process and health recovery;
b. assisting victims during the medicolegal process;
c. assisting.....17 - 17 -
c. assisting victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants;
g. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes activities and actions carried out by assistants originating from individuals or representatives from institutions that have expertise in assisting victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the purpose of strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.

Pasal 16
Health as referred to in Pasal 13 ayat (2) huruf c includes:
a. First aid to victims;
b. Treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel; and
c. Referral to health service facilities.

Article 17
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 13.
paragraph (2) letter d includes:
a. provision.....18 - 18 -
a. provision of spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and to provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems.

Article 18
Legal assistance as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by means of:
a. Providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. Accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court proceedings and assisting victims to comprehensively present the violence they have experienced; and
c. Coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer companions, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.
(1) Repatriation

Article 19
and social reintegration as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter f aims to return victims to their families and social environment.
(2) Repatriation.....19.
(2) Repatriation -19- and social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. Regency/City Government within one provincial territory or different provinces; and
b. related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Fourth Part
Empowerment

Article 20
Protection of Women through empowerment as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. Job training;
b. Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups;
c. Capital assistance.

Article 21
Job training as referred to in Article 20 letter a includes:
a. Skills training;
b. Field work practice; and
c. Apprenticeship.

Article 22
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 20 letter b include:
a. Entrepreneurial skills training;
b. Facilitation of joint business group formation; and
c. Assistance in business implementation.

I'm ready to help translate the text, but I don't see any text provided in your message besides the formatting instructions and "Pasal 23.....20 - 20-". 

Could you please provide the text you'd like me to translate?

Article 23
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 20 letter e includes:
a. Assistance for work facilities and infrastructure; and
b. Facilitation of working capital assistance.

Fifth Part
Coordination of Women's Protection

Article 24
(1) UPTD PPA as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (3) shall optimize the Protection of Women in the Region. (2) The optimization as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordinating the Protection of Women;
b. synchronizing, maintaining and developing networks and referral systems; and
c. collecting, compiling and presenting reports on violence.
(3) The optimization of Protection of Women by UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the code of ethics of UPTD PPA.
(4) Further provisions regarding the code of ethics as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent regulation.

CHAPTER VII.....21
-21

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government supports and facilitates UPTD PPA to conduct cooperation on Women's Protection.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted with:
a. the central government;
b. other district/city governments; and/or
c. the Community.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Second Part
Partnership

Article 26
(1) Regional Government based on cooperation as referred to in Article 25 establishes partnerships in providing Protection for Women.
(2) Partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out through:
a. provision of employment opportunity information for women victims of violence,
b. education and training for women victims of violence;
c. assistance.....22 -22-
c. educational assistance for women victims of violence; and
d. fostering and increasing economic independence for women victims of violence.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Part One
General (1) Regent

Article 27
conducting guidance and supervision of the implementation of Women's Protection in the Region.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted through: information and reporting system; and
b. guidance and supervision team.

Second Part
Information and Reporting System

Article 28
(1) The Regional Government through UPTD PPA in carrying out Women's Protection utilizes an information and reporting system.
(2) The information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall contain at least:
a. data on Women's Protection partners;
b. reporting of acts of violence against Women;
c. the process of implementing Women's Protection; and
d. Women's Protection activities.
(3) Utilization.....23 23- (3) Utilization of the information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Third Part
Guidance and Supervision Team

Article 29
(1) The guidance and supervision team as referred to in Article 27 paragraph (2) letter b shall be established by the Regent. (2) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be led by the head of the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs under the authority of the Region in the field of women's empowerment.
(3) The team as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of at least: in the Regional Apparatus that has the duty to assist the Regent in formulating policies and administrative coordination of the implementation of regional apparatus duties as well as administrative services. b. Regional apparatus that has the duty to assist the Regent in guiding and supervising the implementation of governmental affairs under the authority of the Region and Co-Administration Tasks;
c. Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs under the authority of the Region in the field of health;
d. Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs under the authority of the Region in the field of social affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs under the authority of the Region in the field of public order;
f. Prosecutor's Office....24 -24-
f. Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Indonesia;
g. Police of the Republic of Indonesia; and
h. UPTD PPA.

Article 30
(1) The Team as referred to in Article 29 paragraph (1) shall be assisted by a secretariat.
(2) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be led by the head of UPTD PPA.
(3) The Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be located at UPTD PPA.
(4) The guidance and supervision team as referred to in Article 29 paragraph (1) and the Secretariat as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by Regent's decree.

CHAPTER IX
FUNDING
Article 31
Funding for the Protection of Women is sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
d. Other sources that are legal and non-binding.

CHAPTER X
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Implementing regulations

Article 32
This Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 33.....25
-25-

Article 33
The utilization of the information system and reporting as referred to in Article 30 paragraph (1) shall be implemented no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 34
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bungo Regency.
Enacted in Muara Bungo on the date of 28 DECEMBER 2007 REGENT OF BUNGO,

H. MASHURI
Promulgated in Muara Bungo on the date of 20 December 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BUNGO REGENCY,
MURSIDI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUNGO REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 7
REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY JAMBI PROVINCE NUMBER 7-80/2022

HAS BEEN VERIFIED FOR ACCURACY, BY
KAGUBENG
KABAG
HAS BEEN VERIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PROVISIONS
SECRETARY OPAD
KASUBBAG H
KABAGH
HHAHAH! &ses 197902162002041003 NIP.

TAUFIK HIDAYAT, SENN 117/08/0 20002 1005
DASM
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BUNGO REGENCY
NUMBER YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
1. GENERAL
Every citizen including women has equal rights to obtain a sense of security and freedom from the state to conduct activities in various aspects of life as guaranteed in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. In reality, there is still much gender-based violence against women and violence that treats women disproportionately in various aspects of life, so there needs to be a guarantee of women's rights concretely from the government as the state administrator through regional governments supported by various parties. Thus, the Bungo Regency Government as the regional government administrator does not yet have regional legal products to guarantee women's rights in various aspects of life in Bungo Regency, so it is necessary to establish regulations regarding the protection of women as a legal basis so that the rights of women in the Regency in Bungo Regency can be guaranteed in social and state life.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
Sufficiently Clear

Article 5
Sufficiently Clear

Article 6
Sufficiently Clear

Article 7
Sufficiently Clear

Article 8
Sufficiently Clear

Article 9
Sufficiently Clear

Article 10
Sufficiently Clear

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear

Article 12
Sufficiently Clear

Article 13
Sufficiently Clear

Article 14
Sufficiently Clear

Article 15
Sufficiently Clear

Article 16
Sufficiently Clear

Article 17
Sufficiently Clear

Article 18
Sufficiently Clear

Article 19
Sufficiently Clear

Article 20
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Sufficiently Clear

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BUNGO REGENCY NUMBER