COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY NUMBER 2 OF 2012
CONCERNING
SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WONOSOBO,

Considering : a. that social problems of women and children in Wonosobo Regency continue to increase and become increasingly complex, thus requiring comprehensive, integrated and sustainable mitigation efforts organized by the Regional Government, community and business sector;
b. that the implementation of social protection for women and children still has gaps in its handling thus needs to receive priority according to what is needed;
c. that social affairs is a mandatory matter that becomes the duty and responsibility of the Regional Government, thus requiring regulation regarding social protection for women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency concerning Social Protection for Women and Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Areas Within the Province of Central Java (State Gazette Year 1950);
3. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3019);
4. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
5. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
6. Law Number 8 of 1985 concerning Social Organizations (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1985 Number 44, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3298);
7. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
8. Law Number 4 of 1997 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1997 Number 9, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3670);
9. Law Number 19 of 1999 concerning Ratification... (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
10. Law Number 20 of 1999
11. Law Number 39 of 1999
12. Law Number 1 of 2000
13. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
14. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
15. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
16. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended by Law Number 8 of 2005 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 3 of 2005 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2005 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4468) most recently Law Number 12 of 2008;
17. Law Number 24 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
18. Law Number 40 of 2004 concerning National Social Security System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 150, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4456);
19. Law Number 23 of 2006
20. Law Number 21 of 2007
21. Law Number 44 of 2008
22. Law Number 11 of 2009
23. Law Number 12 of 2011
24. Government Regulation Number 31 of 1980 concerning Mitigation of Vagrants and Beggars (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1980 Number 51, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3177);
25. Government Regulation Number 42 of 1981 concerning Social Welfare Services for the Destitute (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3206);
26. Government Regulation Number 2 of 1988 concerning Child Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3367);
27. Government Regulation Number 43 of 1998 concerning Efforts to Improve Social Welfare of Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 70, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3952);
28. Government Regulation Number 43 of 2004 concerning Implementation of Efforts to Improve Welfare of the Elderly (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4451);
29. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
30. Government Regulation Number 31 of 2006 concerning National Job Training System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 67, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4637);
31. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
32. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008
33. Presidential Regulation Number 1 of 2007 concerning Ratification, Promulgation and Dissemination of Legislation;
34. Presidential Decree Number 59 of 2002
35. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 9 of 2007
36. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 of 2009
37. Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 5 of 2009
38. Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency Number 12 of 2008 concerning Organization and Work Procedures
39. Regional Regulation of Wonosobo Regency Number 14 of 2008 With Joint Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WONOSOBO REGENCY and

REGENT OF WONOSOBO
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
1. Region means Wonosobo Regency.
2. Regional Government means the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of Regional Government administration.
3. Regent means the Regent of Wonosobo.
4. Vice Regent means the Vice Regent of Wonosobo.
5. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, means the Regional House of Representatives of Wonosobo Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, means the Apparatus of Wonosobo Regency tasked in the field of social protection and social welfare administration for women and children.
7. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as UKPD, means part of the SKPD.
8. Social welfare means a condition of fulfillment of material, spiritual, and social needs of citizens so that they can live properly and are able to develop themselves, so that they can carry out their social functions.
9. Social welfare administration for women and children means directed, integrated, and sustainable efforts carried out by the Government, Regional Government and society in the form of social services to meet the basic needs of every citizen, especially women and children, which includes social rehabilitation, social security, social empowerment, and social protection.
10. Social problems
11. Social rehabilitation means a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out their social functions properly in community life.
12. Social empowerment means all efforts directed to enable citizens experiencing social problems to have capacity, so that they are able to meet their basic needs.
13. Social security means an institutionalized scheme to guarantee all people so that they can meet their proper basic life needs.
14. Social protection means all efforts directed to prevent and handle risks from social problems.
15. Special protection means
16. Social outreach means a series of activities to pick up women and children who are in parks, markets, streets and public places that can cause social problems, so that these women and children receive social welfare administration services.
17. Social organization means a social association formed by society whether legally incorporated or not legally incorporated that functions as a means of community participation in carrying out social welfare efforts.
18. Social Institution means an institution or work unit established by the community and or government that provides social welfare services.
19. Child means a person who has not reached the age of 18 (Eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.
20. Child in emergency situation means
21. Neglected child means a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled whether physical, mental, spiritual and social.
22. Child with disability means a child who experiences physical and or mental障碍 so that their growth and development is disrupted in a proper manner.
23. Child welfare means a child's life that can guarantee their growth and development properly whether physically, spiritually or socially.
24. Family means the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband, wife and their children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
25. Poor family means a family that does not have a source of livelihood and does not have the ability to meet proper basic needs for humanity or a person who has a source of livelihood but cannot meet proper basic needs.
26. Domestic violence means any act against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, and or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the scope of the household.
27. Human trafficking means
28. Victim means
29. Person with disability means every person who has physical and or mental abnormalities that can disturb or constitute obstacles and barriers for them to perform properly, consisting of persons with physical and mental disabilities.
30. Social deviant means a person whose life does not conform to religious norms, moral norms, legal norms, and or societal norms.
31. Care means various efforts provided to children who do not have parents and are neglected, neglected children, and children experiencing behavioral problems, which are temporary in nature as a substitute for parents or family so that they can grow and develop properly whether spiritually, physically, or socially.
32. Social assistance means assistance that is not permanent or temporary in nature and is given within a certain period of time to social welfare beneficiaries who are unable so that they can improve their social welfare level and are able to carry out their social functions properly in community life whether spiritually, physically, or socially.
33. Community members means residents of Wonosobo Regency and foreign citizens residing in Wonosobo Regency.
34. Society means a group of community members who have interest and role in the field of social welfare.
35. Violence against children means

CHAPTER II
SCOPE
Article 2
The scope of social protection includes: women and children with social problems.

Article 3
Women and children with social welfare problems as referred to in Article 2, include:
a. Neglected children;
b. Children who are victims of gender-based violence and/or maltreatment;
c. Delinquent children;
d. Street children;
e. Children with disabilities;
f. Women vulnerable to socio-economic problems;
g. Women who are victims of gender-based violence and/or maltreatment;
h. women and children victims of human trafficking
i. children with special needs
j. children in emergency situations

Pasal 4
Social protection for women and children in the form of: a. Social assistance;
b. Social advocacy; and/or
c. legal assistance.

CHAPTER III
PRINCIPLES, FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES
Article 5
Social protection for women and children is based on the principles of:
a. humanity;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection;
d. best interests of women and children;
e. non-discrimination;
f. participation;
g. professionalism; and
h. partnership.

Article 6
Social protection for women and children functions to:
a. prevent the emergence, growth and development of social welfare problems.
b. restore social functions in achieving independence. c. enhance community social resilience in preventing and addressing social welfare problems.
d. develop social potential.
e. empower social resources.
f. prevent social vulnerability.

Article 7
Social protection for women and children aims to:
a. eliminate all forms of violence against women and children
b. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children
c. improve the standard of welfare, quality, and sustainability of life.
d. restore social functions in order to achieve independence.
e. increase social resilience of the community in preventing and addressing social welfare issues.
f. increase awareness, capability, concern and social responsibility of the business sector in the implementation of social welfare in an institutionalized and sustainable manner.
g. increase awareness, capability, concern and social responsibility of the business sector and the community.

CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTATION
Part One
General

Article 8
(1) Social protection for women and children is a joint obligation between the Regional Government, community, social organizations and the business sector which is implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner.
(2) Social protection for women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) is prioritized for women and children who have lives that are not humanely decent and have social problem criteria:
a. poverty
b. neglect;
c. disability
d. social disability and behavioral deviation; and/or
e. victims of gender-based violence and children and/or mistreatment, as well as victims of human trafficking;
f. victims of social conflict.
(3) Social protection for women and children, as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. prevention efforts;
b. handling efforts;
c. recovery efforts;
d. protection and support efforts.

Article 9
Prevention Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter a, can be carried out among others through efforts of:
a. social counseling and guidance;
b. Social assistance;
c. improvement of health and education standards;
d. improvement of accessibility to sources;
e. empowerment.

Article 10
(1) Handling Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter b, may be conducted among others through efforts of:
a. outreach (raid operations);
b. identification;
c. selection;
d. social motivation;
e. social guidance and assistance.
(2) In the framework of handling efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), further actions may be taken consisting of:
a. referral to Temporary Shelter;
b. referral to Social Rehabilitation Institution/Center;
c. return to parents/guardian/family/place of origin;
d. provision of health services.

Article 11
(1) Recovery Efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter c, can be carried out among others through efforts:
a. Initial motivation from outreach results (raid operations);
b. Identification;
c. Selection;
d. Social motivation;
e. Distribution/referral to rehabilitation centers;
f. Return to place of origin;
g. Social guidance and skills training;
h. Stimulant assistance;
i. Supervision.
(2) Handling of rehabilitative efforts can be carried out in centers located within the region and outside the region.
(3) In the implementation of rehabilitative efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), can be provided through guidance, education, training both physical, mental, social, medical rehabilitation, work skills in accordance with their talents and abilities, social assistance, distribution and follow-up development.

Article 12
Protection and supporting efforts as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter d, can be carried out through the provision of facilities which include:
a. Child Care Social Institutions that can receive referrals from private institutions and are equipped with workshop facilities;
b. Women's Work Centers;
c. Provision of facilities/accessibility for persons with disabilities in buildings and public facilities.

Article 13
The technical implementation of social protection and the administration of social welfare for women and children as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (2) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Second Part
Social Protection and Implementation of Social Welfare for Women

Article 14
Every Woman has the right to obtain social protection in the form of equal treatment and opportunities in education and training, employment, protection of safety and/or health in relation to women's reproductive function in accordance with the norms of a decent life and livelihood.

Article 15
Every woman has the obligation to maintain her dignity and honor and that of her family as well as her nature as a woman by paying attention to her function and role in family life and/or society in accordance with her capabilities.

Article 16
(1) Regional Government and/or society provides social protection and implementation of social welfare to women who are unable, neglected, exploited, trafficked and prostitutes.
(2) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (1), through:
a. education and training services;
b. opportunities to work and do business;
c. physical, religious, mental, and social guidance;
d. health services;
e. legal assistance;
f. other special social protection.
(3) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be the responsibility of SKPD/UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.
(4) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for women as referred to in paragraph (2), may be organized by society, social organizations, and the business sector.

Article 17
Every institution, both government and private, that provides public services or employs women is obligated to provide adequate facilities for the interests of women.

Third Part
Social Protection And Implementation of Social Welfare For Children

Article 18
(1) Every child has the right to obtain social protection and the implementation of social welfare from parents, family, community, and local government to grow and develop properly.
(2) Every child has the right to obtain social protection and the implementation of social welfare to develop their abilities and social life in accordance with the culture and personality of the nation to become a good and useful member of society.
(3) Every child has the right to obtain maintenance of the child's welfare level and protection from environments that endanger and/or hinder their growth and development properly.
(4) Every child has the right to obtain first aid, assistance and protection in dangerous situations. every child has the right to obtain protection from parents against all forms of physical and mental violence, neglect, maltreatment, exploitation and sexual abuse, as well as the right to care, religious guidance, and social mental guidance.

Article 19
(1) Every person is prohibited from neglecting, committing acts of violence and/or exploitation against children.
(2) Every person is prohibited from employing children below the working age as regulated in the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 20
Regional government and/or the community may provide social protection and implementation of social welfare for children in the interest of improving child welfare carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 21
(1) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in Article 18, shall be in the form of:
a. Care and nurturing
b. Health services and nutritional improvement;
c. Education and recreation services;
d. Religious, mental and social guidance;
e. Social rehabilitation;
f. Social assistance;
g. Family reunification;
h. Population administration and civil registration services; i. Funeral services
j. Legal aid services;
k. Maintenance of social welfare standards
l. Provision of childcare facilities at the workplace
m. Other special social protection.
(2) For children with disabilities, in addition to receiving social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), they shall also receive accessibility services.
(3) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be the responsibility of SKPD/UKPD in accordance with their duties and functions.
(4) Social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1) may be implemented by the community, social organizations and the business sector.
(5) Further provisions regarding the forms of social protection and implementation of social welfare for children as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
REGIONAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY
AND COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Part One
Regional Government Responsibility

Article 22
(1) Social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children shall be the responsibility of the Regional Government.
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. planning, implementation, development, guidance and supervision of social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children;
b. application of service standards for social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children;
c. provision and/or granting of facilities as well as infrastructure and facilities;
d. granting of facilities for social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children;
e. development of institutional capacity and social resources in accordance with the development of science and technology;
f. facilitating participation from the community, social organizations and/or the business sector in social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(3) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (2), may be delegated to SKPD/UKPD related to social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.

Article 23
(1) In carrying out the responsibilities as referred to in Article 21 paragraph (3), SKPD/UKPD shall prepare a plan for social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) In preparing the plan as referred to in paragraph (2), it shall be guided by the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJM) and the Regional Long-Term Development Plan (RPJP).
(3) The plan for implementation of social welfare as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Two
Community Participation

Article 24
(1) The community can participate in social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children (2) The role as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by:  a. Individuals;
b. Families;
c. Religious organizations;
d. Social community organizations;
e. Non-governmental organizations;
f. Professional organizations;
g. Business entities;
h. Social welfare institutions; and
g. Foreign social welfare institutions.

Article 25
Professional organizations as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) letter f include:
a. professional social worker associations;
b. social work education institutions; and
c. social welfare institutions.

Article 26
The role of business entities as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) letter g towards social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children is carried out as part of social and environmental responsibility in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 27
Local governments may grant awards to the community, social organizations and business entities that play a role in social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.

Article 28
(1) The community may establish a social organization to optimize participation in coordinating social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) The regional government facilitates the establishment of social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) are established at the regency level and may have representatives in each sub-district and/or village.
(4) Social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) are open, autonomous and do not constitute institutions that have a hierarchical relationship with the regional government structure.
(5) Social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) must fulfill the provisions:
a. not for profit/non-profit;
b. in institutional form;
c. oriented towards the public interest;
d. managed professionally;
(6) Social organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) must obtain permission from the Regent through the head of SKPD/UKPD responsible in the field of social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(7) Further provisions regarding licensing procedures as referred to in paragraph (6) refer to applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI
COOPERATION
Article 29
(1) Regional governments may establish cooperation with other regional governments to provide social protection and implement social welfare for women and children.
(2) Forms of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), may include:
a. repatriation and further guidance;
b. social counseling
c. health services
d. provision of employment opportunities
e. education and training
f. research and development of science and technology
g. funding
h. provision of facilities and infrastructure.
(3) Procedures for cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Part One
Guidance

Article 30
Regional Governments conduct guidance on social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children, comprising:
a. Coordination;
b. Establishment of guidelines and standards;
c. Provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation;
d. Research, monitoring, and evaluation.

Article 31
(1) Coordination as referred to in Article 30 letter a, begins from the planning stage, implementation and evaluation.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out at the regency, sub-district and urban village scope by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 32
(1) The establishment of guidelines and standards as referred to in Article 30 letter b, includes planning, implementation, procedures, financing, quality, control and supervision.
(2) The establishment of guidelines and standards as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be prepared by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 33
(1) The provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation as referred to in Article 30 letter c, covers planning, implementation, administration, financing, quality, control and monitoring.
(2) Counseling and/or guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to the community, social organizations and business entities.
(3) The provision of counseling, guidance, supervision, and consultation as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out by SKPD/UKPD.

Article 34
(1) Research, monitoring and evaluation as referred to in Article 30 letter d, shall be conducted in the framework of evaluating the social impact of development, policy development and achievement of social welfare objectives.
(2) Research, monitoring, and evaluation shall be implemented periodically or according to needs by SKPD/UKPD in accordance with their functions and authorities.

Second Part
Supervision

Article 35
(1) Regional governments conduct supervision over social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children in accordance with their duties, functions, and authorities.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted with the principles of transparency and accountability.

Article 36
(1) Functional supervision over social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children shall be carried out by functional supervisory apparatus.
(2) Technical operational supervision over social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children organized by social organizations and the community shall be carried out by SKPD/UKPD.
(3) Further provisions regarding the implementation of supervision shall be regulated by Regent Regulation in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 37
(1) Social organizations and or the community may participate in conducting supervision over social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children.
(2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted in accordance with the laws and regulations

CHAPTER VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
Article 38
(1) Every social organization that has obtained a permit in the implementation of social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children, which deliberately does not provide social services as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (5), may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(2) Every social organization that implements social protection and implementation of social welfare for women and children without a permit as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (6), may be subject to administrative sanctions.
(3) Administrative sanctions as referred to in paragraph (1), may be in the form of: a. verbal warning;
b. written warning;
c. revocation of permit.

CHAPTER IX
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 39
(1) Every person who neglects, commits acts of violence and/or exploitation against a child as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) shall be subject to criminal sanctions as stipulated in Article 77 letter b, Article 80, Article 81, Article 82, and Article 88 of Law No. 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection.
(2) Every person who employs a child below working age as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) shall be subject to criminal sanctions as stipulated in Article 185 paragraph (1) of Law No. 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower.

CHAPTER X
INVESTIGATION
Article 40
Investigation may be carried out by Civil Servant Investigators (PPNS) within the Regional Government.

Article 41
In carrying out investigative duties, Civil Servant Investigators are authorized to:
a. receive, seek, collect and examine information or reports concerning criminal offenses;
b. examine, seek and collect information regarding individuals or entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal offenses;
c. request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal offenses;
d. examine books, records and other documents concerning criminal offenses;
e. conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents as well as carry out seizures of such evidence;
f. request the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out investigative duties for criminal offenses;
g. order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and examine the identity of persons and or documents carried as referred to in letter e of this Article;
h. take fingerprints and photograph a person related to a criminal offense;
i. summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. terminate the investigation after receiving instructions from the POLRI investigator that there is insufficient evidence or the incident does not constitute a criminal offense and subsequently through the POLRI investigator notify the public prosecutor, suspect or their family of such matter;
k. take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal offenses, according to law that can be accounted for.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 42
All provisions related to social protection and the implementation of social welfare for women and children that existed prior to the enactment of this Regional Regulation, shall remain valid insofar as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 43
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Wonosobo Regency.
Enacted in Wonosobo on the date of March 26, 2012

# BUPATI WONOSOBO REGULATION
NUMBER 45 OF 2016

REGARDING

AMENDMENT TO BUPATI WONOSOBO REGULATION NUMBER 64 OF 2014
REGARDING PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING AND UTILIZING
REGIONAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

BUPATI WONOSOBO,

Considering : a. that to improve the implementation of granting and utilizing Regional Financial Assistance, it is necessary to make changes to Bupati Wonosobo Regulation Number 64 of 2014 regarding Procedures for Granting and Utilizing Regional Financial Assistance;

b. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Bupati Regulation regarding Amendment to Bupati Wonosobo Regulation Number 64 of 2014 regarding Procedures for Granting and Utilizing Regional Financial Assistance;

In view of : 1. Law Number 13 of 1950 regarding the Formation of Autonomous Regions within Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 42, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 9);

2. Law Number 17 of 2003 regarding State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 47, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4286);

3. Law Number 1 of 2004 regarding State Treasury (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 5, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4355);

4. Law Number 15 of 2004 regarding Audit of Management and Responsibility of State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 66, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4400);

5. Law Number 33 of 2004 regarding Financial Balance between Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 126, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);

6. Law Number 23 of 2014 regarding Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 regarding Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 regarding Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);

7. Government Regulation Number 58 of 2005 regarding Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 140, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);

8. Government Regulation Number 8 of 2006 regarding Financial and Performance Reporting of Government Agencies (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 25, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4614);

9. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 13 of 2006 regarding Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended by Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 21 of 2011 regarding Second Amendment to Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 13 of 2006 regarding Guidelines for Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 310);

10. Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 14 of 2016 regarding Amendment to Minister of Home Affairs Regulation Number 32 of 2011 regarding Guidelines for Granting Grants and Social Assistance Sourced from Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;

11. Bupati Wonosobo Regulation Number 64 of 2014 regarding Procedures for Granting and Utilizing Regional Financial Assistance (Regional Gazette of Wonosobo Regency of 2014 Number 64);

HAS DECIDED:

To establish : BUPATI REGULATION REGARDING AMENDMENT TO BUPATI WONOSOBO REGULATION NUMBER 64 OF 2014 REGARDING PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING AND UTILIZING REGIONAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.

Article I

Several provisions in Bupati Wonosobo Regulation Number 64 of 2014 regarding Procedures for Granting and Utilizing Regional Financial Assistance (Regional Gazette of Wonosobo Regency of 2014 Number 64) are amended as follows:

1. The provisions of Article 1 are amended so that Article 1 reads as follows:

Article 1

In this Bupati Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Wonosobo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Bupati as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Bupati is the Bupati of Wonosobo.
4. Regional Apparatus is a supporting element of the Bupati and Regional People's Representative Council in administering Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD, is the annual financial plan of the Regional Government discussed and mutually agreed upon by the Regional Government and the Regional People's Representative Council, and established by Regional Regulation.
6. Regional Financial Assistance is assistance in the form of money or goods provided by the Regional Government to other Regional Governments, Village Governments, and Community Groups/Organizations that are non-profit in nature, selective, and not continuously, which aims to support the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
7. Regional General Treasurer, hereinafter abbreviated as BUD, is an official authorized to carry out the duties of the Regional General Treasurer.
8. Regional General Treasurer Service Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is an official authorized to carry out the duties of the Regional General Treasurer Service Unit.
9. Budget User, hereinafter abbreviated as PA, is an official who holds the authority for budget use/goods.
10. Budget User Authority, hereinafter abbreviated as KPA, is an official who holds the authority for budget use/goods.
11. Commitment Making Official, hereinafter abbreviated as PPK, is an official authorized by PA/KPA to make commitments on behalf of PA/KPA concerned.
12. Expenditure Treasurer is the Expenditure Treasurer of the Regional Apparatus.
13. Accountability Letter, hereinafter abbreviated as SPJ, is a letter made by the Expenditure Treasurer as accountability for expenditures that have been made based on proof of valid expenditure.
14. Accountability Report is a report made by the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance as accountability for the use of Regional Financial Assistance that has been received.

2. The provisions of Article 2 are amended so that Article 2 reads as follows:

Article 2

(1) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in Article 1 number 6 is provided to:
a. other Regional Governments;
b. Village Governments; and
c. Community Groups/Organizations.

(2) Regional Financial Assistance to other Regional Governments as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is assistance provided to other Regional Governments that are not hierarchically related.

(3) Regional Financial Assistance to Village Governments as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is assistance provided to Village Governments to support the implementation of village government affairs.

(4) Regional Financial Assistance to Community Groups/Organizations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is assistance provided to Community Groups/Organizations engaged in education, religion, customs, and other social fields that are non-profit in nature.

3. Article 3 is deleted.

4. The provisions of Article 4 are amended so that Article 4 reads as follows:

Article 4

(1) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1) is budgeted in the APBD.

(2) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is budgeted in the Regional Apparatus that has the main duties and functions in accordance with the purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance.

(3) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is budgeted in the expenditure group for unexpected expenditures, type of unexpected expenditure, object of unexpected expenditure.

5. The provisions of Article 5 are amended so that Article 5 reads as follows:

Article 5

(1) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1) is provided based on the interests of the Region by considering the principles of fairness, propriety, rationality, and regional optimization benefits.

(2) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided after taking into account the capability of the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.

6. The provisions of Article 6 are amended so that Article 6 reads as follows:

Article 6

(1) Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in Article 2 paragraph (1) is provided based on a proposal.

(2) The proposal as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted by:
a. Regional Head for other Regional Governments;
b. Village Head for Village Governments; and
c. Chairperson of Community Groups/Organizations for Community Groups/Organizations.

(3) The proposal as referred to in paragraph (2) is submitted to the Bupati through the Head of the Regional Apparatus in accordance with the main duties and functions related to the purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance.

(4) The proposal as referred to in paragraph (2) is submitted no later than the end of June of the current budget year.

(5) The proposal as referred to in paragraph (2) at least contains:
a. applicant's identity;
b. purpose and objectives of the activity;
c. activity plan;
d. budget plan; and
e. accountability plan.

(6) The proposal as referred to in paragraph (2) is accompanied by:
a. photocopy of the identity card of the Regional Head/Village Head/Chairperson of the Community Group/Organization;
b. photocopy of the deed of establishment of the Community Group/Organization;
c. photocopy of the domicile certificate of the Community Group/Organization;
d. photocopy of the Taxpayer Identification Number of the Community Group/Organization;
e. photocopy of the bank account of the Community Group/Organization;
f. work program of the Community Group/Organization; and
g. accountability report for the previous year's Regional Financial Assistance for Community Groups/Organizations that have received Regional Financial Assistance in the previous year.

7. The provisions of Article 7 are amended so that Article 7 reads as follows:

Article 7

(1) The Head of the Regional Apparatus as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3) conducts verification and evaluation of the proposal.

(2) Verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by a team formed by the Head of the Regional Apparatus.

(3) The team as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of elements of the Regional Apparatus and can involve elements outside the Regional Apparatus.

(4) Verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by examining the completeness and validity of the proposal requirements.

(5) Based on the results of verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Head of the Regional Apparatus submits the results of verification and evaluation to the Bupati.

(6) The results of verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (5) become the basis for the Bupati to determine the recipients and amount of Regional Financial Assistance.

8. The provisions of Article 8 are amended so that Article 8 reads as follows:

Article 8

(1) The determination of recipients and amount of Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (6) is established by Bupati Decree.

(2) The Bupati Decree as referred to in paragraph (1) at least contains:
a. name of the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance;
b. amount of Regional Financial Assistance; and
c. purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance.

9. The provisions of Article 9 are amended so that Article 9 reads as follows:

Article 9

(1) Based on the Bupati Decree as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1), the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance submits a request for disbursement of Regional Financial Assistance to the Bupati through the Head of the Regional Apparatus.

(2) The request for disbursement as referred to in paragraph (1) is accompanied by:
a. photocopy of the Bupati Decree regarding the determination of recipients and amount of Regional Financial Assistance;
b. photocopy of the identity card of the Regional Head/Village Head/Chairperson of the Community Group/Organization;
c. photocopy of the Taxpayer Identification Number of the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance;
d. photocopy of the bank account of the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance; and
e. statement letter of willingness to be audited.

(3) The Head of the Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) verifies the request for disbursement.

(4) Based on the results of verification as referred to in paragraph (3), the Head of the Regional Apparatus submits the request for disbursement to BUD.

10. The provisions of Article 10 are amended so that Article 10 reads as follows:

Article 10

(1) Based on the request for disbursement as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (4), BUD disburses Regional Financial Assistance to the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance.

(2) Disbursement of Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by transfer to the bank account of the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance.

(3) Disbursement of Regional Financial Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out after the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance signs a statement letter of willingness to be audited.

11. The provisions of Article 11 are amended so that Article 11 reads as follows:

Article 11

(1) The recipient of Regional Financial Assistance is obligated to use Regional Financial Assistance in accordance with the purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance.

(2) The recipient of Regional Financial Assistance is obligated to submit an accountability report for the use of Regional Financial Assistance to the Bupati through the Head of the Regional Apparatus.

(3) The accountability report as referred to in paragraph (2) is submitted no later than 1 (one) month after the activity is completed.

(4) The accountability report as referred to in paragraph (2) at least contains:
a. activity implementation report;
b. financial report; and
c. activity documentation.

(5) The financial report as referred to in paragraph (4) letter b at least contains:
a. budget realization report; and
b. valid proof of expenditure.

12. The provisions of Article 12 are amended so that Article 12 reads as follows:

Article 12

(1) The Head of the Regional Apparatus as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (2) conducts verification and evaluation of the accountability report.

(2) Verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the team as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2).

(3) Verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by examining the suitability of the use of Regional Financial Assistance with the purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance.

(4) Based on the results of verification and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1), the Head of the Regional Apparatus submits the results of verification and evaluation to the Bupati.

13. The provisions of Article 13 are amended so that Article 13 reads as follows:

Article 13

(1) In the event that the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance does not submit an accountability report as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (2), the Bupati provides a written warning to the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance.

(2) In the event that the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance does not submit an accountability report after being given a written warning as referred to in paragraph (1), the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance is subject to sanctions in the form of:
a. obligation to return Regional Financial Assistance; and
b. not being given Regional Financial Assistance for the following year.

(3) In the event that the use of Regional Financial Assistance is not in accordance with the purpose of providing Regional Financial Assistance, the recipient of Regional Financial Assistance is subject to sanctions in the form of:
a. obligation to return Regional Financial Assistance; and
b. not being given Regional Financial Assistance for the following 2 (two) years.

14. Article 14 is deleted.

15. Article 15 is deleted.

16. The provisions of Article 16 are amended so that Article 16 reads as follows:

Article 16

This Bupati Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Bupati Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Wonosobo Regency.

Established in Wonosobo
on December 30, 2016

BUPATI WONOSOBO,
Signed and sealed

AMIN PURNAWAN

Promulgated in Wonosobo
on December 30, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF WONOSOBO REGENCY,

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOSOBO REGENCY OF 2016 NUMBER 45

H.A. KHOLIQ ARIF
Promulgated in Wonosobo on the date of 27 March 2012

# REGIONAL SECRETARY
WONOSOBO REGENCY,
Seal. Signature

EKO SUTRISNO WIBOWO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOSOBO REGENCY YEAR 2012 NO 7
Copy in accordance with the original REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE (1 / 2012)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF WONOSOBO REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2012
CONCERNING
SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION

The targets of development in the field of social welfare regulated in this Regional Regulation are directed towards Women and Children. Especially programs for improving the quality of life and protection of women and children. This is adjusted to the objectives and functions of a Regional Regulation to regulate certain matters in accordance with the conditions and needs of a region.

This Regional Regulation on Social Protection for Women and Children aims to provide a legal basis for efforts of Social Protection for Women and Children as well as to provide studies within the philosophical, sociological and juridical framework regarding the necessity of a Regional Regulation that becomes the legal foundation for handling social problems in Wonosobo Regency, especially related to Women and Children.

Substantively, in the effort to overcome the problems of Women and Children in Wonosobo Regency, it is necessary to formulate a Regional Regulation on Social Protection for Women and Children which essentially constitutes an action that is rooted in or has a strong foundation, namely in good governance, and to be formulated with correct principles.

The regulation of the field of Social Protection for Women and Children must pay attention to environmental aspects and social aspects, so that the social conditions of the community are controlled. The regulation of Social Protection for Women and Children through Regional Regulation can be viewed as a solution as well as a preventive effort against negative impacts that potentially harm the interests of the community.

The absence of a Regional Regulation that specifically regulates Social Protection for Women and Children in Wonosobo Regency makes the urgency of this Regional Regulation indeed necessary as a legal umbrella for the creation of legal certainty in matters of Social Protection for Women and Children, which is an obligation of the Regional Government, specifically the Wonosobo Regional Government, to provide Social Protection for Women and Children of Wonosobo Regency.

II. EXPLANATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
a. A neglected child is a child aged 0-18 years who, due to certain reasons (poverty/inability, one or both parents/guardians being ill or deceased, family disharmony), cannot have their basic needs properly fulfilled, whether physically, spiritually or socially.
b. A child who is a victim of gender-based violence or maltreatment is a child aged 0-18 years who is threatened physically and non-physically due to acts of violence, maltreatment or improper treatment within the family environment or immediate social environment, such that their basic needs cannot be properly fulfilled, whether physically, spiritually or socially.
c. A delinquent child is a child aged 0-18 years who behaves in deviation from the norms and customs prevailing in society and their environment, thereby harming themselves, their family and others, and will disturb public order, but due to age cannot yet be prosecuted legally.
d. A street child is a child aged 0-18 years who spends most of their time seeking livelihood and/or wandering on the streets or in public places.
e. A child with disabilities is a child aged 0-18 years who has physical and/or mental abnormalities, which can interfere with or constitute obstacles and barriers for them to carry out activities normally, consisting of those with physical disabilities, those with mental disabilities, those with physical and mental disabilities.
f. A woman vulnerable to socio-economic conditions is an adult woman aged 18-59 years, unmarried or widowed, who does not have sufficient income to meet daily basic needs.
g. A woman who is a victim of gender-based violence and/or maltreatment is a woman aged 18-59 years who is threatened physically or non-physically (psychologically) due to acts of violence, maltreatment or improper treatment within the family environment or immediate social environment.
h. Trafficking of women and children is the transfer, transportation, mobilization, sending of children and women within a country or abroad illegally and against the law, with or without the consent of the person concerned, to then be employed exploitatively, especially in the prostitution environment

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
a. What is meant by "the principle of solidarity" is that in the implementation of social welfare it must be based on social care to help people who need assistance with empathy and compassion.
b. What is meant by "the principle of justice" is that in the implementation of social welfare it must emphasize aspects of equity, non-discrimination and balance between rights and obligations.
c. What is meant by "the principle of benefit" is that in the implementation of social welfare it must provide benefits for improving the quality of life of citizens.
d. What is meant by "the principle of integration" is that in the implementation of social welfare it must integrate various related components so that they can run in a coordinated and synergistic manner.
e. What is meant by "the principle of partnership" is that in handling social welfare issues partnership is required between the Government and the community, the Government as the responsible party and the community as the Government's partner in handling social welfare problems and improving social welfare.
f. What is meant by "the principle of transparency" is providing the widest possible access to the community to obtain information related to the implementation of social welfare.
g. What is meant by "the principle of accountability" is that in every implementation of social welfare it must be accountable in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
h. What is meant by "the principle of participation" is that in every implementation of social welfare it must involve all components of society.
i. What is meant by "the principle of professionalism" is that in every implementation of social welfare to the community it should be based on professionalism in accordance with the scope of duties and carried out as optimally as possible.
j. What is meant by "the principle of sustainability" is that in implementing social welfare it is carried out continuously, so that independence is achieved.
k. What is meant by "the principle of non-discrimination" is treatment that does not distinguish between ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of children, birth order of children, and physical and mental conditions.
l. What is meant by "gender equality" is equal conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, legal, economic, socio-cultural, educational and national defense and security (hankamnas) activities, as well as equality in enjoying the results of such development.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1) In order to obtain optimal results, the implementation of the program must be integrated and cross-sectoral with a comprehensive approach both between professions and between agencies by developing active participation from the community.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3)
a. What is meant by preventive is an effort to prevent the emergence of complex social problems in the community, which is directed both to individuals and community groups that are estimated to be the source of the emergence of persons with social welfare problems.
b. What is meant by repressive is an effort in the form of supervision, with the aim of reducing and/or controlling the number of persons with social welfare problems that is directed to a person or group of persons with social welfare problems.
c. What is meant by rehabilitative is an effort of care, vocational, accessibility and empowerment aimed at changing the mental attitude of persons with social welfare problems from a non-productive state to a productive state.
d. Sufficiently Clear;

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) Development through institutions can be conducted at Child Care Social Institutions, Child Shelter Social Institutions and Youth Development Social Institutions, while outside institutions through child adoption, child care within one's own family or substitute family.
The non-institutional system for handling street children can take the form of: drop-in centers, mobile child friend units, Islamic boarding schools, and so forth. Such systems function to become centers for child welfare services in development, protection, recovery and prevention, also as information centers for data collection and problem solving, as well as centers for skills development and creativity development.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Paragraph (1) Social organizations include community organizations, non-governmental organizations, social rehabilitation centers for persons with disabilities operated by social bodies, social organizations that can operate care services for abandoned children Paragraph (2) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (5) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (6) For the sake of legal and social order, Social Organizations must have legal entity status because they have important duties and functions and their existence and work programs must be accountable. The Regent as regional head who is responsible for social issues has authority in the field of licensing.
Paragraph 7 Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently Clear Paragraph (2) letter h.
What is meant by facilities and infrastructure in this regulation is all facilities that are funded and obtained from the APBD and/or APBN to support social welfare functions. Among others: Regional Hospitals, Shelters, Transit Houses, Social Transport Vehicles, Facilities in Nursing Homes, Orphanages, Foundations, etc.

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

Article 34
Sufficiently Clear

Article 35
Sufficiently Clear

Article 36
Sufficiently Clear

Article 37
Sufficiently Clear

Article 38
Sufficiently Clear

Article 39
Sufficiently Clear

Article 40
Sufficiently Clear

Article 41
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WONOSOBO REGENCY NO 7