MAYOR OF SEMARANG
CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SEMARANG CITY
NUMBER 7 OF 2023
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF SEMARANG,

Considering : a. that women are a national asset who play a very important role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations and need to receive guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights to be empowered so that they can actualize their potential optimally and receive guarantees of protection from acts of violence against women;
b. that in order to provide means for women's self-actualization and guarantees of protection in society in the city of Semarang, there is a need for a regional regulation that regulates the empowerment and protection of women;
c. that based on Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law, regional governments have authority in the implementation of governmental affairs in the field of empowerment and protection of women;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to stipulate a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 16 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large City Regions Within the Province of East Java, Central Java, West Java, and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 45);
-2-
3. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
4. Law Number 11 of 2023 concerning Central Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6867);

With Mutual Approval, THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SEMARANG CITY and

MAYOR OF SEMARANG
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Semarang.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Semarang.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Human Rights is a set of rights inherent to the nature and existence of human beings as creatures of God Almighty and constitutes His gift that must be respected, upheld and protected by the state, law, government, and every person for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity and worth.
6. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that women can manage themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
-3-
7. Women's Protection is all efforts to protect and provide a sense of security to women as well as the fulfillment of their rights through consistent, structured, and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
8. Violence Against Women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, and psychologically, including threats of certain actions, arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the private or public sphere.
9. Gender is the values, roles, and responsibilities of women and men that are socially and culturally constructed by society.
10. Gender Equality is an equal condition and position between men and women to obtain their rights as human beings, in accessing and controlling resources, participating in all development processes and decision-making, as well as obtaining benefits from development.

Article 2
Empowerment and Protection of Women is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. non-discrimination;
c. gender equality and gender justice;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. accountability; and
h. inclusion.

Article 3
The Empowerment and Protection of Women aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women;
b. increase the participation of women in the development process;
c. encourage women's leadership and women's bargaining position in decision-making in various development processes, both planning, implementation as well as monitoring and evaluation;
d. increase the capacity of women in managing the economy, both in meeting household needs and in opening productive and independent employment opportunities;
e. provide protection of women's rights from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment;
f. prevent all forms of Violence Against Women;
-4-
g. provide services and recovery for women victims of violence;
h. increase community participation in the Protection of Women;
i. realize a social life that is safe and free from all forms of Violence Against Women; and
j. increase the strengthening and development of institutions providing Women's Empowerment services.

Article 4
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. authority and responsibility of regional government; b. women's rights;
c. Women's Empowerment;
d. Women's Protection;
e. strategy for Women's Empowerment and Protection; f. mechanism for implementing Women's Empowerment and Protection;
g. institutional arrangements;
h. participation;
i. guidance and supervision; and
j. funding.

CHAPTER II
AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 5
(1) Regional Government has the authority and is responsible for Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) The authority and responsibility for Women's Empowerment and Protection as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. planning;
b. organizing;
c. implementation;
d. coordination;
e. budgeting;
f. supervision;
g. research and development;
h. standardization; and
i. management of development information in the Region.
(3) The authority and responsibility for Women's Empowerment and Protection as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(4) The implementation of the authority and responsibility of the Regional Government shall be carried out through coordination with other Regional Apparatus that have authority over fields in Women's Empowerment and Women's Protection.
-5- (5) The coordination mechanism as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 6
Every Woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, establish a family and continue descendants;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life in order to become a human being who is faithful, pious, responsible, of noble character, happy, and prosperous in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
g. obtain protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
h. obtain welfare and a decent life;
i. participate in politics;
j. perform legal acts; and
k. freely choose a partner in her marriage in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Part One
General

Article 7
Women's Empowerment is directed to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. health;
b. education;
c. economy;
d. social culture;
e. politics and governance;
f. law;
g. employment;
h. social security; and
i. environmental conservation.
-6-

Second Part
Health Sector

Article 8
(1) Women's Empowerment in the Health Sector is implemented to increase access to health services for women in all aspects of health.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the Health Sector as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Third Part
Education Sector

Article 9
Empowerment of Women in the Field of Education through: a. increasing awareness of average length of schooling, school participation rate, and completed education.
b. organizing formal, nonformal, and informal education for women in the Region.

Third Part
Economic Field

Article 10
Empowerment of Women in the Economic Field is implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitating the formation, strengthening, and development of productive economic business groups and creative economy;
c. facilitating capital; and
d. facilitating the development of marketing networks.

Fourth Part
Social and Cultural Sector

Article 11
Empowerment of Women in the social and cultural field is implemented through:
a. improvement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. raising awareness of various social problems in society through communication, information and education services;
c. raising awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitating and efforts to preserve customs and traditions and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.
-7-

Fifth Part
Political and Governmental Affairs

Article 12
Empowerment of Women in the field of politics and government shall be implemented through:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. involvement of women in development planning at various levels;
c. encouraging increased involvement of women in organizations and providing opportunities for women to hold public positions;
d. facilitating women's participation in general elections;
e. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions;
f. facilitating human resource improvement for prospective legislative candidates, political party members and/or women's community organizations in order to fulfill women's representation in legislative institutions of at least 30% (thirty percent);
g. facilitating increased political participation of women in legislative institutions;
h. facilitating facilities and infrastructure for women's community organizations or community organizations whose vision and mission advocate for the fulfillment of women's rights in the Region;
i. conducting socialization in order to increase awareness of women's rights and women's participation in the field of politics; and
j. encouraging the establishment of women's organizations and/or forums.

Sixth Part
Legal Field

Article 13
(1) Empowerment of Women in the field of law through:  a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of  law with communication, information and  education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services as well as  legal aid that is Gender responsive.
(2) Empowerment of Women in the field of law  as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented  in accordance with laws and regulations.

Seventh Part
Employment Sector

Article 14
Women's Empowerment in the field of employment is implemented through:
a. provision of access to enter the labor market; b. freedom of women to become members of labor unions and lead labor unions; and -8-
c. access for women to be involved in policy-making related to wages, fundamental rights of workers and other aspects closely related to employment.

Eighth Part
Social Security Sector

Article 15
Empowerment of Women in the field of social security is implemented through:
a. facilitating guidance for social rehabilitation for women with social welfare problems; and
b. encouraging increased involvement of women in addressing social problems.

Ninth Part
Field of Environmental Preservation

Article 16
Women's Empowerment in the field of environmental conservation is implemented through:
a. enhancing the capacity of women particularly related to increasing environmental knowledge so that it can be highly beneficial for environmentally friendly development;
b. improving education on environmental conservation and environmental management in households; c. improving education on waste management in the surrounding environment; and
d. increasing access for women to participate in environmental development.

Article 17
Further provisions regarding the implementation of Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 8 through Article 16 shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 18
(1) The Implementation of Women's Protection is through: a. prevention of violence against women; b. services for women victims of violence; and
c. strengthening of Women's Protection institutions.
-9- (2) The Implementation of Women's Protection as referred to in Article 18 may be provided to vulnerable women groups.
(3) Vulnerable women groups as referred to in paragraph (2) include:
a. poor women;
b. women with disabilities; c. women with HIV/AIDS;
d. women migrant workers;
e. elderly women;
f. indigenous women;
g. women in disaster and social conflict situations; h. women heads of households;
i. women informal workers;
j. women in situations of intolerance;
k. women victims/exposed to NAPZA (narcotics, psychotropics, and addictive substances);
l. women victims/exposed to terrorism, radicalism and extremism; and/or
m. other vulnerable women groups.

Second Part
Prevention of Violence Against Women

Article 19
(1) Prevention of Violence Against Women as referred to in Article 18 letter a may be carried out in the following forms:
a. developing communication media, information, education and public campaigns;
b. developing educational materials and curriculum;
c. developing safe transportation systems and public spaces;
d. establishing early detection systems, security and integrated complaint services in industrial areas, companies, residential areas, educational environments, Islamic boarding schools and other public spaces;
e. providing consultation, information, education, and counseling services;
f. developing policies related to safe and friendly schools/madrasah, boarding schools, Islamic boarding schools, and universities;
g. establishing and developing cadres, communities, and groups from among youth, students, Islamic boarding school students, university students, journalists, social media influencers, educators, and religious leaders;
h. conducting education and advocacy to owners, managers and/or users of social media;
i. developing protection systems and special support for vulnerable groups of women;
j. conducting awareness-raising for perpetrators;
-10-
k. increasing the capacity of regional governments, government agencies, institutions, community institutions, business sector, Islamic boarding schools, community organizations, media, religious leaders, community leaders and communities;
l. conducting cooperation with religious institutions, community social institutions, service institutions, universities, Islamic boarding schools, media, youth organizations, religious leaders and community leaders; and
m. conducting socialization of laws and regulations.
(2) Forms of prevention of Violence Against Women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Third Part
Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 20
Women victims of violence obtain the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to recovery;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain ease of access to information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to social rehabilitation;
g. the right to complaint handling that is fast, appropriate, comfortable and in accordance with needs;
h. the right of victims and their families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process;
i. the right to assistance; and
j. the right to a sense of security.

Article 21
Services for women victims of violence can be carried out through:
a. receiving reports and/or outreach to victims of violence;
b. providing information about the rights of victims of violence;
c. facilitating the provision of health services;
d. facilitating the provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitating the provision of psychosocial services, social rehabilitation, social empowerment, repatriation, and social reintegration;
f. providing legal services;
g. identifying economic empowerment needs;
h. identifying temporary shelter needs for victims of violence and families of victims of violence that need to be fulfilled immediately;
i. facilitating the needs of victims of violence with disabilities;
-11-
j. coordination and cooperation on the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence with other institutions; and
k. monitoring the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence by law enforcement apparatus during the judicial process.

Fourth Part
Institutional Strengthening of Women's Protection

Article 22
(1) Institutional strengthening of Women's Protection can be carried out through capacity building, cooperation and integration with:
a. government agencies;
b. educational institutions;
c. religious institutions;
d. health service provider institutions; e. professional institutions;
f. business sector;
g. service institutions;
h. Islamic boarding schools;
i. youth organizations;
j. legal aid organizations;
k. media;
l. religious leaders;
m. community leaders;
n. communities; and
o. families.
(2) Strengthening and development of Women's Protection service provider institutions is implemented through: a. capacity building of human resources of Women's Protection service provider institutions for victims of violence at the Regional level;
b. provision of specific needs for women in emergency situations and special conditions at the Regional level;
c. development of communication, information, and education strategies regarding the protection of women's rights at the Regional level;
d. strengthening networks among Women's Protection service provider institutions at the Regional level;
e. facilitation of efforts to fulfill standards of Women's Protection service provider institutions at the Regional level; f. development of Women's Protection service provider institutions at the Regional level.

CHAPTER VI
STRATEGY FOR WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION
Article 23
(1) Women's Empowerment and Protection is implemented by integrating gender mainstreaming and gender-disaggregated data based on laws and regulations.
-12- (2) Women's Empowerment and Protection is implemented through working groups and/or integrated services established by Mayor's Decree.
(3) Women's Empowerment and Protection is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Protection.

CHAPTER VII
MECHANISM FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

Part One
General

Article 24
The mechanism for implementing Women's Empowerment and Protection is carried out through the following stages:
a. formulation of policy, program planning and activities;
b. budgeting of programs and activities;
c. implementation of programs and activities; and
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Second Part
Formulation of Program and Activity Planning Policy

Article 25
(1) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning as referred to in Article 24 letter a, shall be implemented through:
a. mapping, collection, processing and presentation of data;
b. coordination and synchronization of the preparation of program and activity planning with related Regional Apparatus; and
c. determination of programs and activities in planning documents.
(2) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning shall be implemented based on minimum service standards and standard operating procedures.
(3) The formulation of policy for program and activity planning for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection, shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of planning.

Third Part
Budgeting of Programs and Activities

Article 26
The budgeting of programs and activities as referred to in Article 24 letter b, is implemented through general budget policy as set forth in the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
-13-

Fourth Part
Implementation of Programs and Activities

Article 27
The implementation of programs and activities as referred to in article 24 letter c, shall be carried out through:
a. implementation of programs and activities contained in the budget document of Regional Apparatus; and
b. coordination and synchronization of program and activity implementation with related Regional Apparatus.

Part Five
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting

Article 28
The implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as referred to in Article 24 letter d, shall be carried out through:
a. conducting monitoring and evaluation periodically on the implementation of programs and activities that have been carried out;
b. Reports shall be submitted at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year or at any time if necessary; and
c. evaluation results as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.

CHAPTER VIII
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Article 29
(1) Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Protection functions as the leading sector in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) Further provisions regarding the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER IX
PARTICIPATION
Article 30
(1) The community, community groups/community organizations, business sector, academics, and/or other professional groups may participate in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. synergy;
-14-
c. provision of communication, information and education media regarding Women's Empowerment and Protection; and
d. active role in the fulfillment of women's rights through social responsibility.
(3) Further provisions regarding participation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 31
(1) The Mayor through the Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Protection conducts guidance and supervision over Women's Empowerment and Protection;
(2) The forms of guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) are as follows:
a. providing socialization to the community and business sector regarding Women's Empowerment and Protection policies;
b. providing educational media regarding Women's Empowerment and Protection, and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitating capacity building of institutions organizing Women's Empowerment and Protection;
d. facilitating forums for women's participation and women's organizations;
e. coordinating the participation of the business sector and other institutions, and international assistance for Women's Empowerment and Protection; and
f. providing awards to the community and business sector both individually and institutionally that have made efforts in Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(3) The form of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities over Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(4) The Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Protection reports the results of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) to the Mayor.
-15-

CHAPTER XI
FUNDING
Article 32
Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and b. other legal and non-binding sources, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 33
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, Regional Regulation of Semarang City Number 5 of 2016 concerning Protection of Women and Children From Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of Semarang City Year 2016 Number 5, Supplement to Regional Gazette of Semarang City Number 106), is revoked and declared invalid.

Article 34
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the time this Regional Regulation comes into force

Article 35
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation. In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of the City of Semarang.
Enacted in Semarang on the date of 9 November 2023

MAYOR OF SEMARANG,
HEVEARITA GUNARYANTI RAHAYU
Promulgated in Semarang on November 9, 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY
CITY OF SEMARANG,
ISWAR AMINUDDIN
Copy in accordance with the original Acting HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

REGIONAL SECRETARIAT OF SEMARANG CITY
Diah Supartiningtias, SH, M.Kn Pembina Tingkat I

NIP. 196710231994012001
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SEMARANG CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 7
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SEMARANG CITY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE: (7-297/2023)

ELUCIDATION
OF
DRAFT REGIONAL REGULATION OF SEMARANG CITY
NUMBER 7 OF 2023
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

I. GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the authority of regional governments to regulate and manage their own governmental affairs directed towards accelerating the realization of public welfare through improvement of services, Empowerment and community participation. The authority of Regional Government is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community Empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.

The implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare by always paying attention to the interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, governmental affairs related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled.

Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to human beings by nature, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or seized by anyone. The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, specifically Article 27 paragraph (1) which states that "All citizens have equal status in law and government and are obliged to uphold the law and government without exception". Although the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia guarantees equal status for every citizen, until now women still experience various obstacles in obtaining their rights in almost all areas of life.

This has an impact, women as part of the national development process, namely as actors as well as beneficiaries of development results, have not been able to obtain optimal benefits in enjoying development results equal to men, especially in the policy formulation process and decision-making, as well as in the implementation of development in all fields and at all levels. On the other hand, women have special needs compared to men so that in accordance with their nature, in certain conditions, the Regional Government must be able to guarantee their rights are fulfilled according to those needs.

-17- Based on this, a regulation is needed that serves as a guideline for all parties, especially the Regional Government in ensuring the implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women in Semarang City. This Regional Regulation is expected to be able to encourage efforts to improve the physical and mental conditions of women in fulfilling their rights and life needs as part of human rights from various fields of development, increase the commitment and effectiveness of regional government in implementing policies, programs and activities as well as encourage the institutional capacity of government and society that improves the quality of life of women.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "Principle of respect for human rights" contains the understanding that the Republic of Indonesia recognizes and upholds human rights and fundamental human freedoms as rights that are inherently attached to and inseparable from human beings, which must be protected, respected, and upheld for the enhancement of human dignity, welfare, happiness, and intelligence as well as justice.
Letter b What is meant by "Principle of non-discrimination" is that in providing protection to women and children victims of acts of violence there shall be no differentiation on the basis of age, sex, race, ethnicity, tribe, religion and between groups.
Letter c What is meant by "Principle of gender equality and justice" is that gender justice is a process to be fair to men and women. Gender equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, governmental activities and equality in enjoying the results of development.
Letter d What is meant by "Principle of justice and legal certainty" is that which contains the understanding that every person has the right to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal treatment as well as to obtain legal certainty and equal treatment before the law.
-18- Letter e What is meant by "Principle of benefit" is that which contains the understanding that the regulation of women's empowerment policies must provide the greatest benefit for the welfare of society.
Letter f What is meant by "Principle of participation" is that which contains the understanding that the entire process of policy formulation and implementation must take into account the active participation of all components of society so as to obtain equal benefits in all fields of development and life.
Letter g What is meant by "Principle of accountability" is that which concerns that the implementation of women's empowerment must be accountable and constitutes part of the accountability of government implementation.
Letter h What is meant by "Principle of inclusion" is the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is carried out by inviting and involving all people with various diversities of abilities, backgrounds, characteristics, status, conditions, ethnicity, culture and others as well as facilitating special needs based on such diversity and eliminating barriers that may hinder the equality of every woman in obtaining her rights.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
-19- Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j What is meant by "performing legal acts" is being legally competent to perform legal acts. A legal act is any act of a legal subject (human or legal entity) the consequences of which are regulated by law, because such consequences can be considered as the will of the one performing the law. Legal acts consist of:
a. Unilateral legal acts, are legal acts performed by one party only and give rise to rights and obligations by one party only. For example: Making a will, and Granting a gift of an object.
b. Bilateral legal acts, are legal acts performed by two parties and give rise to rights and obligations for both parties (reciprocal). For example: sale and purchase agreements, lease agreements and others.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) What is meant by promotive approach is an activity and/or series of activities of health services that prioritize activities that are promotional in nature for health.
What is meant by preventive approach is an activity of prevention against a health problem/disease.
What is meant by curative approach is an activity and/or series of activities of treatment aimed at curing disease, reducing suffering due to disease, controlling disease, or controlling disability so that the quality of the patient can be maintained as optimally as possible.
What is meant by rehabilitative approach is an activity and/or series of activities to return former patients to society so that they can function again as useful members of society for themselves and society as maximally as possible in accordance with their capabilities.
-20-

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "formal education" is an educational pathway that is structured and tiered consisting of basic education, secondary education, and higher education.
What is meant by "nonformal education" is an educational pathway outside formal education that can be implemented in a structured and tiered manner.
What is meant by "informal education" is an educational pathway of family and environment.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Letter a Sufficiently clear Letter b What is meant by "various levels" is development planning from the lowest government unit, namely the kelurahan level, and then hierarchically ascending upward, namely the kecamatan level, city, province, up to national.
Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f Sufficiently clear Letter g Sufficiently clear Letter h Sufficiently clear Letter i Sufficiently clear Letter j Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
-21- Letter b What is meant by basic rights of workers includes:
a. basic right to obtain decent wages.
b. right to obtain equal opportunity and treatment from the company without discrimination.
c. right to obtain work training to improve and develop work competence.
d. right to perform work according to the determined time.
e. right to labor placement.
f. right to obtain protection for occupational health and safety.
g. right to obtain welfare through labor social security.
h. right to participate in trade unions or labor unions.
i. right to obtain leave: at least 12 working days after the employee has worked for one year continuously.
j. right to rest: workers after working four hours continuously, obtain rest opportunity for a minimum of half an hour.
k. right to maternity leave, miscarriage and menstrual leave specifically for female workers/laborers:
Female workers/laborers are entitled to obtain rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months before the time of childbirth and 1.5 (one and a half) months after childbirth according to the calculation of an obstetrician or midwife.
Female workers/laborers who experience miscarriage are entitled to obtain rest for 1.5 (one and a half) months or in accordance with a certificate from an obstetrician or midwife.
Female workers/laborers who during menstruation feel pain and notify the employer, are not obligated to work on the first and second day during menstruation.
l. right to perform worship.
m. right to conduct work strikes.
n. right to obtain severance pay in the event of termination of employment or dismissal.
o. right to appropriate opportunity to provide breast milk to their child if it must be done during working hours.

Article 15
Letter a The criteria for social problems are having a life that is not decent from a humanitarian perspective which includes:
a. poverty;
b. abandonment;
c. disability;
-22-
d. remoteness;
e. social dysfunction and behavioral deviation;
f. disaster victims; and/or
g. victims of violence, exploitation, and discrimination. Article 16 Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Letter a What is meant by "poor women" is women who cannot fulfill their basic needs.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c What is meant by HIV/AIDS is as follows: Human Immunodeficiency Virus hereinafter abbreviated as HIV is a Virus that causes Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome hereinafter abbreviated as AIDS is a collection of symptoms of reduced immune system capability caused by the entry of the HIV virus into a person's body.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by "indigenous women" is women who have real roles and functions related to the resilience of their community based on ancestral origins passed down through generations in customary territories.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.
-23- Letter l Sufficiently clear.
Letter m What is meant by "other vulnerable groups of women" is women who live in conditions that can give rise to acts of violence.

Article 19
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "providing consultation, information, education, and counseling services" is implemented to encourage behavioral change in parents and the Community.
Letter f What is meant by "boarding school" is one that takes the form of general education, vocational and/or religious education or integrated education (general education with religious education, or general education with vocational education or religious education with vocational education) which in its learning process requires its students to live in dormitories.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.
Letter l Sufficiently clear.
Letter m Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.
-24-

Article 21
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h What is meant by "temporary shelter" is a place used as transit for female victims and/or their families, reporters and/or witnesses that is temporary in nature.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j Sufficiently clear.
Letter k Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Letter a What is meant by "periodically" is the time to conduct monitoring and evaluation at least 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year or at any time if needed Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.
-25-

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SEMARANG CITY NUMBER 157