I'd be happy to help translate the text, but I don't see any text provided in your message to translate. Could you please share the text you'd like me to translate into English?

MAYOR OF MADIUN
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE MAYOR OF MADIUN,
Considering : a. that forms of violence against women and children constitute a form of violation of human rights based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that acts of violence against women and children will have prolonged physical, psychological, sexual, social and economic impacts, therefore it is necessary to provide a sense of security and protection;
c. that at present there is no Regional Regulation that guarantees protection for women and children victims of violence in the City of Madiun;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 16 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large City Regions Within the Province of East Java, Central Java, West Java and the Special Region of Yogyakarta (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 45);
- 2 -
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Government Regulation Number 49 of 1982 concerning Amendment to the Territorial Boundaries of the Municipality of Second Level Region of Madiun (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1982 Number 76, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3244);
7. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict;
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
- 3 -
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
11. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province of 2012 Number 3 Series D);
12. Regional Regulation of the City of Madiun Number 02 of 2009 concerning Civil Servant Investigators within the Government of the City of Madiun (Regional Gazette of the City of Madiun of 2009 Number 1/E);
With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY OF MADIUN and

MAYOR OF MADIUN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Madiun.
2. Regional Government is the Government of the City of Madiun.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Madiun.
4. Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security, hereinafter abbreviated as BPMKB dan KP, is the Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security of the City of Madiun.
- 4 -
5. Appointed Official is the Head of the Agency for Community Empowerment, Family Planning, and Food Security of the City of Madiun.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Protection of Women is all efforts made by family, government and others aimed at women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
9. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, or psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
- 5 -
12. Violence against children is any act against children that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of children.
13. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Service is an action that must be immediately taken for victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or having occurred violence against victims.
16. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Repatriation is an effort to return women and child victims of violence from within/outside the country to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
18. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
19. Empowerment is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work and earn independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
20. Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
- 6 -
21. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
22. Integrated Service Center for Acts of Violence Against Women and Children hereinafter referred to as PPT is a form of government and non-government network that organizes integrated community-based services handling victims of violence against women and children which includes legal assistance, medical, and psychosocial services.
23. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, as well as repatriation and social reintegration for women and child victims of violence.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. victim protection;
e. best interests of the victim; and
f. empowerment.

Article 3
(1) The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence;
b. protect victims of violence;
- 7 -
c. take action against perpetrators of violence; and
d. maintain the integrity of harmonious and prosperous households.
(2) Violence as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. economic neglect; and
e. restriction of movement.

CHAPTER III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Article 4
(1) Every person is prohibited from allowing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
(2) Every person is obligated to report the occurrence of violence against women and children to the authorized agency.
(3) Protection of women and children victims of violence is carried out by:
a. Regional Government;
b. related agencies together with other social institutions; c. family and/or closest relatives;
d. community; and/or
e. educational institutions.
(4) Protection efforts for women and children in the event of violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. establishing a working network in violence prevention efforts based on partnership patterns;
b. conducting repressive protection in the form of compensation and curative in the form of medical assistance, psycho-social rehabilitation; and - 8 -
c. conducting education and socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(5) Further provisions regarding protection efforts for women and children as referred to in paragraph (4) are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
RESPONSIBILITY
Article 5
The provision of services for women and children victims of violence is a shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family; and/or
d. parents.

Article 6
(1) The Regional Government implements efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, by means of:
a. collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. conducting education about anti-violence values towards women and children;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
- 9 - (2) To anticipate the occurrence of violence, the Regional Government is obligated to provide and implement services for women and children victims of violence by means of:
a. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for women and children victims of violence;
c. conducting continuous handling up to the stage of rehabilitation and social reintegration.
(3) The Regional Government in implementing efforts to prevent and anticipate violence against women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of the community, family and/or parents who are legally responsible for the victim.

Article 7
The responsibility of the community as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3) shall be implemented in the form of: a. preventing the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children; and
b. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children to law enforcement or the authorized party.

Article 8
The family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 paragraph (3) have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.
- 10 -

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 9
Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to: a. obtain protection from family, police, prosecutor's office, court, advocates, social institutions, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
b. health and psychological services according to medical needs;
c. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
e. spiritual guidance services;
f. the right to information on case developments;
g. the right to safe house (shelter) services;
h. the right to restitution;
i. the right to psychosocial services/recovery; and j. the right to social reintegration.

Article 10
(1) In the event that women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 9 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 11
(1) The operation and/or management of safe houses shall be carried out by BPMKB and KP.
- 11 - (2) For security and/or upon request of victims of violence, the manager or operator of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) shall place victims of violence in certain locations that are kept confidential.
(3) Further provisions regarding the operation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional

Article 12
(1) The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner within the PPT framework.
(2) Further provisions regarding PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Second Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 13
(1) Forms of protection services for women and children victims of violence organized by PPT include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery for physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medico-legal services constitute a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
- 12 -
c. psycho-social services constitute services provided by companions in the context of traumatic recovery of the victim's condition, including provision of space and shelter for victims to protect victims from threats and intimidation;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Further provisions regarding the service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Third Part
Service Principles

Article 14
The provision of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatorily, easily accessible and with a guarantee of confidentiality.

Article 15
The PPT Manager shall provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 14.

CHAPTER VII
MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS
Article 16
MSS for Integrated Services for women and children victims of violence, includes:
a. handling of complaints/reports;
b. health services;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. law enforcement and legal aid; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration.
- 13 -

Article 17
(1) SPM as referred to in Article 16 has performance indicators including:
a. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at community health centers and hospitals;
c. coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for women and children victims of violence in PPT;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children;
f. coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal aid;
g. coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.
(2) Further provisions regarding SPM as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
EMPOWERMENT
Part One
Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence Article 18 Steps for implementing empowerment of women victims of violence include:
a. job training;
- 14 -
b. productive economic enterprises and/or joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 19
The implementation steps for empowerment of women victims of violence as referred to in Article 18 shall be carried out by:
a. providing the necessary requirements for entrepreneurship training for women victims of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitudes and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large enterprises as well as financial institutions to develop businesses of women victims of violence;
e. endeavoring to provide capital for women victims of violence; and
f. expanding access to information and promoting the results of productive economic enterprises of women victims of violence.

Second Part
Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence

Article 20
Implementation Steps for Empowerment of child victims of violence include efforts to increase understanding among children not to commit violence.

Article 21
The implementation steps for empowerment of child victims of violence as referred to in Article 20 shall be carried out by means of:
a. skills training according to the child's interests; and b. fulfillment of education both formal and nonformal.
- 15 -

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 22
(1) The Regional Government conducts monitoring to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by BPMKB, and KP.
(3) The monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of regional work units that implement policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(4) Monitoring shall be conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence every year.

Article 23
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence shall be conducted at the end of each fiscal year or when necessary according to needs.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence shall be used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence for the following year.
(3) Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
- 16 -

CHAPTER X
REPORTING
Article 24
The Mayor through the appointed Official reports the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for women and children victims of violence every year in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 25
(1) The Mayor through appointed Officials conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of SPM in the field of integrated services for women and children victims of violence in the Region.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. provision of implementation instructions;
b. coaching;
c. supervision; and/or
d. monitoring, and evaluation of implementation for women and children victims of violence.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 26
(1) In the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, the community may:
a. establish family partners at the Kelurahan level by the community;
b. conduct independent socialization of the rights of women and children;
- 17 -
c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to the competent authorities if violence against women and children occurs in their environment.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by:
a. individuals;
b. social community institutions;
c. non-governmental organizations;
d. educational institutions;
e. religious institutions;
f. private sector; and/or
g. mass media.

BAB XIII
FUNDING
Article 27
Funding for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIV
INVESTIGATION
Article 28
(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are given special authority as Investigators to conduct investigations of criminal violations of this Regional Regulation, as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Law.
- 18 - (2) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) are certain civil servant officials within the Regional Government who are appointed by authorized officials in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) The authority of Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. to receive, search for, collect, and examine information or reports relating to criminal acts so that such information or reports become complete and clear;
b. to examine, search for, and collect information regarding individuals or Legal Entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts;
c. to request information and evidence from individuals or Legal Entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. to examine books, records, and other documents relating to criminal acts;
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents, as well as to carry out seizures of such evidence;
f. to request the assistance of experts in the context of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. to order someone to stop and/or prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and to examine the identity of persons and/or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. to photograph persons related to criminal acts;
i. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. to terminate investigations; and/or - 19 -
k. to take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of criminal investigations according to law that can be accounted for.
(4) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) shall notify the commencement of investigations and submit the results of their investigations to the Public Prosecutor through the Investigator Official of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Law.

CHAPTER XV
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 29
(1) Violations of the provisions as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (2) shall be punishable by imprisonment of a maximum of 3 (three) months and/or a fine of a maximum of Rp. 25,000,000.00 (twenty-five million rupiah).
(2) In the event that the act as referred to in paragraph (1) is committed by a Civil Servant, it shall be added with employment sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) is a violation.
(4) Violations of the provisions as referred to in Article 4 paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XVI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30
Further provisions as implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 3 (three) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.
- 20 -

Article 31
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Madiun City.
Enacted in M A D I U N on the date of 15 October 2015

MAYOR OF MADIUN,
H. BAMBANG IRIANTO
Promulgated in M A D I U N on the date of May 3, 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY,
MAIDI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN CITY YEAR 2016
NUMBER 7/D
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY EAST JAVA PROVINCE: 343-9/2015

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MADIUN CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN
AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

That every citizen has the right to live free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth, as well as to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence, violence against women and children constitutes a violation of human rights and therefore needs to receive protection so that their right to life is guaranteed in accordance with their dignity and worth without discrimination.

The Regional Government has the obligation to provide protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1945. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. Violence against children is any act against a child that results in misery or suffering physically, mentally, socially, psychologically, including neglect or maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child. The existence of women and child victims of violence has not yet received adequate services, therefore minimum services for victims of violence are required.

This Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence is based on Pancasila, and grounded in the 1945 Constitution, and refers to many Laws, especially those regulating the protection of women and child victims of violence.

- 2 - Among them are Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence and other related laws and regulations.

In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and child victims of violence in Madiun City so that they are protected from threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth, it is necessary to provide protection for women and child victims of violence in the form of regional regulations.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for women and child victims of violence specifically in terms of services, monitoring and evaluation, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of women and child victims of violence in Madiun City.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
letter a Sufficiently Clear letter b What is meant by the principle of "justice" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare.
What is meant by the principle of "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
letter c What is meant by the principle of "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward women and children by not making distinctions based on gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
- 3 - letter d What is meant by the principle of "victim protection" is protection of the person, family, honor, dignity, and property under their authority, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.
letter e What is meant by the principle of "the best interests of the victim" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, then the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration letter f What is meant by "empowerment" is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work and earn a living independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3
paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear paragraph (2) letter a What is meant by "Physical violence" is an act that results in pain, falling ill or serious injury such as slapping, hitting, spitting, pulling hair/grabbing by the hair, kicking, burning with hot objects, hitting/injuring with weapons and or resulting in disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.
letter b What is meant by "Psychological Violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
- 4 - letter c What is meant by "Sexual Violence" includes but is not limited to:
a. forced sexual relations committed against a person residing within the scope of the household and/or forced sexual relations against one person within the scope of the household with another person, for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes;
b. by violence or threat of violence forcing a woman who is not his wife to have sexual intercourse with him;
c. by violence or threat of violence forcing someone to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
d. intentionally committing violence or threat of violence forcing a child to commit sexual intercourse;
e. intentionally committing violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing deception, a series of lies or persuading a child to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed.
letter d What is meant by "economic neglect" is neglecting the economic needs of a wife or child or family member or relative such as not providing for the wife, even spending the wife's money, not providing or withholding the wages of domestic workers or drivers and includes acts of restricting and/or prohibiting family members from working in a proper manner.
letter e What is meant by "restriction of movement" is restricting the movement of a wife or child in developing their potential both for economic and social purposes such as prohibiting them from gathering and socializing in society and restricting the movement of relatives such as preventing domestic workers or drivers from communicating or having contact with family.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear - 5 -

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
letter a Handling of reports/complaints of women and children victims of violence, with the main indicator being the coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units.
Handling of complaints/reports of women and children victims of violence can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely the coverage of availability of officers in integrated service units who have the capability to follow up on community complaints about violence against women and children, in this case the ability to reach victims and follow up on complaints related to alleged violence against women and children;
- 6 - letter b Health services for women and children victims of violence, with the main indicator being the coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive health services by trained health workers at puskesmas capable of managing KtP/A and PPT/PKT at Hospitals.
The health services referred to are services that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects carried out by trained health workers, namely specialist doctors, doctors, dentists, nurses/midwives who have received training on medical management of violence against women and children victims of violence. The health services referred to are carried out at hospitals that provide integrated services and also for women and children at puskesmas that provide comprehensive basic services.
Health services for women and children victims of violence can be measured through supporting indicators:
a. coverage of puskesmas capable of managing KtP;
b. coverage of RSUD/vertical RSU/RSUD/private RS/Polri RS that implement integrated services for women and children victims of violence;
c. coverage of trained health workers on case management of women and children victims of violence at puskesmas; and
d. coverage of trained health workers on case management of women and children victims of violence at RS.
letter c Social rehabilitation for women and children victims of violence with the main indicator being the coverage of social rehabilitation services provided by trained social rehabilitation officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units and coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for women and children victims of violence in integrated service units.
- 7 - Social rehabilitation services for women and children victims of violence can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely the coverage of trained social rehabilitation officers and coverage of officers trained in providing spiritual guidance.
letter d Law enforcement and legal aid for women and children victims of violence with the main indicator being the coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level up to court decisions on cases of violence against women and children and coverage of women and children victims of violence who receive legal aid services.
Law enforcement is the action of apparatus authorized by the State to carry out duties and functions as enforcement of applicable laws and regulations. Legal aid is law everything related to aspects connected with the legal field provided to a person in the criminal or civil justice process.
Law enforcement for women and children victims of violence can also be measured through supporting indicators:
a. coverage of completion of handling cases of violence against women and children at the police level;
b. coverage of availability of women and children service units (UPPA) at Polda and Polres/ta;
c. coverage of availability of facilities and infrastructure at UPPA;
d. coverage of availability of Police trained in providing gender-sensitive services;
e. coverage of availability of prosecutors trained in prosecuting cases of violence against women and children; and
f. coverage of availability of judges trained in handling cases of violence against women and children.
Furthermore, for legal aid services can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely the coverage of availability of legal companion officers or advocates who have the ability to accompany witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children.
- 8 - letter e Repatriation and Social Reintegration for women and children victims of violence, with the main indicator being the coverage of repatriation services for women and children victims of violence and coverage of social reintegration services for women and children victims of violence.
Repatriation and Reintegration constitute efforts to return victims to their area of origin to be returned to the nuclear family, substitute family, or community. Specifically for social reintegration services, can also be measured through supporting indicators, namely the coverage of availability of trained officers to conduct social reintegration.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Paragraph (1) What is meant by required according to need is when there is a development in laws and regulations.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear - 9 -

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF MADIUN CITY NUMBER 36