MAYOR OF BLITAR
EAST JAVA PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR CITY
NUMBER 2 OF 2017
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF BLITAR,

Considering: a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture, discrimination or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience Violence, therefore they need to receive legal Protection;
c. that based on the provisions in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015, women's empowerment and child protection are governmental affairs that must be implemented by Regional Governments;
d. that the implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence in Blitar City has not been optimal, therefore institutional strengthening is needed and there needs to be regulation that can guarantee its implementation in accordance with applicable provisions;
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence;

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 17 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Small City Regions within the Province of East Java, Central Java and West Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1950 Number 42) as amended by Law Number 13 of 1954 concerning Amendment to Law Number 16 and Number 17 of 1950 (Former Republic of Indonesia) Concerning the Establishment of Large Cities and Small Cities in Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1954 Number 40, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 551);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3668);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143); as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
11. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 48 of 1982 concerning Amendment to the Territorial Boundaries of the Second Level Municipality of Blitar (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1982 Number 75, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3243);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);
15. Presidential Regulation Number 87 of 2014 concerning Implementation Regulations of Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Establishment of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 199);
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Women's Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Implementation of Child Protection;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 56);
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
21. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 615);
22. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs 80 of 2015 concerning Establishment of Regional Legal Products (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 2036);
23. Regional Regulation of East Java Province Number 16 of 2012 concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of East Java Province Year 2013 Number 3 Series D);

With Mutual Agreement:

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BLITAR CITY
MAYOR OF BLITAR
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Blitar.
2. Regional Government is the Government of the City of Blitar.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Blitar.
4. Regional apparatus is the supporting element of the Mayor and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of governmental affairs that are the authority of the region.
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child in the womb.
6. Woman is an adult human being of female gender and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
7. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
8. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, community, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
10. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
11. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
12. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
15. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a direct line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and/or child.
16. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
17. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
18. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems faced.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
20. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
21. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
22. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
23. Counseling is the provision of assistance by an expert/trained person in such a way that the psychological understanding and ability of the victim and/or perpetrator increases in solving the problems faced.
24. Integrated Service Unit hereinafter abbreviated as UPT is technical service units in the Region that carry out integrated service functions for women and children victims of crime and/or violence, including as a center for information on women's empowerment and child protection.
25. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is a form of UPT established by the Regional Government that functions as an information center, service center and empowerment center for women and children.
26. Regional Action Plan is the foundation and guideline for related agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in the context of carrying out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of women and children victims of violence.
27. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of victims;
e. empowerment of women and children victims of violence.

Article 3
(1) The objectives of providing protection for women and children victims of violence are to:
a. prevent violence against women and children including human trafficking;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children; d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
e. facilitate and mediate domestic disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household; and
f. Empower women and children victims of violence.
(2) The objectives of providing protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), include aspects of:  a. prevention;
b. services and assistance;
c. reintegration and rehabilitation; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER III
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Forms of violence against women and children can be in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 5
Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 6
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter includes acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c includes: a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.

Article 8
Neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d includes: a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of one's household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 9
Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e includes:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 10
Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation and reintegration stage; e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member as well as a member of society.

Article 11
Child victims of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 10, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full utilization for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER V
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 12
Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. regional government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 13
(1) Regional Government implements efforts to protect women and child victims of violence through:
a. implementing policies for the protection of women and child victims of violence as applied by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and child victims of violence;
c. formation and implementation of the functions of P2TP2A;
d. ensuring the implementation of service facilitation for victims;
e. pursuing effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. pursuing the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
(2) In order to implement the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection for women and child victims of violence.
(3) The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 14
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation. (2) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan level;
b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights; d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.
(4) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly.

Article 15
The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 12 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women and children as family members.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Article 16
(1) The Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence is realized, among others, through the establishment of integrated and networked UPT formed by the Regional Government, community, non-governmental organizations, donor institutions or other institutions.
(2) UPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is P2TP2A or similar institutions that have the same functions and roles.

Second Part
P2TP2A
Paragraph 1
Establishment

Article 17
(1) P2TP2A is established in the Region.
(2) The institutional structure of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is determined by Mayor's Decree.
(3) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is under the coordination of the Regional Work Unit or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.

Paragraph 2
Coordination Mechanism

Article 18
(1) The implementation of P2TP2A functions as referred to in Article 17, is carried out through coordination with Regional Apparatus or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in the form of: a. Coordination meetings with work networks;
b. Consultation;
c. Submission of data and information; and/or
d. Follow-up on case handling.

Article 19
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. Medical services;
b. Medicolegal services;
c. Psychosocial services;
d. Legal services and;
e. Economic independence services.

Article 20
In carrying out the task of providing services to women and children victims of violence, P2TP2A may coordinate with government institutions as well as non-government institutions.

Third Part
Prevention

Article 21
(1) To prevent the occurrence of violence against women and children, the government conducts empowerment and awareness raising to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government undertakes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women and children from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from violence.

Article 22
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 21, shall be implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. Social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of violence by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Fourth Part
Assistance Mechanism

Article 23
(1) Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions that cooperate with P2TP2A.
(2) The mechanism for assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Fifth Part
Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 24
The provision of services and assistance to victims shall be conducted with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Part Six
Services

Article 25
(1) Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence organized by UPT, include:
a. Medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services constitute a form of medical services for the purpose of evidence in the legal field;
c. Legal aid services to assist victims of violence in undergoing the judicial process;
d. Spiritual services;
e. First psychosocial assistance to victims is carried out to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;
f. Assistance to victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with UPT; and
g. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and provision of economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
(3) In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the regional government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other district/city governments, community, family and parents.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for services, and handling of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), are regulated in the Mayor's Regulation.

Seventh Part
Protection

Article 26
(1) In the event that victims of violence require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence. (2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1), constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 27
(1) Safe houses as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (1), provide temporary safe place and/or shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The implementation and/or management of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(3) For security and upon request of victims of violence, the manager or operator of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) may place victims of violence in certain confidential locations.
(4) Further provisions regarding the implementation of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be further regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation (3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 29
The guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 28 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), shall be carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING
Article 30
(1) P2TP2A reports the implementation of protection services for women and children victims of violence to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out every 3 (three) months.
(4) Procedures for reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
SOURCES OF FUNDS
Article 31
Funds for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 32
(1) Regional Governments may provide financing assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women and children victims of violence.
(2) Financing assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity.

CHAPTER X
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 33
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, the old institutions that carry out women's empowerment and protection of child victims of violence may still exercise their authority until new institutions are established.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 34
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 35
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Blitar City.
Enacted in Blitar On the date of 16 June 2017

MAYOR OF BLITAR,
Signed.

MUH. SAMANHUDI ANWAR
Promulgated in Blitar On the date of 16 June 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BLITAR CITY
Signed.
Rudy Wijonarko REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BLITAR CITY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 2 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BLITAR CITY NUMBER 130-2/2017 Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL AND
ORGANIZATIONAL DIVISION,
JUARI
Principal Administrator Level I

# NIP. 19651204 198603 1 006