CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY
NUMBER 5 YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR
VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN,

Considering : a. that all forms of violence, especially gender-based violence and violence against children are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination;
b. that victims of gender-based violence and children must receive protection, both from the Regional Government, related agencies and/or the community, so that the community is protected and free from violence and/or threats of violence in the household and community;
c. that based on Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection, as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government, related agencies, and/or the community are obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of gender-based violence and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Children;

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 16 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large City Regions Within the Provinces of East Java, Central Java, West Java and the Special Region of Djogjakarta, as amended by Law Number 13 Year 1954 concerning the Merger of Laws Number 16 and 17 Year 1950 concerning the Establishment of Large Cities and Small Cities in Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1954 Number 40, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 551);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
4. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as last amended by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Government Regulation Number 21 Year 1988 concerning Changes to the Regional Boundaries of the Second Level Municipality of Pekalongan, Second Level Regency of Pekalongan and Second Level Regency of Batang (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1988 Number 42, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3381);
7. Regional Regulation of Pekalongan City Number 11 Year 2012 concerning the Implementation of Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Pekalongan City year 2011 Number 11);

With Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PEKALONGAN CITY and

MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Pekalongan.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Pekalongan.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution of the City of Pekalongan which is positioned as an element of regional government administration.
5. Regional Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Prevention is activities carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
8. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
10. Implementation of Protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the relevant SKPD.
11. Violence is any act that results in or causes misery and suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological including neglect, threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
12. Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights, the consequences of which include and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
13. Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children, the consequences of which include and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological, and economic violence.
14. Victims of gender-based violence are people who due to their gender experience physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
15. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
16. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering in a person.
17. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
18. Victims of acts of violence are individuals or groups of people who experience physical, mental or emotional suffering, economic loss, or experience neglect, reduction or deprivation of their basic rights, as a result of human rights (HAM) violations, or criminal acts as well as acts of violence committed either by state apparatus or by the state or regional government apparatus or by individuals.
19. Services are immediate activities and actions carried out for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is activities and actions carried out by assistants during the service process.
21. Assistant is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance.
22. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that provides assistance.
23. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of acts of violence to family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
24. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in society.
25. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
26. Regional Action Plan is the foundation and guideline for relevant agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the implementation of prevention and protection of victims of gender-based violence and children.
27. Safe house is a temporary residence, provided to give protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.
28. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
29. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
30. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or step father and/or mother, or adoptive father and/or mother.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Part One
Principles

Article 2
Protection of victims of gender-based violence and children is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution, as well as basic principles that include:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of victims;
c. gender justice and equality;
d. victim protection;
e. survival, and growth and development of children; f. respect for the views of children;
g. transparency;
h. integration;
i. empowerment; and
j. confidentiality of victims.

Article 3
(1) The objectives of implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children are:
a. to prevent all forms of gender-based violence and violence against children, occurring within the household and/or community;
b. to provide protection;
c. to provide legal assistance;
d. to pursue recovery and social reintegration; and/or e. to increase community participation.
(2) The objectives of implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children as referred to in paragraph (1), include aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. services and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every victim of gender-based violence and child victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. protection for personal safety, family, and property, as well as freedom from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
b. participation in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. information regarding case developments and court decisions; d. services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and in accordance with needs; e. recovery and social reintegration;
f. legal assistance, psychological support, spiritual guidance, economic support, social support and interpreter.

Article 5
Child victims of acts of violence, in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 4, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. right to respect;
b. right to basic services;
c. right to equal protection;
d. right to be free from various stigma; and
e. right to obtain freedom
f. right in full to survival, growth and development.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 6
Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children in the Region are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family and/or parents.

Article 7
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 6 letter a, include:
a. implementing protection policies against gender-based violence and violence against children established by the government; b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection against gender-based violence and violence against children; c. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children;
e. allocating budget for the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children in accordance with regional financial capacity; and
f. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children. (2) In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of gender and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for SKPD in implementing protection against gender-based violence and violence against children.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 8
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 6 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of community participation.
(2) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), include:
a. preventing the occurrence of gender-based and child violence;
b. providing information and/or reporting gender-based and child violence to law enforcement or authorized parties; and/or
c. participating in providing assistance, protection or handling of victims of violence.
(3) The forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 9
The obligations and responsibilities of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 6 letter c are to prevent all forms of violence and protect victims of gender-based violence and children as family members in accordance with their respective roles.

CHAPTER V
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 10
(1) The Regional Government has the duty to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of gender-based and child violence, in the form of: a. collecting data and information about acts of gender-based and child violence, and laws and regulations; b. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based and child violence;
c. conducting education about anti-violence values toward gender and children; and
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection against acts of gender-based and child violence.
(2) The Regional Government in anticipating the occurrence of acts of gender-based and child violence, has the authority to provide and organize services for victims in the form of: a. providing and facilitating the establishment of integrated services for victims of acts of violence by involving institutions and community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims; and
c. conducting community empowerment for the prevention of acts of violence.
d. actively carrying out handling efforts for victims of gender-based and child violence.
(3) The Regional Government in implementing obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives, or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER VI
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
Part One
Institutional

Article 11
In order to provide services and protection against gender-based and child violence, the Regional Government establishes the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution (LP PAR) as an integrated service center for victims of gender-based and child violence.

Second Part
Form and Mechanism of Prevention

Article 12
Forms of prevention of gender-based and child violence carried out by the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution, can be implemented through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community; and
b. training of members of the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution related to the implementation of their duties in preventing acts of gender-based and child violence.

Article 13
(1) The Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with the Sub-District Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution and competent parties in conducting efforts to prevent the occurrence of criminal acts of gender-based and child violence.
(2) Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Third Part
Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 14
(1) The Regional Government conducts empowerment and awareness-raising to families, parents, and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling to prevent the occurrence of criminal acts of gender-based and child violence.
(2) In addition to empowerment and awareness-raising as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government undertakes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection against acts of gender-based and child violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building network cooperation with law enforcement officers, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about gender and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for protection against acts of gender-based and child violence.

Article 15
(1) Efforts to prevent the occurrence of gender-based and child violence as referred to in Article 14, shall be implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection; f. public order and security; and
g. planning.
(2) Prevention of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Fourth Part
Services and Assistance

Article 16
The forms of services and assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children organized by the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution, include: a. medical;
b. medicolegal;
c. psychosocial;
d. legal;
e. economic independence

Part Five
Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 17
The provision of services and assistance to victims of gender-based violence and children, is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Sixth Part
Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 18
(1) The form of service is implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the field of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. gender-based empowerment and child protection; d. welfare;
e. education;
f. population;
g. labor.
(2) In carrying out the duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government cooperates with Government agencies, Provincial Government, other Regency/City Governments, and the community.

Article 19
Regional Government and/or the community may establish recovery houses or safe houses.

Seventh Part
Reunification

Article 20
(1) Forms of Reunification provided to victims of gender-based violence and children are as follows:
a. repatriation;
b. social reintegration.
(2) Repatriation services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a include:
a. implementing coordination with relevant agencies;
b. implementing the victim repatriation process; and
c. providing protection to the victim's destination.
(3) Social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b include:
a. assistance in the process of reunification with the victim's family;
b. providing information to the local community for the victim's reunification with their environment;
c. providing assurance that the family and community are ready to accept the victim back; and
d. implementing economic empowerment.

Part Eight
Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 21
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct empowerment of victims of acts of violence.
(2) The empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented by the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution.
(3) In conducting empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall formulate empowerment programs in the economic field, which include:
a. procuring the needs required for entrepreneurship training for victims of acts of violence, in order to increase knowledge, attitude, and business skills;
b. facilitating the implementation of various job training and skills training;
c. providing assistance in developing productive economic enterprises;
d. exploring cooperation with small, medium and large enterprises, as well as financial institutions to develop the businesses of victims of acts of violence;
e. endeavoring to facilitate the provision of capital for victims of acts of violence; and
f. expanding access to information and promoting the products of victims of acts of violence.
(4) In conducting empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government may establish cooperation with job training institutions organized by the private sector.

Article 22
(1) Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 21, is carried out by providing training to improve capability, skills, and independence.
(2) Training as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through: a. training in the workplace;
b. training before placement; and
c. job readiness training.

Article 23
Further provisions regarding the establishment, duties and functions of the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Agency and the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children shall be regulated by Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIP
Part One
Cooperation

Article 24
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of implementing protection against gender-based violence and child violence as referred to in Article 3, the Regional Government cooperates with: a. the Government;
b. the Provincial Government;
c. other regency/city governments; and
d. the community.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses, and followed up in accordance with applicable law.
(3) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with laws and regulations.

Second Part
Partnership

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government establishes partnerships with stakeholders in the implementation of protection against gender-based and child violence.
(2) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out through: a. notification of employment opportunity information for victims of gender-based and child violence;
b. education and training for victims of violence; c. educational assistance for victims of violence who have been withdrawn from their education; and
d. fostering and increasing the economic independence of victims of violence.
(3) The partnership as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), shall be set forth in the form of an agreement.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 26
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. minimum service standards (SPM);
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(3) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for guidance and supervision by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 27
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children organized by the Regional Government through the mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Mayor or DPRD.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 28
(1) The community may participate in efforts to implement protection against acts of gender-based violence and violence against children. (2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be carried out by individuals or organizations.
(3) Community participation in the implementation of protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children may be carried out through:
a. providing protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children;
b. providing emergency assistance;
c. providing advocacy to victims and/or the community regarding the handling of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children;
d. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders;
e. conveying information to the authorized authorities related to cases of gender-based violence and violence against children; f. fostering local wisdom with the principles of non-discrimination and best interests of victims in handling gender-based violence and violence against children;
g. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling gender-based violence and violence against children; h. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to gender-based violence and violence against children.

CHAPTER X
REPORTING
Article 29
(1) SKPD is obligated to report the implementation of protection services against gender-based violence and violence against children to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports on recapitulation of reported cases shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER XI
SOURCES OF FUNDS
Article 30
Funds for the implementation of protection against gender-based violence and violence against children, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 31
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pekalongan City.
Enacted in Pekalongan on the date of 16 June 2015

MAYOR OF PEKALONGAN,
Seal.
signed.-

MOHAMAD BASYIR AHMAD
Promulgated in Pekalongan on the date of 16 June 2015

REGIONAL SECRETARY,
DWI ARIE PUTRANTO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PEKALONGAN CITY YEAR 2015 NUMBER 5
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY, CENTRAL JAVA PROVINCE: ( 5 / 2015 )

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PEKALONGAN CITY
NUMBER 5 OF 2015
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR
VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

The State has an obligation to provide a sense of security to its citizens from threats and actions that can disturb and damage psychological, physical, sexual and economic security. This is philosophically stated in the preamble of the 1945 Constitution, that the purpose of establishing the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is to protect the entire Nation and the Homeland of Indonesia. Because the Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), it is obligated to fulfill these provisions.

Human Rights state that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the State, especially the Government. Through Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection, the government recognizes the existence of children's rights. The human rights inherent in children include basic rights as human beings, namely the Right to Life, the Right to Growth and Development, the Right to Protection and the Right to Participation. To fulfill the Right to life, children need food in sufficient quantities, healthy and nutritious, as well as optimal health access. Protection from violence that threatens their safety and health must be provided from an early age. Protection is needed to prevent physical, mental and sexual violence and exploitation. To fulfill the right to growth and development, children need space to play, exercise, and education that is appropriate to their physical and psychological development.

In fulfilling children's rights, every government administrator, community and parents are obligated to understand and care about children's rights. The existence of legal instruments and law enforcement officials who defend the interests of children is necessary for this protection effort. Legislation that is principled on defending the best interest of the child is needed to realize protection that is legal in nature. Furthermore, it is not uncommon to find cases of women and children who experience problems of physical, psychological, sexual and social violence. For example, women and children who are victims of persecution, neglect, eviction and abuse by parents or other people. For women and children who experience these problems, the government must provide a Safe House (children protection home) or Integrated Service Center (PPT) for women and children victims of violence. The Safe House or PPT is a safe place and is friendly in nature for women and children. The PPT is equipped with companions from educators, doctors, psychologists, religious leaders and networked with lawyers for women and children as well as the RPK Unit at the Police.

The fate of women and children victims of violence must be given attention by the government. The large number of cases of violence against women and children are often caused by factors that develop in society, for example low levels of economy, education, environments located in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of violence like this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights. For the empowerment of victims of violence, local governments can establish an Integrated Service Center for the Empowerment of Women and Children (P2TP2A) as a center for empowering women victims of violence which specifically has the main duties and functions for empowerment of women and children victims of violence. From the framework above, the Government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce, and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children. From these various efforts, a legal framework will be realized in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear

Article 2
Sufficiently clear

Article 3
Sufficiently clear

Article 4
Sufficiently clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Paragraph (1) If based on urgency and assessment it is possible, then the Women, Children and Adolescent Protection Institution may be established up to the Kelurahan level.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 14
Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
In addition to victims of gender-based violence and children, the forms of services and assistance organized by LP-PAR are also provided to Children in Conflict with the Law. In legal literature, ABH states that Children in conflict with the law are children who have reached the age of 12 (twelve) years but have not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years and are not yet married:
a. Who are suspected, alleged, accused, or sentenced for committing a criminal offense;
b. Who become victims of a criminal offense or who see and/or hear directly the occurrence of a criminal offense.
Children in conflict with the law can also be defined as children who are forced to come into contact with the criminal justice system because:
a. They are suspected, accused, or declared proven guilty of violating the law
b. They have become victims as a result of acts of legal violations committed by person/group of persons/institution/state against them; or
c. They have seen, heard, felt, or known of an event of legal violation.
There are two categories of child behavior that cause them to come into conflict with the law:
a. Status Offence, namely delinquent behavior of children which if committed by adults would not be considered a crime, for example: skipping school, running away from home, etc.
b. Juvenile Delinquency, namely delinquent behavior of children which if committed by adults would be considered a crime or criminal act, for example: robbery, rape, sexual harassment, etc. Therefore, if viewed from its scope, children in conflict with the law can be divided into:
a. Perpetrators or suspects of criminal offenses;
b. Victims of criminal offenses;
c. Witnesses to a criminal offense As a child, legal mechanisms and the sense of justice in society must be placed within a framework that constructively encourages their physical and psychological development.
The forms of services and assistance organized by LP-PAR are also provided to women in conflict with the law.
Legal protection of women's interests in performing their position in society requires the preparation of various laws and regulations, and the consistent enforcement thereof, as well as socialization activities to raise awareness of their rights and obligations. In addition, non-legal support is needed, because law is only one means of social control. Action agendas from various components of society in an integrative manner need and must be immediately realized.
Furthermore, in the context of empowerment and protection of women, there needs to be legal, psychological, social and economic assistance when women are faced with legal processes.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently clear

Article 19
Sufficiently clear

Article 20
Sufficiently clear

Article 21
Sufficiently clear

Article 22
Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Sufficiently clear

Article 24
Sufficiently clear

Article 25
Sufficiently clear

Article 26
Sufficiently clear

Article 27
Sufficiently clear

Article 28
Sufficiently clear

Article 29
Sufficiently clear

Article 30
Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear