COPY
MAYOR OF BANDUNG

PROVINCE OF WEST JAVA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG CITY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2025
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
MAYOR OF BANDUNG,

Considering:
a. that women have a strategic position as an asset of the nation, therefore the empowerment and protection of women must be carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner through acceleration of the fulfillment of empowerment and protection of women in community, national and state life;
b. that every woman has the right to survival, to grow, to develop and to obtain protection from threats of fear, treatment that degrades dignity, self-worth, human dignity and has the right to obtain access to and control over economic, political, social, cultural resources, so that women can play a role and participate actively in social life;
c. that to guarantee legal certainty in the implementation of empowerment and protection of women as well as to carry out mandatory regional government affairs, regulation in a Regional Regulation is necessary;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women;

In View of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

-2-
4. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 238, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);
5. Law Number 30 Year 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 6 Year 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 Year 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 238, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6841);
6. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
7. Law Number 4 Year 2024 concerning Welfare of Mothers and Children in the First Thousand Days of Life Phase (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 98, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6923);
8. Law Number 104 Year 2024 concerning Bandung City in West Java Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 290, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 7041);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
10. Presidential Regulation Number 55 Year 2024 concerning Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Protection of Women and Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2024 Number 73);
11. Regional Regulation of West Java Province Number 2 Year 2023 concerning Empowerment and Protection of Women (Regional Gazette of West Java Province Year 2023 Number 2, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Java Province Number 264);

-3-
With Mutual Approval
REGIONAL PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF BANDUNG CITY
and
MAYOR OF BANDUNG

DECIDES:
To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Part One
General

Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. City Region hereinafter referred to as Region is the City Region of Bandung.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Bandung.
4. Regional Government Administration is the implementation of government affairs by the regional government and regional house of representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
5. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a Regional People's Representative Institution that is positioned as an element of Regional Government administration.
6. Woman is a person or human being who has a womb, experiences menstruation, pregnancy, gives birth to children and breastfeeds.
7. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that women can organize themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and actively participate in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
8. Women's Protection is all efforts to protect and provide a sense of security to women as well as the fulfillment of their rights through consistent, structured, and systematic attention.
-4-
9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband and wife and their children, or father and children or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct lineage upward and downward up to the third degree.
10. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and DPRD in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
11. Every Person is an individual or corporation, whether legal entity or non-legal entity.
12. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women.
13. Service is an activity and immediate action carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
14. Handling is an action taken to provide complaint services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement, legal services, repatriation, and social reintegration.
15. Companion is a person who is trusted and has the competence to accompany Victims in accessing the right to handling, protection and recovery.
16. Accompaniment is an activity and action carried out by a companion during the service process. 17. Institution is an Agency/Office/Bureau within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organization (NGO) that conducts accompaniment.
18. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
19. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Children Protection hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a technical operational implementation unit in a work unit that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection, which functions as an organizer of Integrated Services for women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, and other problems.
20. Integrated Service is the provision of integrated, multi-aspect, cross-functional and cross-sectoral services for Victims, Victims' Families, and/or Witnesses of Sexual Violence Crimes.
-5-

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
Part One
Principles Article 2 The Principles of Empowerment and Protection of Women are: a. protection;
b. non-discrimination;
c. kinship;
d. inclusiveness;
e. synergy;
f. order and legal certainty;
g. sustainability; and
h. accountability.

Second Part
Purpose Article 3 This Regional Regulation is established to serve as a guideline for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Women's Protection by the Regional Government, business sector and the Community in development services in the Region.

Part Three
Objectives Article 4 The objectives of the establishment of this Regional Regulation are as follows:
a. to serve as a guide for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Women's Protection by the Regional Government, business sector and the Community;
b. to guarantee legal certainty in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection by the Regional Government, business sector and the Community;
c. to realize synergy between the Regional Government, business sector and the Community in providing effective, efficient, transparent and accountable services for handling the Empowerment and Protection of Women victims of violence;
d. to empower Women both individually, in families, groups and the Community so that they are able to live independently; and
e. to prevent, serve and handle Women victims of violence and Women experiencing vulnerability in order to achieve independence.
-6-

Part Four Scope
Article 15 The scope of this Regional Regulation is as follows:
a. women's rights;
b. Women's Empowerment;
c. Women's Protection;
d. guidance and supervision; and
e. community participation.

CHAPTER III
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Article 6 Every Woman in the Region has the right:
a. to life;
b. to form a family and continue descendants; c. to self-development;
d. to obtain justice;
e. to security;
f. to welfare; and
g. to participate in government.
Article 7 (1) The right to life as referred to in Article 6 letter a, includes:
a. the right to maintain life and improve living standards;
b. the right to obtain tranquility, security, peace, happiness, physical and spiritual welfare; and
c. the right to a good and healthy environment. (2) The right to form a family and continue descendants as referred to in Article 6 letter b, namely to form a family, continue descendants through legal marriage in accordance with religion and laws and regulations.
(3) The right to self-development as referred to in Article 6 letter c, includes:
a. the right to fulfillment of basic needs to grow and develop properly;
b. the right to protection for personal development, to obtain education, educate oneself and improve quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
c. the right to develop and obtain benefits from science and technology, arts and culture for the welfare of oneself, nation and state;
-7-
d. the right to obtain information to develop oneself and social environment in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
e. the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available means in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
f. the right to fight for self-development, both personally and collectively, to build society, nation, and state in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms;
g. the right to participate in conducting social activities in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms; h. the right to participate in planning and implementation of government policies in accordance with laws and regulations;
i. the right to assemble and associate in accordance with laws and regulations; and
j. the right to obtain education and teaching in accordance with religious, social, and legal norms.
(4) The right to obtain justice as referred to in Article 6 letter d, includes:
a. the right to receive equal treatment without discrimination; and
b. the right to submit applications, complaints, and lawsuits, whether in criminal, civil, or administrative cases;
(5) The right to security as referred to in Article 6 letter e, includes:
a. the right to protection of oneself, family, honor, dignity, and property rights;
b. the right to protection from violence in digital space including cyber harassment;
c. the right to recognition before the law as a human person; and
d. the right to be free from threats that violate religious, social, and legal norms.
(6) The right to welfare as referred to in Article 6 letter f, includes:
a. the right to perform work and receive fair wages in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. the right to maternity leave, granted to working Mothers for a minimum of the first 3 (three) months, and the next 3 (three) months if there are special conditions proven by a doctor's certificate;
c. the right to obtain rest time, granted to working Mothers for 1.5 (one and a half) months or in accordance with a doctor's certificate, or midwife in case of miscarriage;
-8-
d. the right to obtain appropriate opportunities and facilities for health and nutrition services and to perform lactation during working hours;
e. the right to guarantee the fulfillment of Mother's rights, husbands have the right to obtain leave to accompany their wives during childbirth, for 2 (two) days and may be granted for a maximum of the next 3 (three) days or in accordance with agreement.
(7) The right to participate in government as referred to in Article 6 letter g, includes:
a. the right to be elected and to elect;
b. the right to pursue a career in government; and c. the right to convey aspirations directly or through intermediaries in government.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Part One
Implementation of Empowerment Article 8 (1) The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility in the efforts of Women's Empowerment. (2) The efforts of Women's Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the laws and regulations. (3) Women's Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. socio-cultural;
b. economic;
c. legal; and
d. political.
Article 9 (1) Women's Empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter a shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that oversees the affairs of Women's Empowerment, social, culture, education, health, tourism with the participation of individuals, the Community, the education sector and the business sector.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of formal education in stages and strengthening the capacity of women in informal and non-formal education in accordance with potential to improve their social status;
-9-
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts;
c. strengthening the capacity of women through social institutions and/or cultural preservation center institutions;
d. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
e. active participation of women in socializing and educating the Community to develop themselves in the social and cultural fields;
f. involving women in various socio-cultural and tourism events at various levels both local, national and international; and
g. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and the development of science, technology, sports, arts and culture for the advancement of Women.

Article 10
(1) Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter b is implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Regional Apparatus responsible for manpower affairs;
c. Regional Apparatus responsible for industry and trade affairs;
d. Regional Apparatus responsible for tourism and culture affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus responsible for cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises affairs; f. Work Unit responsible for economic affairs; g. Work Unit responsible for welfare affairs; and
h. participation of individuals, the Community, the education sector and the business sector.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the economic field as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint economic enterprises;
c. facilitation of capital and manpower accessibility; and
d. facilitation of marketing network development.
-10- (3) Job training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. briefing, workshops, mentoring for women to be work-ready;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.
(4) Productive economic enterprises and joint economic enterprises as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training;
b. facilitation of the formation of joint business groups; and
c. business implementation assistance.
(5) Facilitation of capital and manpower accessibility as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c includes:
a. assistance with work facilities and infrastructure;
b. working capital facilitation; and
c. manpower accessibility that is fair for women.
(6) Facilitation of marketing network development as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d includes:
a. facilitation of marketing women's business products; b. facilitation of marketing women's business products domestically and abroad; and
c. inclusion of women's groups in economic, industrial and trade promotion.

Article 11
(1) Women's Empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter c, shall be implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Work Units responsible for legal affairs; and c. participation of individuals, the Community, the education sector and the business sector.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication services, consultation, information and education;
b. facilitating access and consultation services and legal aid;
c. conducting socialization and education regarding the rights of Women and the obligations of Women;
-11-
d. providing capacity strengthening to Women so that they can perform legal actions independently and responsibly;
e. facilitation of discussion activities, FGDs, training that raises issues/problems regarding law in local, national and international perspectives; and
f. encouraging Women to be actively involved and contribute in advocacy education, and government as well as the business sector.
(3) The implementation of Women's Empowerment in the field of law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 12
(1) Women's Empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (3) letter d, shall be implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment affairs;
b. Work Units responsible for general government affairs;
c. participation of individuals, the Community, the education sector and the business sector.
(2) Women's Empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. involvement of Women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for Women to hold public office;
c. participation in political activities in various political activities; and
d. self-development through political education. (3) The Regional Government must provide a certain percentage to Female State Civil Apparatus for managerial positions, in accordance with needs through established mechanisms.
Article 13 In order to realize the implementation of Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 5 letter b, it shall be carried out through:
a. providing access for Women to education services, health, social services and other strategic services;
b. encouraging the involvement of Women in the development process;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals, and family resilience; and d. encouraging programs to increase Women's independence in the economic, political, legal, social, cultural fields, as well as other strategic fields.
-12-

Second Part
Women's Empowerment Institution

Article 14
(1) The establishment and development of Institutions providing Women's Empowerment services shall be implemented by:
a. Regional Apparatus responsible for governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and child protection;
b. Regional Apparatus responsible for manpower affairs;
c. Regional Apparatus responsible for industrial and trade affairs;
d. Regional Apparatus responsible for tourism and cultural affairs;
e. Regional Apparatus responsible for cooperatives and micro, small and medium enterprises; f. Work Units responsible for welfare affairs;
g. Work Units responsible for economic affairs; h. participation of individuals, the Community, the education sector and the business sector.
(2) Provisions regarding the establishment of Institutions providing Women's Empowerment services shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 15
(1) Every Female victim of acts of violence has the right to obtain continuous protection and handling up to the rehabilitation stage.
(2) The handling of Female victims of acts of violence must be kept confidential unless otherwise determined by the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain professional Assistance services based on the condition and needs of the victim.
(4) The Regional Government provides integrated Services for comprehensive and integrated protection and handling.
(5) Integrated services as referred to in paragraph (4) shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment and child protection affairs.
-13-

Part Two
Forms of Acts of Violence Against Women

Article 16
(1) Forms of Violence against Women include: a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence; and
d. psychological violence.
(2) Forms of physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, include any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
(3) Forms of sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, include sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forcing intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or other non-commercial purposes.
(4) Forms of economic violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, include neglect of Women by not providing proper living support.
(5) Forms of psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d are acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or other psychological suffering to the victim.
Article 17 (1) Every Woman victim of acts of violence must receive protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Protection of Women victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to Women who experience acts of violence in the family environment, Society, the education sector, offices and the business sector.

Part Three
Responsibility of Regional Government for the Protection of Women Victims of Acts of Violence Article 18 (1) Prevention of the occurrence of acts of violence against Women is implemented by all Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), is implemented comprehensively and in an integrated manner.
-14- (3) The Regional Government is responsible for taking actions to prevent violence against Women in the form of:
a. collecting data and information on violence and victims of acts of violence in the family environment, Society, the world of education, offices and the business world in accordance with laws and regulations;
b. conducting socialization to the Society regarding anti-violence values against Women; c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for victims of acts of violence;
d. establishing service standards for the Protection of Women victims of acts of violence;
e. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of Protection for Women victims of acts of violence; and
f. preparing reports on the implementation of prevention of Protection for Women victims of acts of violence.
(4) The Regional Government is responsible for providing and organizing services for Women victims of acts of violence in the form of:
a. Service institutions for Women victims of acts of violence;
b. encouraging public awareness regarding the interests of protection for Women victims of acts of violence; and
c. preparing reports on the implementation of Protection for Women victims of acts of violence.
(5) The Regional Government in carrying out its responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) must pay attention to the rights of victims, victims' families and/or other parties legally related to the victims.
(6) Prevention actions by the Regional Government can be carried out through efforts, as follows:
a. conducting socialization regarding acts of violence against Women that occur in the domestic sphere and/or public sphere;
b. conducting socialization on handling Women victims of acts of violence in the domestic sphere and/or in the public sphere;
c. conducting socialization regarding the rights of Women;
d. seeking to improve the Empowerment and Protection of Women;
-15-
e. facilitating and/or opening access to skills training to support the welfare of families of victims of acts of violence;
f. conducting socialization to individuals, families/groups and Society regarding procedures for reporting if violence against Women occurs;
g. empowering social community institutions and women's organizations to prevent acts of violence against Women; and
h. forming social networks (networking) in efforts to prevent and handle Women victims of acts of violence.

Part Four
Protection of Women Victims of Acts of Violence Article 19 (1) The Regional Government provides protection to Women victims of acts of violence implemented comprehensively and in an integrated manner.
(2) Protection of victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. social protection;
b. medical protection;
c. legal protection;
d. economic protection; and
e. psychological protection.
Article 20 (1) Social Protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter a is in the form of support to ensure the survival of Women from social vulnerability in order to ensure the fulfillment of decent living needs.
(2) Medical protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter b is in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics at the nearest health service facility from the victim in accordance with the victim's needs.
(3) Legal protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter c is in the form of Services and Assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes by providing legal aid, legal consultation and legal Assistance to victims.
-16- (4) Economic protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter d is in the form of services for skills and to provide economic access in accordance with the identification of economic empowerment needs of victims taking into account: a. age;
b. education level;
c. expertise;
d. interests and talents;
e. experience in participating in training; and/or f. employment history.
(5) Psychological protection as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (2) letter e is in the form of psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, are capable of being independent in problem solving.
(6) Other psychological protection is in the form of Assistance to victims to recover from traumatic conditions. (7) Provision of temporary shelters intended to protect victims from various threats and intimidation as well as to facilitate data collection and extraction of victim information. (8) Placement of victims in temporary shelters taking into account:
a. the level of threat to victims that endangers life;
b. security and safety of victims;
c. acceleration of handling and recovery of victims; d. ease of access in assisting victims; and
e. preparation for repatriation of victims before returning to their area of origin.
Article 21 Protection as referred to in Article 19 is carried out through efforts to provide services and rapid handling to witnesses and/or victims, as follows:
a. providing services and rapid handling to witnesses and/or victims;
b. providing ease, comfort, safety, and free of charge for witnesses and/or victims; c. maintaining confidentiality of witnesses and/or victims; d. guaranteeing justice and legal certainty for witnesses and/or victims;
e. provision of health workers, social workers, spiritual counselors, psychologists, and legal advisors; f. establishing and developing service programs for Protection of Women victims of acts of violence by involving the business sector and the Community to facilitate the Community's access to services; and
g. providing protection for Assistants, witnesses, victims and their families.
-17- Article 22 The provision of services for Protection of Women victims of acts of violence is not subject to fees and is implemented in a precise, accurate and easily accessible manner to the community.

Part Five
Public Complaint Services Article 23 (1) The Regional Government in implementing the policy of Protection of Women victims of violence must provide complaint services in the form of UPTD PPA.
(2) UPTD PPA as referred to in paragraph (1) is tasked to:
a. receive reports or outreach to victims; b. provide information about victims' rights; c. facilitate the provision of health services; d. facilitate the provision of psychological strengthening services;
e. facilitate the provision of social rehabilitation services, social empowerment and reintegration;
f. provide legal services;
g. identify economic and empowerment needs;
h. identify temporary shelter needs for victims and victims' families that need to be fulfilled immediately;
i. facilitate the needs of victims with disabilities;
j. coordinate and cooperate on the fulfillment of victims' rights with other Institutions; and
k. monitor the fulfillment of victims' rights by law enforcement apparatus during the court proceedings.
Article 24 (1) The Regional Government establishes a Women's Protection service task force by Mayor's Decree.
(2) Regional Apparatus that administers the affairs of Women's Empowerment and child protection must issue Standard Operating Procedures in the implementation of complaint services.
-18- Article 25 (1) The Regional Government facilitates social community institutions as a community self-help effort in the Protection of Women from violence.
(2) In order to realize the implementation of Protection of Women victims of violence is carried out through:
a. providing access to Women victims of violence to obtain education services, health, Social services and other strategic services;
b. encouraging the involvement of Women victims of violence in the process of resolving problems and recovery of victims psychologically and physically as individuals, family members, groups and communities;
c. providing knowledge, skills, character values, morals, and personal resilience, family resilience and Community resilience; and
d. encouraging programs that can increase the independence of Women in the economic, political, legal, social, cultural fields, as well as other strategic fields.
Article 26 Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing Women's Empowerment and Protection are regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
DEVELOPMENT AND SUPERVISION
Article 27 (1) Regional Government conducts development and supervision of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) The form of development and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
-19-

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 28 (1) The Community may participate in the planning and implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection policies.
(2) Community Participation as referred to in paragraph (1), may be submitted through the delivery of suggestions, opinions orally and in writing through Regional Apparatus that administers Women's Empowerment and Child Protection affairs.
(3) The Community, community institutions/organizations and the business sector individually and/or institutionally may participate in the financing/funding of Women's Empowerment and Protection programs and activities organized by the Regional Government.
(4) The Community, community institutions/organizations and the business sector individually and/or institutionally may participate in monitoring and evaluation.
(5) Every form of Community participation shall be recorded and reported to the Regional Government through the Regional Apparatus that administers Women's Empowerment and Child Protection affairs.
(6) The Regional Government may grant awards to the Community that has played an active role and has met the requirements in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
FINANCING
Article 29 Financing for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection activities may be sourced from: a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
-20-

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30 This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation with its placement in the Regional Gazette of the City of Bandung.
Enacted in Bandung on June 30, 2025 MAYOR OF BANDUNG, signed.

MUHAMMAD FARHAN
Enacted in Bandung on the date of 30 June 2025

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE CITY OF BANDUNG,
sgd.

ISKANDAR ZULKARNAIN
LOCAL GAZETTE OF BANDUNG CITY YEAR 2025 NUMBER 7 REGISTRATION NUMBER, LOCAL REGULATION OF BANDUNG CITY WEST JAVA PROVINCE (7/58/2025) Certified true copy LEGAL BUREAU BANDUNG CITY GOVERNMENT, -21-

EXPLANATION
OF
BANDUNG CITY REGIONAL REGULATION
NUMBER 7 OF 2025
CONCERNING
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

I. GENERAL
The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia mandates the authority of regional governments to regulate and manage their own governmental affairs directed towards accelerating the realization of community welfare through improved services, empowerment and community participation. The authority of Regional Government is to make regional policies to provide services, increase participation, initiative, and community empowerment aimed at improving people's welfare.

The implementation of regional autonomy must always be oriented towards improving community welfare by always paying attention to the interests and aspirations that grow in society. Therefore, governmental affairs related to basic services such as basic education, health, fulfillment of minimum living needs, basic environmental infrastructure must be fulfilled.

Human rights are basic rights that are inherently attached to human beings by nature, are universal and lasting, so they must be protected, respected, maintained, and may not be ignored, reduced, or seized by anyone. In the context of Upholding Human Rights (HAM) to guarantee justice for every individual by seeking to prevent all forms of unbalanced treatment or treatment deemed detrimental to other parties, whether between individuals, between groups of individuals, or between individuals and between government and society, including the process of marginalization of women that causes women to be vulnerable to acts of violence, discrimination and exploitation in both domestic and public spheres.

Women have equal and equivalent rights with men, however in certain discriminatory conditions, the government is obliged to implement affirmative action so that the rights of women and women in vulnerable groups need to receive protection so as not to experience violence and can live a decent life according to the principles of humanity, equality and justice. Women's empowerment and women's protection are implemented in order to realize gender equality and justice. To implement these affairs, efforts are needed to increase the capacity of women's resources and strengthen gender mainstreaming institutions, through gender mainstreaming strategies and gender-disaggregated data.

-22- The Bandung City Government as the party that has the authority to regulate and protect the citizens of Bandung City, deems it necessary to continuously carry out and formulate regulations in order to provide guarantees for women's empowerment and women's protection in Bandung City. This Regional Regulation is expected to be able to encourage efforts to improve the physical and mental conditions of women in fulfilling their rights and life needs as part of human rights from various development sectors, increase the commitment and effectiveness of regional government in implementing policies, programs and activities as well as encourage the institutional capacity of government and society that improves the quality of life of women.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article1 Sufficiently clear.
Article2 Sufficiently clear.
Article3 Sufficiently clear.
Article4 Sufficiently clear.
Article5 Sufficiently clear.
Article6 Article7 Sufficiently clear.
Article8 Sufficiently clear.
Article9 Sufficiently clear.
Article10 Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.
Article 14 Sufficiently clear.
-23- Article 15 Sufficiently clear.
Article 16 Sufficiently clear.
Article 17 Sufficiently clear.
Article 18 Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20 Sufficiently clear.
Article 21 Sufficiently clear.
Article 22 Sufficiently clear.
Article 23 Sufficiently clear.
Article 24 Sufficiently clear.
Article 25 Sufficiently clear.
Article 26 Sufficiently clear.
Article 27 Sufficiently clear.
Article 28 Sufficiently clear.
Article 29 Sufficiently clear.
Article 30 Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF THE CITY OF BANDUNG NUMBER 7