REGENT OF DEMAK
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DEMAK REGENCY
NUMBER 1 OF 2014
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF DEMAK,
Considering : a.




b.




c.




d.
that all forms of violence, especially gender-based violence and violence against children are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination;

that victims of gender-based violence and violence against children must receive protection, both from the regional government and/or the community in order to be protected and free from violence and/or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community;

that based on Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government together with the community is obligated to undertake prevention, protection, and recovery efforts for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children;

that based on the considerations as referred to in point a, point b and point c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children;

In View of : 1

2

3


4




5



6




7








8




9




10




11





12






13




Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

Law Number 13 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of Central Java;

Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);

Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);

Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437 as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);

Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

Government Regulation Number 2 of 1988 concerning Child Welfare Efforts for Children with Problems (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1988 Number 2, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3367);

Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Development and Supervision of the Implementation of Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);

Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/Municipal Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);

Regional Regulation of Central Java Province Number 3 of 2009 Concerning the Implementation of Protection for Victims of Gender-Based Violence and Violence Against Children (Regional Gazette of the Province of 2009 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Central Java Province Number 20);

With the Mutual Approval of THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF DEMAK REGENCY and

REGENT OF DEMAK
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

GENDER AND CHILDREN.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Demak Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration.
3. Regent is the Regent of Demak.
4. Regional Apparatus Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is the Regional Apparatus Work Unit in Demak Regency.
5. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
9. Implementation of protection is a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation coordinated by the SKPD in charge of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
10. Violence is any act that results in or can result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
11. Gender-Based Violence is any form of restriction, exclusion, differentiation and all forms of treatment carried out on the basis of gender and aimed at reducing, eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or use of human rights, the consequences of which include and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
12. Violence Against Children is any form of restriction, differentiation, exclusion and all forms of treatment carried out against children the consequences of which include and are not limited to physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence.
13. Victim of Gender-Based Violence is a person who due to their gender experiences physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual suffering, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
14. Child Victim of Violence is a child who receives harsh treatment whether physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community, including children who become perpetrators of violence.
15. Victim Recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
16. Psychosocial Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the purpose of self-strengthening of victims of gender-based violence and children to resolve the problems faced.
17. Integrated Services is a series of activities to provide protection for victims of gender-based violence and children carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unified implementation, prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
18. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
19. Safe House (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
20. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations, and/or community organizations.

Article 2
Protection of victims of gender-based violence and children is based on Pancasila and grounded in the 1945 Constitution, as well as basic principles that include:
a. Non-discrimination
b. The best interests of the child
c. The right to life, survival and development
d. Respect for the views of the child
e. Confidentiality
f. Empowerment
g. Not blaming the victim
h. Decision in the hands of the victim
i. Integration

Article 3
The objectives of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children include: a. providing a sense of security for victims;
b. obtaining legal handling; and
c. pursuing recovery and social reintegration.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
(1) Every victim of gender-based violence and child victim of violence has the right to: a. obtain protection for personal security, family and property, and be free from threats related to testimony that will be, is being, or has been given;
b. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
d. obtain integrated services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and in accordance with needs;
e. recovery and social reintegration;
f. obtain legal assistance, psychological support, spiritual guidance, economic support, social support and interpreter services;
g. special handling related to victim confidentiality; h. obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as wife/mother, husband/father, child and household member as well as community member; and
i. obtain information about laws and regulations that protect victims.
(2) The Rights of Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER III
OBLIGATIONS AND AUTHORITIES OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 5
(1) In implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, the Regional Government is obligated to:
a. carry out all efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence;
b. provide protection for victims of violence;
c. provide recovery services and social reintegration for victims;
d. encourage and increase community participation;
e. conduct cooperation with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect and recover victims of violence; and
f. supervise the implementation of services for victims involving the community.
(2) To carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of gender-based violence and children;
b. facilitate the implementation of integrated services;
c. provide facilities and infrastructure;
d. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
e. conduct coordination and cooperation in implementing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children; and
f. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
(3) The regional government in carrying out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

BAB IV
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional

Article 6
Integrated services assist the Regional Government in providing protection to victims of gender-based violence and child victims of violence.

Second Part
Integrated Services

Article 7
(1) Integrated services as referred to in Article 6 shall be established by the Regional Government in accordance with laws and regulations.
(2) The establishment of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of members from regional government elements, non-governmental organizations, health service institutions, law enforcement officers, professional personnel, companion volunteers, social workers, religious counselors, safe houses (shelters), and social rehabilitation centers.
(3) Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for Integrated Services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8
The duties of integrated services include:
a. pursuing prevention;
b. recovery and social reintegration;
c. providing legal protection;
d. conducting mediation, coordination and cooperation;
e. pursuing increased community participation; and
f. monitoring and evaluation.

Third Part
Principles of Service

Article 9
In carrying out the duties as referred to in Article 8, integrated services shall apply the following principles:
a. easy;
b. precise; and
c. comfortable;

Fourth Part
Prevention Efforts

Article 10
Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 8 letter a include:
a. conducting communication, information, and education regarding gender-based and child violence; and
b. socialization of laws and regulations related to gender-based and child violence.

Part Five
Recovery Efforts and Social Reintegration

Article 11
Recovery and Social Reintegration Efforts as referred to in Article 8 letter b, include:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions; b. providing medicolegal services;
c. assisting in the repatriation of victims;
d. providing temporary protection in safe houses (shelters); e. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. providing spiritual guidance services; and
g. conducting family and community preparation, economic empowerment and return to school and/or other educational institutions.

Sixth Part
Legal Protection

Article 12
Legal protection as referred to in Article 8 letter c includes:
a. providing assistance in legal proceedings;
b. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence can be carried out through the appointment of guardianship in accordance with applicable regulations.

Seventh Part
Mediation, Coordination and Cooperation

Article 13
Mediation, coordination and cooperation as referred to in Article 8 letter d includes:
a. conducting mediation in resolving problems with related parties;
b. conducting coordination and cooperation in handling cases of violence with the Provincial integrated services;
c. conducting coordination and cooperation with integrated services between districts;
d. conducting coordination and cooperation with institutions providing services for victims of gender-based violence and children; and e. conducting coordination with the Regional Government.

Part Eight
Community Participation

Article 14
Community participation as referred to in Article 8 letter e is carried out through:
a. providing protection for victims;
b. providing emergency assistance;
c. providing advocacy to victims and or the community regarding the handling of gender-based violence and child cases;
d. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders;
e. conveying information to the authorized authorities related to cases of gender-based violence and child cases;
f. fostering local wisdom in handling gender-based violence and child cases;
g. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling gender-based violence and child cases; and
h. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to gender-based violence and child cases;

Part Nine
Monitoring and Evaluation

Article 15
Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in Article 8 letter f includes monitoring, documentation and evaluation of cases of gender-based violence and violence against children.

Article 16
The implementation of integrated services shall be coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

CHAPTER V
COOPERATION
Article 17
(1) In providing protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, the regional government cooperates with the Central Government, Provincial Government and Regency/City Government and other institutions.
(2) Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Central Government and Provincial Government as referred to in paragraph (1) includes consultation, coordination and reporting.
(3) Cooperation between the Regional Government and Regency/City as referred to in paragraph (1) includes coordination, advocacy, referral, repatriation, social reintegration, facilitation of Integrated Service System development, monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

CHAPTER VI
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 18
(1) The Regent shall conduct control, guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and violence against children.
(2) The implementation of control, guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out on a daily basis by the SKPD responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCING
Article 19
All activities related to the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget as well as other lawful and non-binding receipts.

CHAPTER VIII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 20
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, all implementing regulations related to the protection of victims of gender-based violence and children shall remain valid insofar as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 21
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Demak Regency.
Enacted in Demak on the date of 13 January 2014  REGENT OF DEMAK

MOH. DACHIRIN SAID
Promulgated in Demak On the date of January 13, 2014 Regional Secretary of Demak Regency

SINGGIH SETYONO
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DEMAK REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 1
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF DEMAK REGENCY
NUMBER 1 YEAR 2014
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS OF GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL
In the 1999 National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, it is stated that Women as mothers of the nation and children as successors of the nation are creatures created by God Almighty, therefore they must be protected and their honor, dignity, and self-respect must be safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race and class in community, national and state life.
To realize the achievement of enforcement and fulfillment of human rights, the government is obliged to provide protection and security for women and children as outlined in a policy both at the national and regional levels.
The government is responsible for taking actions both legally, politically, economically and socially to prevent, suppress, reduce and eliminate all forms of violence against women and children, whether in the form of policies applicable both at the national and regional levels.
Acts of violence against women and children can occur in the public sphere as well as in the domestic sphere (within the household) and can occur at any time, in peaceful situations as well as conflict. Acts of violence against women and children are actions that violate, hinder, negate and ignore the human rights of women and the rights of children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
letter a What is meant by "non-discrimination" is protection for all victims of gender-based violence and children without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture, and language, legal status and physical or mental condition.
letter b What is meant by "best interests of the child" is all actions concerning child victims of violence carried out by the government, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, then the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration letter c What is meant by "life" is the most fundamental human right for children that is protected by the state, government, society, family and parents.
What is meant by "survival" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to identity.
What is meant by "child development" is as stated in the principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, including the right to education, the right to play, the right to create and recreate.
letter d What is meant by "respect for the views of the child" is respect for the rights of children to participate and express their opinions in decision-making, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.
letter e What is meant by "confidentiality" is every action taken to ensure victims are in a safe condition from threats or other actions that threaten the life and psychological state of victims.
letter f What is meant by "Empowerment" is every action to motivate victims to be able to control their own lives to shape the future according to their wishes.
letter g What is meant by "not blaming the victim" is an attitude and treatment of not blaming the victim for the occurrence of violence experienced by them.
letter h What is meant by "Decision in the hands of the victim" is the right of victims of gender-based violence to determine the best choice in resolving their problems.
letter i What is meant by "integration" is that in the implementation of protection for victims of gender-based violence and children, it is carried out by building coordination between service providers, including medical services, legal advocates, psychologists, religious counselors, social workers, police.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
letter a Sufficiently clear.
letter b Sufficiently clear.
letter c Sufficiently clear.
letter d Sufficiently clear.
letter e Sufficiently clear.
letter f Sufficiently clear.
letter g Sufficiently clear.
letter h what is meant by a child born out of wedlock has civil relations with his/her mother and his/her mother's family as well as with the man as his/her father which can be proven based on science and technology and/or other evidence according to law having blood relations, including civil relations with his/her father's family.
letter i Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Paragraph (1) letter a Sufficiently clear.
letter b Sufficiently clear.
letter c Sufficiently clear.
letter d Sufficiently clear.
letter e What is meant by "cooperation" is a systematic and integrated method among organizers of protection and handling of victims of violence in providing services for victims of gender-based violence and children.
letter f Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
letter a Sufficiently clear.
letter b What is meant by "Medicolegal" is the effort to collect evidence for the purpose of proof in the judicial process. letter c Sufficiently clear.
letter d Sufficiently clear.
letter e Sufficiently clear.
letter f Sufficiently clear.
letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF DEMAK REGENCY YEAR 2014 NUMBER 1