REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER 12 YEAR
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU,

Considering : a. that Women and Children have the right to obtain protection from torture, threats, pressure, and have the right to obtain equal treatment and opportunities to obtain justice and welfare in accordance with the mandate of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that Women's Empowerment and protecting the rights of Children is the obligation of the Regional Government and the Community in the Region;
c. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b and letter H Division of Government Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Appendix to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law, the Regional Government has the authority to implement Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;

In View of : 1. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elemination of All Forms of Discrimination Againts Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 102, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 1 of 2023 concerning the Criminal Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6842);
5. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
6. Law Number 6 of 2014 concerning Villages (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 7, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5495) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
8. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
9. Law Number 17 of 2023 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2023 Number 105, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6887);
10. Presidential Regulation Number 25 of 2021 concerning Child-Friendly Regency/City Policy (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2021 Number 96);
11. Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 19 of 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2016 Number 19) as has been amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 5 of 2021 concerning Second Amendment to Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 19 of 2016 concerning Formation and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2021 Number 5);
12. Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 11 of 2021 concerning Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Year 2021 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 126);

With Mutual Approval
Has Decided : REGULATION

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY
REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU
DECIDES:
REGIONAL
CONCERNING
IMPLEMENTATION
OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Tanah Bumbu Regency.
2. Regional Government is the head of the Region as an element of the Regional Government organizer who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous Region.
3. Head of Region hereinafter referred to as Regent is the Regent of Tanah Bumbu Regency.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the people's representative institution of Tanah Bumbu Regency Region.
5. Agency is the Regional Apparatus that organizes government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
6. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in organizing government affairs that are the authority of the Region.
7. Women's Empowerment is an effort to obtain access and control over resources, economic, political, social, cultural, so that Women can regulate themselves and increase self-confidence to be able to play a role and participate actively in solving problems, so as to be able to build capacity and self-concept.
8. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into men and Women.
9. Woman is an adult human of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a Woman.
10. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a Child who is still in the womb.
11. Child in conflict with the law (ABH) is a Child in conflict with the law, a Child who is a victim of a criminal act and a Child who is a witness to a criminal act.
12. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
13. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting Women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
14. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from Violence and discrimination.
15. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security.
16. Toddler is a Child aged 0 (zero) to 5 (five) years, in the early stages of human development.
17. School-Age Child is a Child aged 6 (six) to 18 (eighteen) years.
18. Neglected Child is a Child whose needs for mental and religious guidance as well as services for clothing, food, shelter, health, education, physical, and social needs are not properly met.
19. Child who is a victim of an act of Violence is a Child who experiences mistreatment such as being abused, humiliated, which endangers the Child physically, mentally and socially.
20. Child maltreatment is all forms of violence against children committed by those who should be responsible and/or those who have power over the child, who should be trusted, namely parents, close family, teachers, supervisors, law enforcement officers, caregivers and companions (World Health Organization).
21. Child in emergency situations is a Child who is in situations and conditions that endanger him/herself such as Children victims of riots, Children who become refugees, Children victims of natural disasters and Children in armed conflict.
22. Child in conflict with the law is a Child in conflict with the law, a Child victim of a criminal act, and a Child who is a witness to a criminal act.
23. Child of isolated indigenous community is a Child who lives in a situation of isolation where they cannot access basic needs.
24. Economically exploited Child is a Child who is forced and/or deceived to be employed by parents or others without being paid or being paid.
25. Sexually exploited Child is the use of a Child for sexual purposes with cash or other forms of compensation between the Child, buyer of sexual services, intermediary or agent and other parties who profit from the sexual trade of the Child.
26. Child who is a victim of Napza abuse is a Child who suffers from dependence on Napza caused by Napza abuse, either of their own volition or due to encouragement or coercion by others.
27. Child with special needs is a Child who experiences physical and/or mental disabilities that interfere with their growth and development in accordance with the stages of Child development.
28. Child victim of maltreatment is a Child who receives treatment that is not in accordance with the rights of the Child.
29. Village is a legal community unit that has territorial boundaries authorized to regulate and manage Government affairs, the interests of the local Community, based on Community initiative, rights of origin, and/or traditional rights that are recognized and respected in the Government system of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia.
30. Child in need of Special Protection is a Child in emergency situations, a Child in conflict with the law, a Child from isolated indigenous communities, a Child who is economically and/or sexually exploited, a Child victim of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other active substance (Napza) abuse, a Child victim of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, a Child victim of physical and/or psychological Violence, a Child with special needs, and a Child victim of maltreatment and neglect.
31. Child Trafficking is a criminal act or action that meets one or more elements of recruitment, transfer, handover of a Child using Violence or threat of violence, fraud, kidnapping, confinement, abuse of power, exploitation of a position of vulnerability or debt bondage for the purpose of and/or resulting in exploiting the Child.
32. Child Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, Community, government/Regional Government, and the state.
33. Child Obligations are everything that must be carried out by Children in accordance with the functions and roles of Children.
34. Social Organization hereinafter referred to as Orsos is an institution/foundation/social association formed by the Community whether legally incorporated or not legally incorporated that functions as a means of Community participation in implementing Social Welfare Efforts (UKS).
35. Non-Governmental Organization hereinafter abbreviated as LSM is an organization/institution formed by members of the Indonesian citizen Community, voluntarily of their own will and interested in and engaged in the field of social welfare efforts determined by the organization/institution, as a manifestation of Community participation in efforts to improve the standard of living and welfare of the Community that emphasizes voluntary service.
36. Napza are chemical substances which when introduced into the body either orally (drunk, smoked, inhaled and sucked) or injected, can affect a person's thoughts, mood, feelings and behavior. This can cause disturbances in social conditions characterized by negative indications, long duration of use and excessive use.
37. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Child Protection hereinafter referred to as UPTD PPA is the Regional technical implementation unit for Women and Child Protection at the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Agency that provides services for Women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, Special Protection, and other problems.
38. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES, AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
Empowerment

Article 2
Women and Child Protection is organized based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. best interests of the Child;
h. accountability; and
i. gender responsive.

Pasal 3
The purpose of establishing this Regional Regulation is as a guideline in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 4
and Protection Regulations regarding the Empowerment of Women and Children aim to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of every Woman and Child to survival, growth and development;
b. improve the quality of life of Women, Children and the quality of families;
c. increase the institutional capacity of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region, including the development of gender and Child data systems; and
d. provide protection of Women's rights and fulfillment of Children's Rights including Special Protection for Children from various forms of Violence and other discriminatory treatment.
(1) Implementation

Article 5
Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as regulated in this Regional Regulation as an inseparable part of regional development planning in the regional long-term development plan, regional medium-term development plan, and Regional Government work plan, the content of which concerns Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.
(2) Regional development planning as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be set forth in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection programs and activities by adhering to the classification, codification, and nomenclature of development planning.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 6
The scope of regulation for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection includes:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. Women's Protection;
c. Child Protection;
d. safe houses;
e. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by Village government;
f. family quality;
g. cooperation;
h. awards;
i. Community participation;
j. financing;
k. prohibitions;
l. investigation provisions; and
m. criminal provisions.

CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 7
(1) The Regional Government is responsible for Women's Empowerment.
(2) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the Agency.
(3) In the implementation of Women's Empowerment administration, the Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) shall involve:
a. Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in the fields of:
1. population administration;
2. education;
3. Village government;
4. Regional development planning;
b. national commission on Women.

Article 8
Regional Government has the authority to:
a. institutionalize Gender Mainstreaming;
b. carry out Women's Empowerment Women's Empowerment in the political, legal, social and economic fields in community organizations; and
c. strengthen and develop service provider institutions for Women's Empowerment.

Article 9
(1) Regional Governments in implementing Women's Empowerment shall establish a Gender Mainstreaming institution. (2) The Gender Mainstreaming institution as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be the responsibility of the Regent.

Article 10
Further provisions regarding the Gender Mainstreaming institution as referred to in Article 9 shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One General
Article 11
(1) Regional Government is responsible for providing Protection of Women covering: efforts
a. to establish and implement policies, programs and activities for Protection of Women;
b. to undertake prevention efforts against the occurrence of Violence against Women;
c. to undertake prevention efforts against the occurrence of criminal acts of human trafficking;
d. to increase the effectiveness of services for Women and Children victims of acts of violence;
e. to increase protection efforts for Women workers;
f. to strengthen and develop institutions providing protection services for Women workers;
g. to strengthen and develop institutions providing Protection of Women services;
h. to conduct cooperation with the government, Regional Government, other Regional Governments, private parties, business sector, and/or Community non-governmental organizations in efforts to prevent the occurrence of acts of Violence against Women; and
i. to involve the active role of families, religious leaders, Community and institutions in the field of Protection of Women.
(2) The responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that administers governmental affairs in accordance with their duties and functions.

Article 12
Regional Government provides Protection of Women in the form of:
a. prevention of Violence against Women;
b. provision of services for Women victims of Violence that require coordination at the Regional level; and
c. strengthening and development of institutions providing Women Protection services.

Part Two Protection of Women's Rights
Article 13
(1) The Regional Government guarantees protection of women's rights.
(2) Women's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) include the fields of:
a. education;
b. health;
c. employment;
d. politics;
e. law; and
f. economic, cultural and social.

Article 14
Women's Rights in the field of education as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter a include:
a. formulating policies to facilitate Women's access and revoking discriminatory policies that hinder the fulfillment of Women's rights to education;
b. obtaining equal opportunities with men to receive education and instruction in all types and levels of educational pathways.

Article 15
Women's Rights in the field of health as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter b include:
a. obtaining education regarding reproductive health;
b. obtaining health services;
c. obtaining family planning services;
d. obtaining services for pregnant mothers; and
e. childbirth and post-childbirth services.

Article 16
Women's Rights in the field of employment as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter c include:
a. empowerment of women entrepreneurs;
b. obtaining decent work; and
c. obtaining protection from criminal acts of human trafficking.

Article 17
Women's Rights in the political field as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter d include:
a. facilitating the increase of Women's political participation in legislative institutions;
b. providing facilities and infrastructure for Women's organizations whose vision and mission advocate for the fulfillment of rights and protection of Women;
c. implementing socialization in order to increase awareness of Women's rights in the political field; and
d. encouraging the establishment of Women's forum organizations.

Article 18
The Rights of Women in the field of law as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter e include:
a. facilitating the improvement of legal knowledge and awareness for Women; and
b. encouraging the establishment of organizations that provide free legal services for Women.

Article 19
The Rights of Women in the economic, cultural and social fields as referred to in Article 13 paragraph (2) letter f include:
a. facilitating Women in improving family economy;
b. encouraging the activities of Women as agents of change;
c. facilitating Women in increasing social activities;
d. obtaining capital assistance.

Article 20
Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing the fulfillment of Women's rights as referred to in Article 13 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
CHILD PROTECTION
Part One General
Article 21
(1) The Regional Government conducts Child Protection in the Region.
(2) Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is through the Protection of Children's Rights.
(3) Children's Rights as referred to in paragraph (2) are guided by the provisions of Regional Regulation of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 11 of 2021 concerning the Implementation of Child-Friendly Regency (Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency of 2021 Number 11, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency Number 126).

Second Part
Implementation of Child Protection

Article 22
(1) Regional Government, NGOs/Social Organizations, Community and parents/family are obligated to provide Child Protection which consists of:
a. Children in the womb;
b. Toddlers;
c. School-Age Children;
d. Neglected and street children; and
e. Children who require Special Protection.
(2) The implementation of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through:
a. policies, programs, and mechanisms regarding:
1. prevention, supervision, complaints/reporting, and development of Child data information systems;
2. integrated handling for Children who are victims of violence, maltreatment, exploitation and neglect;
3. guarantee of fulfillment of the rights of every Child who is a victim of crime, violence, maltreatment, exploitation and neglect including:
a) recovery services and health maintenance; b) continuity of education services;
c) psychosocial services; and
d) legal aid services.
4. implementation of family support including:
a) counseling;
b) Child parenting education;
c) family mediation; and
d) economic support.
b. increasing Community awareness and attitudes through socialization, education, and information regarding:
1. Child Rights, Child Protection, prevention of child marriage and Child parenting; and
2. the impact of violence, maltreatment, exploitation, and Child neglect.
c. increasing the capacity of Child Protection services which includes development of institutional capacity and service provider personnel.
d. service provider personnel as referred to in letter c includes:
1. health;
2. education;
3. psychosocial;
4. parenting; and
5. legal aid.
e. increasing the ability of Children to recognize risks and dangers from situations or actions that can cause violence, exploitation, maltreatment, and neglect.
(3) The implementation of Child Protection as referred to in paragraph (2) letters a through e is carried out and/or coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Child Protection affairs.

Part Three Handling
Article 23
(1) The targets of handling of Children include:
a. Children outside the care of parents; b. Children in disaster emergency situations;
c. Children in conflict with the law;
d. Children victims of physical, mental and/or sexual Violence;
e. Children subject to maltreatment and neglect;
f.
Children victims of economic exploitation;
g. Children who are victims of the criminal act of trafficking in persons;
h. Children who are victims of gambling, narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances and other addictive substances (Napza); and
i.
Children who are in situations where the nature and conditions of the workplace can endanger the health, safety, and morals of Children.
(2) Handling as referred to in paragraph (1) must be carried out immediately including:
a. identifying and receiving complaints/reports; b. rescue actions;
c. placement of Children in temporary shelters;
d. rehabilitation including:
1. health recovery services;
2. psychosocial recovery services; and
3. legal assistance/expert witness assistance.
e. social reintegration in the form of post-rehabilitation service support.

Article 24
(1) The identification and receipt of complaints/reports as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a includes:
a. ensuring the readiness of complaint services for Child Protection issues;
b. following up on information or complaints/reports received regarding Child Protection issues; and
c. identifying the type of problem, needs, and handling plan.
(2) The SKPD responsible for Child Protection affairs must identify problems and receive complaints/reports.

Article 25
(1) Rescue actions as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b shall be carried out if based on identification results it is known that the safety of the Child is threatened.
(2) Actions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by removing the Child from the threatening situation and environment.
(3) The SKPD responsible for Child Protection must carry out rescue actions and coordinate with the Police Apparatus/Civil Service Police Unit.

Article 26
(1) Placement of a Child in temporary shelter as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c shall be carried out if based on identification results it is known that:
a. the safety of the Child is threatened;
c. the Child
b. the Child does not have a family/caregiver or guardian; and cannot be reunited with family/caregiver/guardian and/or the Community.
-1- (2) Placement as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out for a certain period of time while the Child receives recovery services and/or until the family/caregiver/guardian is assessed to have the readiness to care for and protect the Child. (3) In the placement as referred to in paragraph (2), the Child shall receive services for the fulfillment of basic needs and psychosocial assistance.
(4) The SKPD responsible for social affairs must organize temporary shelter.

Article 27
(1) Health recovery services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 1 include:
a. emergency services;
b. providing visum et repertum or visum psikiatricum upon request or statement from the police;
c. follow-up services in the form of outpatient and/or inpatient care in accordance with medical provisions; and
d. providing further referrals in accordance with the situation and condition of the victim.
(2) The SKPD responsible for health affairs must organize health recovery services.

Article 28
(1) Psychosocial recovery services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 2 include:
a. counseling;
b. psychosocial therapy;
c. mental and spiritual guidance; and
d. assistance.
(2) The SKPD responsible for social affairs must provide psychosocial recovery services.

Article 29
Legal assistance/expert witness services as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d number 3 include:
a. ensuring the Child is accompanied by legal counsel; and b. facilitating assistance to Child victims of violence, both in the examination process at court hearings and outside court hearings.
(1) Social reintegration

Article 30
in the form of post-rehabilitation service support as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter e includes:
a. tracing of family members;
b. reuniting Child victims and family members/substitute family and/or Community;
c. facilitation of provision of psychosocial assistance for families;
d. support for access to further education or health services; and
e. monitoring and evaluation.
(2) SKPD with authority over social affairs shall administer social reintegration.

Article 31
(1) Handling as referred to in Article 23, through Article 30 shall be implemented synergistically.
(2) The implementation of handling as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the SKPD responsible for Child Protection affairs.

Fourth Part
Protection of Children in the Womb

Article 32
Protection of Children in the womb as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter a is carried out through:
a. provision of means and facilities for examination of Children in the womb;
b. provision of nutritious food and immunization for pregnant women;
c. provision of abortion prevention services;
d. provision of appropriate and prompt delivery process services;
e. provision of the best health services for mothers and Children during the delivery process and post-delivery; and
f. implementation of Protection of Children in the womb for pregnant women with problems.

Fifth Part
Protection of Children Under Five Years of Age

Article 33
(1) Protection of Children Under Five Years of Age as referred to in

Article 22 paragraph (1) letter b is carried out through:
a. provision of complete breastfeeding;
b. provision of nutritious food and complete basic immunization;
c. provision of Child growth and development program services and Child parenting patterns;
d. provision of Child daycare facilities;
e. provision of play areas; and
f. provision of special breastfeeding rooms at certain places.
(2) Protection of Toddlers can be implemented through the PSTPA model and playgroups.
(3) PSTPA and/or playgroups as referred to in paragraph (2) must meet the following requirements: a. registered and obtained recommendation from the relevant SKPD within the Regional Government;
b. have adequate human resources and funding sources to manage PSTPA and/or playgroups; and
c. have facilities and infrastructure in accordance with service guidelines at PSTPA and/or playgroups.
(4) Protection of Toddlers can be implemented if in special or urgent conditions.

Sixth Part
Protection of School-Age Children

Article 34
(1) Protection of School-Age Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter c includes:
a. receiving attention and guidance from teachers and/or supervisors without discrimination;
b. receiving attention and affection from family;
c. receiving religious guidance at school and in the Community environment;
d. receiving prevention services, health rehabilitation and care;
e. receiving compulsory education for a minimum of 9 (nine) years and being able to complete senior secondary school supported by a friendly and conducive environment;
f. receiving education guarantees;
g. receiving guidance and counseling; and
h. providing adequate places for play and sports.
(2) Every person and/or any party is obligated to protect School-Age Children from acts of violence, sexual harassment and food containing hazardous substances in the family, school, Office/agency/institution and Community environment.
(3) Every person and/or any party is obligated to protect School-Age Children from acts of suspending and/or expelling Children from school and/or causing Children to drop out of school.

Section Seven Protection of Neglected Children
Article 35
(1) Protection of Neglected Children as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter d, namely Children whose parents do not have the ability to care for the Child, is implemented through institutional and non-institutional forms of service; (2) The institutional form of service as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented by Child Protection Homes or PSAA owned by either the Regional Government or the Community.
(3) The non-institutional form of service as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented within the family or Community environment that is not in the form of an institution.
(4) Child Protection Homes or PSAA owned by the Community as referred to in paragraph (2) must meet the following requirements:
a. registered and received recommendation from the relevant SKPD within the Regional Government and/or District/City government;
b. have adequate human resources and funding sources to manage the Child Protection Home or PSAA; and
c. have facilities and infrastructure that have been determined in the service guidelines for Child Protection Homes or PSAA.

Part Eight
Protection of Children Who Require Special Protection

Article 36
Children requiring Special Protection as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) letter e consist of:
a. Children in emergency situations and conflict areas;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from remote indigenous communities;
d. Children who are economically and/or sexually exploited;
e. Children who are victims of narcotics abuse including aromatic glue that can cause hallucinatory effects and the like;
f. Children who are victims of kidnapping, sale, and trafficking; g. Children who are victims of physical and/or psychological Violence;
h. Children with special needs; and
i. Children who are victims of mistreatment and neglect.

Paragraph 1
Children in Emergency Situations and Conflict Areas

Article 37
Special Protection for Children in emergency situations and conflict areas as referred to in Article 36 letter a shall be in the form of fulfillment of basic needs consisting of:
a. basic social services;
b. education;
c. religious guidance;
d. health services;
e. psychological counseling and/or psychotherapy;
f. legal assistance; and
g. recreational and educational activities.

Paragraph 2
Children in Conflict with the Law

Article 38
(1) Special Protection for Children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 36 letter b includes Children in conflict with the law and Child victims of criminal acts, constituting the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government, Police, Prosecutor's Office, Court, Parents, Family and Community.
(2) The handling of Children in conflict with the legal process and the implementation of Judge's decisions must continue to prioritize the Rights of the Child.
(3) Special Protection for Children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented through:
a. treatment of Children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and Rights of the Child;
b. provision of special accompanying officers for Children from an early stage; c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the Child;
e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of Children in conflict with the law; f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
g. protection from identity disclosure through mass media and to avoid labeling.
(4) In the case of a Child in conflict with the law, law enforcement officials shall not conduct justicia examination of the Child without the knowledge of parents or guardians, and it shall be conducted with:
a. rehabilitation efforts through special institutions for the best interests of the Child;
b. protection efforts from identity disclosure through mass media and to avoid labeling;
c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, whether physical, mental or social; and
d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Paragraph 3
Children From Remote Indigenous Communities

Article 39
(1) Special Protection for Children from isolated indigenous communities as referred to in Article 36 letter c shall be carried out through the provision of facilities and infrastructure to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religious teachings, and use their own language.
(2) Every person and/or and/or any parties are prohibited from obstructing Children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings, and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Paragraph 4
Children Who Are Exploited Economically and/or Sexually

Article 40
(1) Special Protection for Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 36 letter d is carried out through:
a. prevention of Children from supervision that is utilized by certain parties as objects of exploitation;
b. disseminating and/or socializing laws and regulations related to the Protection of Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
c. monitoring, reporting and imposing sanctions; and
d. involving various government agencies, companies, trade unions, NGOs, and the Community in the elimination of exploitation of Children.
(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from conducting economic and/or sexual exploitation of Children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Paragraph 5
Child Victims of Narcotics Abuse Including Aromatic Glue Sniffing and the Like that can Cause Hallucinatory Effects and the Like

Article 41
(1) Special Protection for Children who are victims of narcotics abuse including aromatic glue and the like that can cause hallucinatory effects and the like as referred to in Article 36 letter e, and involved in the use, production and distribution thereof, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the Community.
(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from deliberately placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Children in the abuse, production and distribution of narcotics, aromatic glue and the like as referred to in paragraph (1).

Paragraph 6
Child Victims of Abduction, Sale and Trafficking

Article 42
(1) Special Protection for Children who are victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking as referred to in Article 36 letter f is carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, care, rehabilitation and reintegration efforts by the Regional Government and the Community.
(2) To implement prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government together with the Police, Prosecutor's Office, Courts, Community, NGOs and Social Organizations take steps in the form of:
a. implementing socialization and/or campaigns regarding prevention, handling and elimination of Child Trafficking practices;
b. implementing cooperation with other Regions as well as with other countries through bilateral or multilateral cooperation in accordance with statutory regulations.
(3) Protection for Children who are victims of Child Trafficking is implemented through Shelters and/or other Child Protection Institutions, through referrals from government institutions or the Community.
(4) Every Child who is a victim of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, has the right to obtain care and rehabilitation both physical, psychological and reintegration in the family environment as well as the Community.

Paragraph 7
Child Victims of Physical and/or Psychological Violence

Article 43
(1) Every Child victim of physical and/or psychological Violence as referred to in Article 36 letter g shall receive rehabilitation services both physical and psychosocial.
(2) Forms of protection for Child victims of acts of Violence are in the form of basic social services, education, religious guidance, health services, psychological counseling and/or psychotherapy, legal assistance, recreational activities, educational and empowerment of parents of Child victims of acts of violence.
(3) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from committing acts of Violence against Children.

Paragraph 8
Children with Special Needs

Article 44
(1) Special Protection for Children with special needs as referred to in Article 36 letter h shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. treat Children humanely in accordance with the dignity and Rights of the Child;
b. fulfill special needs; and
c. obtain equal treatment with other Children to achieve social integration as fully as possible and individual development.
(2) Every person and/or any party is prohibited from treating Children with special needs in a discriminatory manner, by disregarding their views including labeling and equalization in education for Children with special needs.

Paragraph 9
Child Victims of Abuse and Neglect

Article 45
(1) Special Protection for Children who are victims of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 36 letter i shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, care and rehabilitation.
(2) Every person and/or party is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, or ordering the involvement of Children in situations of maltreatment and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

CHAPTER VII SAFE HOUSES
Article 46
(1) Women and Child victims of Violence who require continuous handling have the right to stay in a safe house.
(2) The safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) provides a place or temporary safe shelter for victims of Violence until their rights are restored.
(3) The organization and management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Apparatus that performs functions in the field of Women and Child Empowerment.
(4) Further provisions regarding the organization of safe houses as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION BY VILLAGE GOVERNMENT
Article 47
(1) Village Government implements Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Village.
(2) The implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as regulated in this Regional Regulation, applies mutatis mutandis in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be charged to the Village revenue and expenditure budget.
(4) Further provisions regarding the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by the Regional Government shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
FAMILY QUALITY
Article 48
(1) Regional Governments are obligated to improve family quality in the form of:
a. improvement of family quality in realizing gender equality and Child Rights.
b. strengthening and development of institutions providing family quality improvement services in realizing gender equality and Child Rights whose working area is within the Region.
c. provision of services for families in realizing gender equality and Child Rights whose working area is within the Region.
(2) Provisions regarding procedures for improving family quality as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X COOPERATION
Article 49
(1) In the effort to implement Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, the Regional Government may cooperate.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted with:
a. government;
b. provincial government;
c. other Regional Governments;
d. vertical agencies;
e. advocates;
f. social workers;
g. companion volunteers;
h. spiritual counselors; and
i. non-governmental organizations operating in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(3) Forms of cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation; and
g. spiritual guidance.
(4) Procedures for implementing cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI AWARDS
Article 50
(1) The Regent may grant awards for the participation of every person and/or entity that contributes to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region.
(2) Forms of awards as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. plaques/certificates of appreciation;
b. grants; and/or
c. Regional incentives.
(3) Regional incentives as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c are in the form of:
a. Regional fiscal incentives; and/or
b. Regional non-fiscal incentives.
(4) Forms of Regional fiscal incentives as referred to in paragraph (3) letter a, are in the form of:
a. reduction and/or exemption of Regional taxes;
and/or
b. reduction of Regional levies.
(5) Forms of Regional non-fiscal incentives as referred to in paragraph (3) letter b, are in the form of ease of business licensing in the Region.
(6) Procedures for granting awards as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be guided by the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 51
(1) Regional Government has the obligation to strengthen Community participation in the development of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be conducted in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. advocacy;
c. counseling;
d. guidance;
e. supervision;
f. facilitation;
g. services;
h. studies;
i. training;
j. capital; and
k. provision of facilities and infrastructure.
(3) Strengthening of Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be conducted through:
a. strengthening cooperation;
b. strengthening institutional capacity for prevention and services from the Community, Islamic boarding schools and the business sector; and
c. financing support.

Article 52
(1) The business sector has responsibility in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) The form of responsibility of the business sector as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in the form of:
a. financing assistance to service institutions;
b. empowerment;
c. capacity building;
d. publication and information media;
e. provision of facilities and infrastructure;
f. establishment of special institutions for prevention and handling of violence complaints; and
g. non-binding social assistance.

CHAPTER XIII
FINANCING
Article 53
Financing for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in this Regional Regulation shall be charged to the regional revenue and expenditure budget and other lawful sources and non-binding laws and regulations in accordance with the provisions of legislation taking into account the fiscal capacity of the Region.
Every person is prohibited from:

CHAPTER XIV PROHIBITIONS
Article 54
a. treating Women and Children in a discriminatory manner which results in Women and Children experiencing losses, both material and moral, thereby hindering their social function;
b. treating persons with disabilities in a discriminatory manner;
c. placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Women and Children with disabilities in situations of maltreatment and neglect;
d. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in the commission of Violence against Women and Children;
e. committing Violence or threat of Violence to force Women and Children to engage in sexual intercourse with him/her or with another person;
f. committing Violence or threat of violence, forcing, committing deception, committing a series of lies, or persuading Women and Children to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
g. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in the commission of kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of Women and Children;
h. obstructing Women and Children from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to Community development and culture;
i. placing, allowing, committing, ordering the commission of or participating in the commission of economic and/or sexual exploitation of Women and Children;
j. intentionally placing, allowing, involving Women and Children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropic substances; and/or
k. intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of Women and Children in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

CHAPTER XV
INVESTIGATION PROVISIONS
Article 55
(1) Civil Servant Investigators within the Regional Government are given special authority to conduct investigations of criminal acts as referred to in the applicable Criminal Procedure Code. (2) The authority of investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) is:
a. to receive, search for, collect and examine information or reports concerning criminal acts;
b. to examine, search for and collect information or reports concerning criminal acts;
c. to request information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts;
d. to examine books, records and other documents concerning criminal acts;
e. to conduct searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records and other documents as well as to carry out seizures of such evidence;
f. to request the assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out criminal investigation duties;
g. to order to stop, prohibit someone from leaving a room or place when an examination is in progress and to examine the identity of persons and or documents carried as referred to in letter e;
h. to photograph persons related to criminal acts;
i. to summon persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. to terminate investigations;
k. to take other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of criminal investigations according to law and which can be accounted for.
(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1), through the Indonesian National Police Investigators in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Code, shall notify the commencement of investigations and submit the results of their investigations to the public prosecutor.

CHAPTER XVI CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 56
(1) Any person who violates the provisions as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), Article 39 paragraph (2), Article 40 paragraph (2), Article 41 paragraph (2), Article 43 paragraph (3), Article 44 paragraph (2) and Article 54, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of 6 months or a fine of at most Rp50,000,000.00 (fifty million rupiah).
(2) The criminal act as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes a violation.

CHAPTER XVII
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 57
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, existing regional policies regarding Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in the Region shall remain valid, insofar as they do not conflict with this Regional Regulation.

Article 58
At the time the provisions of Article 624 of Law Number 1 of 2023 concerning the Criminal Code (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 1, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6842) come into effect, then:
a. imprisonment as referred to in Article 56 paragraph (1) shall be replaced with a fine of at most category I; and
b. category I fine as referred to in letter a shall be Rp1,000,000.00 (one million rupiah).

CHAPTER XVIII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 59
Regent Regulations as implementation of this Regional Regulation, shall be stipulated no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 60
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Tanah Bumbu Regency.
Enacted in Batulicin on the date of 28 December 2923 REGENT OF TANAH BUMBU,

H. M. ZAIRULLAH AZHAR
Promulgated in Batulicin on the date of 28 December 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY,
H. AMBO SAKKA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 12
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY, SOUTH KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (12-116/2023)

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER 12 OF 2023
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND
CHILD PROTECTION
-18-

1. GENERAL
In order to realize Women who are capable physically, mentally, spiritually, socially, in knowledge, and skills so that they are ready to be utilized, as well as efforts to protect Women and Children from all acts of Violence in order to achieve the goal of welfare through a Regional regulation that can serve as a reference for all parties related to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
The formulation of Regional regulations concerning Women's Empowerment and Child Protection has the purpose and objective as the implementation of the broadest Regional autonomy, therefore the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection sector is one of the sectors that is quite important to be managed and regulated in order to realize Women who are capable physically, mentally, spiritually, socially, in knowledge, and skills so that they are ready to be utilized, as well as efforts to protect Women and Children from all acts of Violence in order to achieve the goal of welfare through a draft Regional regulation that can serve as a reference for all parties related to Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
The establishment of this Regional regulation is based on the principles of good legislation formation and the principles of material content of legislation.
The implementation of governmental affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to increase efforts for the Protection of Women's rights, fulfillment of Children's Rights and Special Protection for Children and to increase the role of Regional Government and the business sector, media and the Community in efforts for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection. The principal matters contained in the body of the Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection and Children include:
a. Women's Empowerment;
b. Women's Protection;
c. Child Protection;
d. safe houses;
e. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection by Village government;
f. family quality;
g. cooperation; h. awards;
i. Community participation;
j. financing;
k. prohibitions;
1. investigation provisions; and
m. criminal provisions.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "respect for human rights" is that the protection and empowerment of women is carried out as a manifestation of respect for women as part of Human Rights.
Letter b What is meant by "gender equality" is one of the rights as a human being, the right to live with dignity, free from fear and free to determine life choices is not only intended for men, women also have the same rights in essence.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward Children by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups, and the condition of the Child.
Letter d What is meant by "justice and legal certainty" is that in implementing the protection and empowerment of women it is based on justice and legal certainty of equality between men and women. Letter e What is meant by "benefit" is providing the widest possible benefit for children and women for the interests of society, nation and state.
Letter f What is meant by "participatory" is that every member of society is encouraged to play an active role in the decision-making process and implementation of child protection and women's empowerment, either directly or indirectly.
Letter g What is meant by "the best interests of the Child" is that in all actions concerning Children carried out by the Regional Government, parents/family, and the Community, the best interests of the Child must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
Letter h What is meant by "accountability" is the principle that requires that every activity and final result of state administration activities must be accountable to the community and the people as holders of the highest sovereignty of the state in accordance with the provisions of the applicable laws and regulations.
Letter i What is meant by "gender responsive" is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural barriers to achieve gender equality.
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Letter a Number 1 Number 2 Number 3 Sufficiently clear.
extort What is meant by maltreatment includes: a. Exploitative treatment, for example actions or conduct of exploiting, utilizing, or the Child to obtain personal, family, or group benefits. b. Neglectful treatment, for example actions or conduct of deliberately neglecting the obligation to maintain, care for, or look after the Child as appropriate.
Sufficiently clear.
Number 4 Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Sufficiently clear.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.

Article 50
Sufficiently clear.

Article 51
Sufficiently clear.

Article 52
Sufficiently clear.

Article 53
Sufficiently clear.

Article 54
Sufficiently clear.

Article 55
Sufficiently clear.

Article 56
Sufficiently clear.

Article 57
Sufficiently clear.

Article 58
Sufficiently clear.

Article 59
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TANAH BUMBU REGENCY NUMBER ..156