REGENT OF SANGGAU
PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SANGGAU REGENCY NUMBER 12 YEAR 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY THE REGENT OF SANGGAU, Considering : Drafted by: Head of DINSOSP3AKB Sanggau Regency,

YOHANES
SUPRIYANTO, SH
NIP. 19580610 199003 1 004
Reviewed by: Head of Legal and Human Rights Division of the Regional Secretariat of Sanggau Regency,

YAKOBUS, SH, MH
NIP. 19700223 Considering: Approved by:
a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of acts of violence against women constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination;
c. that violence against women in Sanggau Regency shows an increasing trend so that prevention efforts and optimization of handling acts of violence against women must be carried out, therefore a Regional Regulation is needed that guarantees legal protection for women;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women from Acts of Violence;
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
Regional Secretary of Sanggau Regency,

A.L
LEYSANDRISH NIP. 19610616  199001 1 001
Approved by: Acting Regent of Sanggau,

MOSES TABAH
2. Law Number 27 of 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 of 1953 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 9) as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 72, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1820);
3. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
4. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
5. Law Number 21 of 2017 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
6. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
7. Presidential Regulation Number 18 of 2014 concerning the Protection and Empowerment of Women and Children in Social Conflict (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 44);
8. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 01 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 56);
With the Mutual Approval of the REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SANGGAU REGENCY and

HEAD OF SANGGAU REGENCY
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Bupati is the Bupati of Sanggau.
2. Region is the Regency of Sanggau.
3. Regional Government is the Bupati as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the Region.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Bupati and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of governmental affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social and psychological to the Victim.
6. Violence Against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
7. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of Violence and life vulnerability.
8. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, community, and/or other parties who know or hear that Violence Against Women will, is, or has occurred.
9. Service/Handling is action taken as soon as possible to the Victim when seeing, hearing and/or knowing that Violence against the Victim will, is, or has occurred.
10. Assistance is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to Victims to conduct counseling, therapy and/or advocacy.
11. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution or functional work unit that organizes integrated services for Victims of Violence.
12. Safe House is a residence for Victims during the Assistance process for the safety and comfort of Victims from threats and danger.
13. Complaint Handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of Violence Against Women submitted by Victims, Families and the community.
14. Health Services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
15. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
16. Legal Aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocacy to conduct the process of Assistance to witnesses and/or Victims of Violence Against Women that is gender sensitive.
17. Law Enforcement is action by officials authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
18. Repatriation is an effort to return women Victims of Violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.
19. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with the Family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment for Victims.
20. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a direct line upwards or downwards.

CHAPTER II
SCOPE OF PROTECTION
Article 2
The scope of Protection of Women from acts of Violence includes: a. prevention;
b. Service/Handling; and
c. empowerment.

Part One
Prevention

Article 3
(1) Efforts to prevent Violence Against Women are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for women's empowerment.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. establishing a working network;
b. conducting coordination, integration, and synchronization of Violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a Violence prevention system;
d. disseminating laws and regulations related to the Protection of Women Victims of Violence; and
e. providing information regarding the Protection of Women from acts of Violence through communication, information and education (KIE) media.

Article 4
In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 3, prevention efforts are also carried out by the Family and/or closest relatives, community, educational institutions and customary institutions.

Second Part
Service/Handling

Article 5
(1) The Implementation of Services/Handling of Victims is carried out in an integrated manner by the PPT.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from and/or to other service units in a networked manner.

Article 6
Forms of Service/Handling for Victims include:
a. Complaint Handling;
b. health/medical rehabilitation services;
c. Social Rehabilitation services;
d. Law Enforcement and Legal Aid services; and
e. Repatriation and Social Reintegration services.

Article 7
The Implementation of Services/Handling of Victims is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast and precise;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Third Part
Empowerment

Article 8
Forms of empowerment for women Victims of Violence include:
a. forming communities of women Victims of Violence;
b. job training;
c. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
d. capital assistance.

Article 9
Job training as referred to in Article 8 letter b includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 10
Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 8 letter c include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training; and
b. Business implementation assistance.

Article 11
Capital assistance as referred to in Article 8 letter d includes:
a. assistance for facilities and infrastructure; and
b. working capital/business capital assistance facilities.

CHAPTER III
VIOLENCE
Article 12
Violence Against Women consists of:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 13
Physical violence as referred to in Article 12 letter a includes acts that result in pain, wounds, injury or disability to the body, miscarriage, fainting, and/or death.

Article 14
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 12 letter b includes acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness, and/or severe psychological suffering.

Article 15
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 12 letter c includes: a. acts constituting sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
c. coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.

Article 16
Neglect as referred to in Article 12 letter d includes:
a. acts that neglect women within the scope of their household; and/or
b. acts that result in economic dependence.

Article 17
Exploitation as referred to in Article 12 letter e includes:
a. actions that exploit women economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. actions with or without the consent of the Victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the Victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 18
Other violence as referred to in Article 12 letter f includes: a. any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and/or
b. a situation where a person/Victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER IV
RIGHTS OF FEMALE VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 19
Every female Victim of Violence has the right to:
a. have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. obtain physical and psychological health recovery from the suffering experienced;
c. determine her own decisions;
d. obtain information;
e. have her identity kept confidential;
f. obtain compensation;
g. obtain Social Rehabilitation;
h. obtain Complaint Handling;
i. obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and j. obtain Assistance.

BAB V
RESPONSIBILITY OF GOVERNMENT AND INSTITUTIONS
Part One
Regional Government

Article 20
(1) Regional Government is responsible for implementing efforts for the Protection of Women from acts of Violence in the form of: a. establishing PPT;
b. policy formulation;
c. preparing planning and implementing programs and activities; d. providing support for facilities and infrastructure; and
e. supervising the implementation of services to Victims with minimum service standards.
(2) In carrying out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women.
(3) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 21
The responsibility of Regional Government as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for women's empowerment.

Second Part
Society and Family

Article 22
Society and Family have the obligation and responsibility to:
a. prevent the occurrence of Violence Against Women;
b. report if Violence occurs;
c. protect Victims; and
d. provide emergency assistance.

Third Part
Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 23
(1) Efforts to provide and organize Services/Handling for Victims are carried out in a networked manner.
(2) The network as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to: a. coordinate and synchronize the handling of PPT services;
b. develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present reports on Violence. (3) The network as referred to in paragraph (2) carries out its duties and functions in accordance with the form of services as referred to in Article 6.

CHAPTER VI
Article 24
(1) PPT may be established by the Regional Government, vertical agencies in the Region, and/or community institutions.
(2) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements from the Regional Police, Regional Apparatus responsible for Health, Education, Social Affairs, Community Empowerment, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as well as Community Social Institutions, which function to provide protection to women from acts of Violence carried out in a networked manner.
(3) PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duty to provide services and temporary protection in the form of Safe Houses (shelters) for Victims.
(4) In the event that PPT does not have a Safe House as referred to in paragraph (3), then the Victim shall be referred to a PPT that has a Safe House.
(5) Provisions regarding the establishment, composition of the management team and organizational structure of PPT established by the Regional Government shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VII
INFORMATION SYSTEM AND REPORTING
Article 25
Regional Apparatus with authority over women's empowerment shall implement an information system and submit reports on the implementation of Women's Protection to the Regent in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 26
Funding for Women's Protection activities carried out by the Regional Government is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget and/or other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 27
(1) The community participates in the implementation of Women's Protection.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of: a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. establishing women's protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's rights;
d. undertaking preventive measures when finding indications of Violence Against Women in the community;
e. providing first aid to Victims; and
f. reporting to the competent authorities if Violence Against Women occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and/or mass media.

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of Women's Protection.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a covers planning and implementation.
(4) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b covers planning, implementation, governance, financing, quality, control, and supervision.
(5) Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(6) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted based on laws and regulations periodically every 6 (six) months.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Sanggau Regency.
Enacted in Sanggau on 30 December 2019

REGENT OF SANGGAU,
PAOLUS HADI
Promulgated in Sanggau on 30 December 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SANGGAU REGENCY,
KUKUH TRIYATMAKA
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SANGGAU REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 12. REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SANGGAU REGENCY, WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: (12) / (2019) Copy in accordance with the original Acting HEAD OF LEGAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS DIVISION BAMBANG, S.H., M.Hum.
Penata

NIP 19821026 201001 1 010
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SANGGAU REGENCY
NUMBER 12 OF 2019
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
Acts of Violence Against Women constitute a violation of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.
In order to prevent and overcome Violence Against Women in Sanggau Regency so that they are protected from Violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women.
Protection of Women constitutes all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention.
Existing laws and regulations or those related to the Protection of Women Victims of Violence have not yet regulated efforts for the Protection of Women in the Region, therefore institutional and regulatory support at the Regional level is needed to ensure its implementation.
This Regional Regulation regulates efforts for the Protection of Women specifically in the form of prevention, Services/Handling, and empowerment of women in Sanggau Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Number 1 Sufficiently clear.
Number 2 Sufficiently clear.
Number 3 Sufficiently clear.
Number 4 Sufficiently clear.
Number 5 Sufficiently clear.
Number 6 Sufficiently clear.
Number 7 Sufficiently clear.
Number 8 Sufficiently clear.
Number 9 Sufficiently clear.
Number 10 Sufficiently clear.
Number 11 Sufficiently clear.
Number 12 Sufficiently clear.
Number 13 Sufficiently clear.
Number 14 What is meant by efforts from the promotive aspect is the effort to promote/socialize about acts of Violence to the community, with the aim of increasing public awareness and sensitivity to the danger of Violence that threatens women.
What is meant by efforts from the preventive aspect is efforts that prioritize the prevention aspect with targets being communities that are vulnerable to being affected by/becoming Victims of Violence and experiencing its impact. Preventive efforts can be carried out through community empowerment in the form of training activities and others.
What is meant by efforts from the curative aspect is efforts carried out in the form of handling Victims of Violence who require handling according to their needs, namely health rehabilitation handling if the Victim suffers the impact of Violence physically or psychologically, provision of Assistance and Law Enforcement for Victims who require Assistance and Law Enforcement, and so forth.
What is meant by the rehabilitative aspect is efforts carried out as an effort to restore Victims of Violence both physically, psychologically and psychosocially.
Number 15 Sufficiently clear.
Number 16 Sufficiently clear.
Number 17 Sufficiently clear.
Number 18 Sufficiently clear.
Number 19 Sufficiently clear.
Number 20 Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Sufficiently clear.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Letter a Threat of violence, namely any act unlawfully either directly or indirectly including through social media networks and communication devices.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Letter a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity respected as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain statements, questions, ideas, and signs containing value, meaning and messages whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard and read presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of Violence.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by "the right to obtain compensation" includes: economic empowerment, Repatriation costs, health and education or skills guarantees.
Letter g What is meant by "the right to obtain Social Rehabilitation" includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, Legal Aid to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.
Letter h What is meant by "the right to obtain Complaint Handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j What is meant by "the right to obtain Assistance" includes among others: psychologists, psychiatrists and health experts, religious counselors, advocates and Family members.

Article 20
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by minimum service standards is the performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing 5 (five) types of services for female Victims of Violence, namely Complaint Handling, Health Services, Social Rehabilitation, Law Enforcement and Legal Assistance, as well as Repatriation and Social Reintegration.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SANGGAU REGENCY NUMBER 12.