Whereas  Considering

REGENT OF SAMBAS
PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMBAS REGENCY
NUMBER 2 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF SAMBAS,

Considering:
a. that every person has the right to obtain protection and guarantee of their human rights, the right to be free from torture, threats, pressure that degrades human dignity, and the right to obtain ease and fair treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in achieving life welfare;
b. that in the context of fulfilling the constitutional rights of women and children to be free from torture and treatment that degrades human dignity and to improve quality of life, women and children in Sambas Regency have the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
c. that Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, and Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 1 Year 2022, grants authority to Regional Governments in the protection and prevention of violence against women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In view of:
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 27 Year 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 Year 1953 concerning the Extension of the Establishment of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 9) As Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 72, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1820) as has been amended by Law Number 8 Year 1965 concerning the Establishment of Level II Region of Tanah Laut, Level II Region of Tapin and Level II Region of Tabalong by Amending Law Number 27 Year 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 3 Year 1953 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions in Kalimantan (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 51, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2756);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning the Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 Year 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 Year 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 Concerning Child Protection Into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
6. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as has been amended by Law Number 31 Year 2014 Concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 Year 2006 Concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4976) as has been amended by Law Number 14 Year 2019 concerning Social Workers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2019 Number 182, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6397);
10. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 1 Year 2022 concerning Financial Relations between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6757);
11. Law Number 18 Year 2017 concerning the Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2017 Number 242, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6141) as has been amended by Law Number 1 Year 2022 concerning Financial Relations between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6757);
12. Law Number 12 Year 2022 concerning the Criminal Act of Sexual Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2022 Number 120, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6792);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 Concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 15 Year 2010 concerning General Guidelines for Handling Children in Conflict with the Law (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 513);
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
20. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 Year 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532);
21. Regional Regulation of West Kalimantan Province Number 3 Year 2015 concerning the Implementation of the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Year 2015 Number 3, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 3);
22. Regional Regulation of West Kalimantan Province Number 4 Year 2015 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Year 2015 Number 4, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Kalimantan Province Number 4);

With Mutual Approval
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SAMBAS REGENCY
and

REGENT OF SAMBAS
DECIDES:
To Establish REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Sambas Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of Sambas Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Sambas.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of government affairs that are the authority of Sambas Regency.
5. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
6. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child still in the womb.
7. Violence against Women is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
8. Violence against Children is any act that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
9. Domestic violence is any act of conduct against a person, especially women, that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or deprivation of freedom unlawfully within the household sphere.
10. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence that occurs.
11. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will, is, or has occurred.
12. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
13. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is, or has occurred.
14. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has expertise in accompanying victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy, integrated for the strengthening and recovery of the victim's self from violence.
15. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a Regional technical implementation unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
16. Shelter House is a shelter for the safety and security of Women and Children from Acts of Violence.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children or blood relatives in direct lineage upward or downward.
18. Household is husband, wife, and children, people who have family relations due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, guardianship, and/or domestic workers and reside in that household.
19. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
20. Social rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out social functions properly in community life.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 2
Forms of violence are:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. domestic neglect;
e. exploitation; and
f. other violence.

Article 3
Physical violence as referred to in Article 2 letter a constitutes all forms of acts that result in:
a. the victim falling ill or being seriously injured;
b. the death of the victim; and/or
c. causing illness or impediment to carrying out official duties or livelihood or daily activities.

Article 4
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 2 letter b results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering in a person.

Article 5
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 2 letter c in the form of: a. acts of sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations in an improper or unwanted manner; and/or
c. coercion of sexual relations with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 6
Household neglect as referred to in Article 2 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children in a proper manner, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after children as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect Women and/or Children within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to such Women and/or Children; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of such person.

Article 7
Exploitation as referred to in Article 2 letter e includes:
a. actions that exploit women and children economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. actions with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial;
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 8
Other violence as referred to in Article 2 letter f includes:
a. any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, either with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and/or
b. a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 9
The Rights of Women and Children from acts of violence include:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced as victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of identity;
f. the right to restitution;
g. the right to rehabilitation and social reintegration;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and/or
j. the right to assistance.

Article 10
In addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 9, children involved in acts of violence also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and/or
e. the right to obtain freedom.

Article 11
(1) In the event that female victims of violence and children involved in violence as referred to in Article 9 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a Shelter House or alternative residence.
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or Government and non-Government institutions.

Article 12
(1) The Shelter House as referred to in Article 11 paragraph (1) provides temporary place and/or shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
(2) The implementation and/or management of the Shelter House as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the relevant Regional Apparatus.
(3) For security and at the request of women victims of violence and children involved in acts of violence, the manager or implementer of the Shelter House as referred to in paragraph (2) may place the person concerned in a certain place that is kept confidential.
(4) Further provisions regarding the implementer of the Shelter House as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 13
(1) Regional Government is obligated to:
a. implement the policy on Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence established by the Government;
b. establish policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children from acts of violence; and
c. conduct cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, and various non-governmental organizations concerned with Women and Children in the implementation of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence.
(2) Regional Government is responsible for:
a. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence; and
b. allocating budget for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity.
(3) In the implementation of the obligations of Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1) and the implementation of the responsibilities of Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (2), Regional Government shall prepare a Regional Action Plan for the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence.
(4) Further provisions regarding the Regional Action Plan for the protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence as referred to in Paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 14
The Regent in carrying out obligations as referred to in Article 13 may delegate them to Regional Apparatus.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community, Family and Children

Article 15
The community and family have the following obligations and responsibilities:
a. to prevent the occurrence of violence against Women and Children;
b. to provide information and/or report acts of violence against Women and Children to law enforcement or authorized parties;
c. to participate in handling victims of acts of violence;
d. to protect victims; and
e. to provide emergency assistance.

Article 16
A child has the following obligations and responsibilities: a. to respect parents, guardians, teachers, the community and their environment; b. to love family, the community and care for friends;
c. to love the homeland, nation and State;
d. to perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and
e. to practice noble ethics and morals.

CHAPTER V
PREVENTION
Article 17
(1) Prevention efforts against violence toward Women and Children shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the Regional Apparatus responsible for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
(2) Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by:
a. establishing working networks together with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health facilities, hospitals, various non-governmental organizations concerned with Women and Children;
b. building community and family participation and awareness toward prevention and Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence;
e. providing critical education about the rights of Women and Children from acts of violence; and
f. opening complaint services for the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 17, shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus or government and non-government institutions whose fields are:
a. empowerment of Women and Protection of Children;
b. education;
c. manpower;
d. health;
e. social;
f. mental and spiritual;
g. peace and order;
h. youth; and
i. community affairs.
(2) Implementation of prevention of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner.

CHAPTER VI
SERVICES
Article 19
(1) Forms of services provided to female victims and children involved in acts of violence, are as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation and social reintegration;
e. social rehabilitation;
f. medicolegal;
g. psychological services; and
h. assistance services.
(2) Services as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus and/or related institutions based on minimum service standards established by the government.
(3) In carrying out the duties and functions of services as referred to in paragraph (1), Regional Apparatus may cooperate with related institutions and/or the community.

Article 20
(1) The provision of services to victims as referred to in Article 19 is carried out every day with the principles of:
a. fast;
b. safe and comfortable;
c. empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easily accessible;
f. not subject to fees; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.
(2) The organizer or manager of services is carried out without collecting any fees from victims of violence.

Article 21
(1) Protection services for Women and Children from acts of violence can be implemented by UPTD PPA.
(2) As long as UPTD PPA has not been established, the duties and functions of protection services for Women and Children from acts of violence shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus and related Institutions in an integrated and sustainable manner.
(3) Protection Services as referred to in paragraph (1) may be delegated by UPTD PPA to other service units through networking and cooperation.
(4) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be set forth in the form of a cooperation agreement.

Article 22
Further provisions regarding the implementation of services for women victims and children involved in acts of violence as referred to in Article 19 shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 23
(1) The community participates in the implementation of Protection for female victims and Children involved in acts of violence.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing family partners at the neighborhood unit/community unit or sub-district/village level by the community;
b. establishing a Women and Child Protection unit/section within community organizations;
c. conducting socialization of the rights of Women and Children independently;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to Regional Apparatus or relevant authorized institutions if acts of violence occur in their environment.

CHAPTER VIII
EMPOWERMENT
Article 24
Forms of Empowerment for Women victims of acts of violence include:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business families;
c. capital assistance; and
d. other activities that support Women's Empowerment

Pasal 25
Forms of Empowerment for children and victims of violence include the fulfillment of children's rights to:
a. education;
b. health; and
c. rehabilitation, repatriation and social reintegration.

Article 26
(1) The implementation of empowerment as referred to in Article (24) and Article (25) shall be carried out by Regional Apparatus and or related Institutions in an integrated and sustainable manner.
(2) Further provisions regarding the implementation of empowerment as referred to in Paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
COOPERATION
Article 27
(1) In order to achieve the objectives of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence, the Regional Government may cooperate with government and non-government institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. prevention;
b. services;
c. empowerment; and/or
d. exchange of data and information;

CHAPTER X
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 28
(1) The Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence.
(2) Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. monitoring and evaluation.
(3) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be conducted with professional and transparent principles.
(5) Regional Apparatus are obligated to report periodically to the Regent regarding the implementation of Protection of Women Victims and Children involved in acts of violence.

CHAPTER XI
FINANCING
Article 29
Financing for the implementation of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XII
INVESTIGATION
Article 30
(1) Certain Civil Servant Officials within the Regional Government are given special authority as Investigators to conduct investigations of criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence, as referred to in the Criminal Procedure Law.
(2) The authority of Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) namely:
a. receiving, searching for, collecting, and examining information or reports concerning criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence so that such information or reports become complete and clear;
b. examining, searching for, and collecting information regarding individuals or entities about the truth of acts committed in connection with criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence;
c. requesting information and evidence from individuals or entities in connection with criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence;
d. examining books, records, and other documents concerning criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence;
e. conducting searches to obtain evidence of bookkeeping, records, and other documents, as well as conducting seizures of such evidence;
f. requesting assistance of experts in the framework of carrying out investigation duties of criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence;
g. ordering to stop and/or prohibiting someone from leaving a room or place at the time the examination is in progress and examining the identity of persons and or documents carried;
h. photographing persons related to criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence;
i. summoning persons to be heard for their statements and examined as suspects or witnesses;
j. terminating the investigation; and
k. taking other actions necessary for the smooth conduct of investigation of criminal acts in the field of Protection of Women and Children and acts of violence in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(3) Investigators as referred to in paragraph (1) notify the commencement of the investigation and submit the results of their investigation to the Public Prosecutor through the Investigator Official of the Police of the Republic of Indonesia, in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Criminal Procedure Law.

CHAPTER XIII
CRIMINAL PROVISIONS
Article 31
Any person who discloses the whereabouts of victims of violence who are placed in a confidential location as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (3) shall be punishable by imprisonment for a maximum of 6 (six) months or a fine of at most Rp 50,000,000,- (fifty million rupiah).

CHAPTER XIV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 32
The implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be established no later than 1 (one) year calculated from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 33
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that every person shall know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placement in the Regional Gazette of Sambas Regency.
Enacted in Sambas on the date of July 1, 2022

REGENT OF SAMBAS,
SATONO
Promulgated in Sambas on July 1, 2022

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SAMBAS REGENCY,
FERY MADAGASKAR
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAMBAS REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 2
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMBAS REGENCY
WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE : (02/2022)
Copy In Accordance With The Original Head of Legal Division,

TO SH
born Level I (III/d) . 19780506 200502 1 004

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAMBAS REGENCY
NUMBER 2 OF 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
To prevent, protect victims, and take action against perpetrators of violence against Women and Children, the state and society are obligated to implement prevention, protection, and action against perpetrators in accordance with the Pancasila philosophy and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The state holds the view that all forms of violence, especially violence against Women and Children, constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of discrimination.

Such a view is based on the provisions of Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person shall have the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under his/her control, and shall have the right to a sense of security and protection from the threat of fear to do or not do something which is a human right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person shall have the right to receive facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in order to achieve equality and justice".

Current developments show that acts of violence against Women and Children physically, psychologically, sexually, and through neglect do in fact occur, thus requiring adequate legal instruments to eliminate violence against Women and Children.

The Government of Indonesia has signed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR 1948) and ratified CEDAW (Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women), and is therefore obligated to comply with these provisions. Likewise, in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia fourth amendment, it is stated that the enforcement and fulfillment of Human Rights is the responsibility of the state, especially the Government.

In the National Action Plan for the Elimination of Violence Against Women, it is stated that Women as mothers of the nation and successors of the nation are creatures created by Almighty God, and therefore must be protected and their honor, dignity and self-respect safeguarded in a reasonable and proportional manner, both legally, economically, politically, socially and culturally, without distinction of ethnicity, religion, race and class.

Regional Governments also have the obligation to prevent, protect victims, and take action against perpetrators of violence against Women and Children. For this purpose, Regional Governments require regional regulations that can be used as instruments to realize prevention, protection and action against perpetrators of violence against Women and Children.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "respect and fulfillment of victims' rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of victims' basic rights.
Letter b What is meant by "justice" is a condition where every person, both men and women, are treated equally and obtain equal opportunities to gain access, as well as welfare.
What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.
Letter c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by "the best interests of women and children" is all best actions for women and children carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, so that the best interests of women and children must be the primary consideration.
Letter e What is meant by "empowerment" is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to endeavor and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Letter a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity respected as a human being" is upholding human rights.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology either electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter e Sufficiently clear.
Letter f What is meant by "the right to restitution" is the payment of compensation charged to the perpetrator based on a court decision that has permanent legal force for material and/or immaterial losses suffered by the victim or their heirs.
Letter g What is meant by "the right to social rehabilitation includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name and citizenship.
Letter h What is meant by "the right to complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.
Letter i Sufficiently clear.
Letter j What is meant by "the right to assistance" includes among others: psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious counselors, advocates, and family members.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Letter a Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by "network" includes: family partners, dasawisma, family groups that exist in the Region.
Point b Prevention efforts within the family and/or closest relatives can be carried out by strengthening resilience within the household such as: practicing religious values, managing household time, and communication between family members. Prevention efforts within the community include: fostering environmental awareness of acts of violence that occur in their environment.
Point c What is meant by "violence prevention system" includes: mapping locations or areas prone to violence and conducting preventive efforts to the community.
Point d Socialization can be carried out through mass media, electronic media, and direct outreach to the community.
Point e Critical education for women victims of violence is an effort to build women's awareness about their rights. The purpose of implementing critical education is to assist in decision-making and to prevent becoming victims of repeated violence. Forms of critical education for women victims of violence consist of: training on gender equality and justice, education on reproductive health for women, and providing understanding of laws and regulations on the Elimination of Domestic Violence.
Point f Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Paragraph (1) What is meant by other Non-Governmental Institutions are Institutions outside the Government such as Private Companies, Non-Governmental Organizations and others.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 23
Paragraph (1) Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e Non-discrimination as intended protects victims from patriarchal cultural understanding which can hinder victims from having their rights protected.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
Sufficiently clear.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAMBAS REGENCY NUMBER 69