MAYOR OF PANGKALPINANG
BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PANGKALPINANG CITY
NUMBER 8 OF 2020
CONCERNING
EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

MAYOR OF PANGKALPINANG,
Considering : a. that women as a national asset who play a role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations need to receive guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and Protection from acts of violence and discrimination;
b. that in the context of Protection and means of self-actualization for women in society in Pangkalpinang City, there is a need for a regional regulation governing the empowerment and protection of women;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Empowerment and Women;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 of 1959 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 55, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1091), Emergency Law Number 5 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1091) and Emergency Law Number 57 (Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1091) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions including Municipal Cities Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 1 of 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1974 Number 1);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention The Elimination Of All Forms Of Discrimination Againts Women) State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 13 of 1998 concerning Elderly Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 190, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3796);
6. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No. 138 Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment (ILO Convention Concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
7. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
8. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities (Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities), (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government to become Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
14. Regional Regulation of Pangkalpinang City Number 18 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus of Pangkalpinang City (Regional Gazette of Pangkalpinang City Year 2016 Number 18);
With Mutual Approval REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PANGKALPINANG CITY and

MAYOR OF PANGKALPINANG
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by: 1. City is the City of Pangkalpinang.
2. City Government is the mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Pangkalpinang
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of the City of Pangkalpinang.
5. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
6. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capabilities, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
7. Discrimination against Women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
8. All Forms of Discrimination against Women are all forms of Discrimination that include territorial dimensions (disaster areas, conflict areas, border areas, underdeveloped areas, remote areas, and others), age dimensions (productive age, elderly, and others), and special dimensions (persons with disabilities, workers, and others).
9. Violence against Women is any act that violates, obstructs, eliminates enjoyment and disregards the human rights of women.
10. Domestic Violence is any act against a woman that results in misery or suffering physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty within the household sphere.
11. Elimination of Violence against Women is a guarantee provided by the Regional Government to prevent the occurrence of violence, take action against perpetrators of violence and protect victims.
12. Elimination of Domestic Violence is a guarantee provided by the state to prevent the occurrence of domestic violence, take action against perpetrators of domestic violence, and protect victims of domestic violence.
13. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Companion is a parent or representative from an institution that has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
15. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
16. Gender Equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and security activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
17. Gender Justice is a process to be fair to men and women.

Article 2
(1) The Principles of Women's Empowerment are:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality and justice;
c. protection of victims' rights; and
d. non-discriminatory.
(2) The Objectives of Women's Empowerment and Protection are to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of women's rights so that they can live and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth;
b. provide gender justice and equality; c. provide protection and security for women victims of violence and discrimination, as well as criminal acts of human trafficking;
d. eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women;
e. provide services to women Victims of violence, and witnesses; and
f. carry out recovery for women Victims of violence to increase the participation of women both individually and in groups as potential and resources in the implementation of social community life.
(3) The scope of this Regional Regulation includes: a. women's rights;
b. obligations and responsibilities of regional government; c. women's empowerment;
d. women's protection;
e. protection of women victims of violence; f. prohibitions and sanctions;
g. community participation;
h. monitoring and evaluation; and i . funding.

CHAPTER II
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 3
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue her lineage;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life to become a human being who is faithful, pious, responsible, of noble character, happy, and prosperous in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
g. obtain protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
h. obtain welfare and a decent life;
i. participate in politics;
j. perform legal acts;
k. freely choose a partner in her marriage; and
l. receive fair wages in accordance with labor regulations.
(2) The right to participate in politics as referred to in paragraph (1) letter i is, women have the right to:
a. vote and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, or elections for political positions and other positions based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret balloting; and
b. be appointed to any government position.
(3) Every woman who is in a condition of disability, old age, and/or pregnancy, has the right to obtain facilities and special treatment.
(4) Every elderly woman, person with physical disability and/or mental disability, has the right to obtain care, non-formal education.

Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities

Article 4
Every woman with disability, has the right to obtain:
a. education in all units, pathways, types, and levels of education;
b. decent work and livelihood in accordance with the type and degree of disability, education, and ability;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy its results;
d. accessibility in the context of independence; e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards; and
f. equal rights to develop talents, abilities, and social life.

Third Part
Rights of Women Victims of Violence

Article 5
Every female victim of violence has: a. the right to have her dignity and worth as a human being respected;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the Victim;
c. the right to determine her own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of the Victim and her family to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and j. the right to assistance.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
Article 6
(1) The City Government has the obligation and responsibility for the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
(2) The efforts for women's empowerment and protection as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities; b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. provision of services; and
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities. (3) The efforts for women's empowerment and protection as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out in an integrated manner.

Article 7
In implementing policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women, the City Government may cooperate with the community/community institutions.

CHAPTER V
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT
Article 8
Women's empowerment is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings in order to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy;
b. social culture;
c. politics and government;
d. law;
e. education;
f. health;
g. employment; and
h. social security.

Article 9
The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 8 letter a shall be carried out through:
a. provision of skills and job training; b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation and capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 10
Empowerment of women in the social and cultural field as referred to in Article 8 letter b shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts primarily in the field of reproductive health;
c. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and traditions and development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 11
The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of politics and governance as referred to in Article 8 letter c includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making; b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.

Article 12
The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of law as referred to in Article 8 letter d includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the field of law through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.

Article 13
The implementation of women's empowerment in the field of education as referred to in Article 8 letter e through:
a. implementation of formal and nonformal education; b. formal education as referred to in letter a is as regulated by the government; and c. nonformal education as referred to in letter a includes women's empowerment education, skills education and job training.

Article 14
(1) The provision for women in the health sector as referred to in Article 8 letter f health services in order to undergo reproductive life and sexual life that is healthy, safe and free from coercion and/or violence.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. health services during the period before pregnancy, during pregnancy, childbirth period and after giving birth; b. pregnancy regulation, contraceptive services and sexual health; and
c. reproductive health services.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented through promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative approaches.

Article 15
(1) The implementation for women in the field of employment as referred to in Article 8 letter g has equal opportunities without gaps and differences with men.
(2) Employers provide protection to female workers which includes welfare, safety and health.

Article 16
The implementation for women in the field of social security as referred to in Article 8 letter h, is the responsibility of the City Government and must provide guidance facilities as well as grant social security rights.

CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 17
The Mayor in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women undertakes efforts to: a. coordinate the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women among regional apparatus; b. cooperate with regencies/cities within one province and cooperate among regencies/cities in other provinces in the implementation of policy programs, and activities for the protection of women in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
c. strengthen the institutional capacity of gender mainstreaming for the implementation of policy programs and activities for the protection of women;
d. facilitate services for the protection of women; e. provide services for the protection of women; f. implement affirmative action for the protection of women; and g. formulate a data system for the protection of women.

Article 18
Implementation of protection for women is provided to:
a. women workers/laborers;
b. elderly women;
c. women with disabilities;
d. homeless women;
e. domestic women workers;
f. women as family economic supporters; and
g. women inmates of correctional institutions.

Second Part
Health Protection

Article 19
(1) Women have the right to obtain special protection from matters that threaten their safety and or health.
(2) Special protection is given to women because their reproductive function is guaranteed and protected by law.
(3) The City Regional Government facilitates health protection in accordance with regional financial capacity.
(4) The form of health protection for women as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Third Part
Female workers/laborers

Article 20
(1) Women have equal opportunities without discrimination to obtain employment and to seek fair recognition for their work (2) Equal opportunities as referred to in paragraph (1) are realized through the fulfillment of protection of the rights of female workers to receive equal treatment from employers.
(3) Further provisions regarding the fulfillment of protection of the rights of female workers as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Part Four
Elderly Women

Article 21
(1) The City Government provides protection to elderly women who are not independent, sick, and economically incapable so that they can realize and enjoy a decent standard of living.
(2) Further provisions regarding the form of protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

Fifth Part
Women with Disabilities

Article 22
(1) The implementation of protection for women with disabilities in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination includes, among others, freedom from cruel treatment, inhuman treatment, degrading human dignity and freedom from exploitation.
(2) Women with disabilities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection for:
a. guarantee of continuity and personal self-development;
b. participation in the fields of education, health, employment, politics, sports, arts and culture as well as the utilization of information and communication technology;
c. accessibility to information, legal aid, mobility, social services; and
d. early intervention efforts including treatment and rehabilitation for the improvement of their functions and capacities.

Sixth Part
Homeless Women

Article 23
(1) The implementation of protection for homeless women is intended to provide protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the absence of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection for:
a. decent housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration registration;
d. opportunities to obtain skills to improve economic status; and
e. access to information and legal consultation services.

Seventh Part
Female Domestic Workers

Article 24
(1) The implementation of protection for female domestic workers is in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel treatment, inhumane treatment, degrading of human dignity and exploitation in employment relations.
(2) Female domestic workers as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive protection for: a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions; b. health insurance and social security for employment; c. access to information and legal consultation services; and d. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Eighth Part
Women as Economic Pillars of the Family

Article 25
(1) The implementation of protection for women as family economic pillars is in the framework of providing protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, negative stigma and economic empowerment for women as family economic pillars.
(2) Women as family economic pillars as referred to in paragraph (1) shall receive the right to protection from:
a. discriminatory actions and efforts to weaken the function of women as family economic pillars;
b. strengthening of capacity and recognition as family economic pillars in their environment; and
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.

Ninth Part
Women Former Inmates of Correctional Institutions

Article 26
(1) The implementation of protection for women former inmates of Correctional Institutions is intended to provide protection from obstacles to adjusting to life in society and to be able to carry out life normally.
(2) Women former inmates of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; and
b. opportunities to obtain knowledge and skills to improve economic status.

Tenth Part
Women Victims of Disaster

Article 27
(1) Implementation of protection for women victims of disaster in order to provide protection during disaster and post-disaster.
(2) Women victims of disaster as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. access to proper shelter;
b. health services;
c. information access services and legal consultation; and d. post-disaster recovery

CHAPTER VII
PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Part One
General

Article 28
(1) Every female victim of violence has the right to obtain protection, information, integrated services, continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential handling from individuals, groups or institutions, the City Government and the community.
(2) In the event of violence, every victim has the right to obtain health services and assistance, both psychologically and legally, and to obtain guarantees of their rights related to their status as a woman.

Second Part
Obligations and Efforts of Regional Government

Article 29
(1) The City Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent the occurrence of violence against women in the form of: a. collecting data and information about victims of violence and laws and regulations; b. conducting education on anti-violence values against women;
c. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for victims of violence;
d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for victims of violence; and
e. preparing reports on the implementation of protection for women victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence against women, the City Government is obligated to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing and facilitating the operation of integrated service institutions for victims by involving community elements; and
b. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for victims.
(3) The City Government in carrying out its obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must pay attention to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

Third Part
Forms of Violence and Protection

Article 30
(1) Forms of violence against women include: a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence; and
d. psychological violence.
(2) The form of physical violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, unconsciousness and or causes death.
(3) The form of sexual violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and/or specific purposes.
(4) The form of economic violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is in the form of neglect of women in the form of not providing proper livelihood, care or maintenance.
(5) The form of psychological violence as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is in the form of acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
(6) Every woman victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 31
Every victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.

Article 32
(1) Forms of protection against violence toward women include:
a. medical protection;
b. legal protection;
c. medico legal protection (forensic medicine); d. economic protection; and
e. psychological protection.
(2) The form of medical protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
(3) The form of legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
(4) The form of medico legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c is in the form of medical services for the purposes of evidence in the field of law.
(5) The form of economic protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d is in the form of services for skills and to provide economic access so that victims of violence can be independent.
(6) The form of psychological protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e is in the form of psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in problem solving through assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims.

Article 33
To provide Protection as referred to in Article 27, the City Regional Government may undertake efforts to:
a. provide services and handling as quickly as possible to witnesses and/or victims;
b. provide ease, comfort, safety and free of charge for witnesses and/or victims;
c. maintain confidentiality of witnesses and/or victims; d. guarantee justice and legal certainty for witnesses and/or victims;
e. provision of special service rooms at Police Offices;
f. provision of apparatus, health workers, social workers, and spiritual counselors;
g. creation and development of a system and mechanism for cooperation of service programs involving parties that are easily accessible to victims;
h. provide protection for companions, witnesses, families and friends of victims;
i. provide protection for female workers/laborers in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 36
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of empowerment and protection of women.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and c. complaints/reports.
(4) The obligations and responsibilities of the community in the protection of women shall be implemented through activities:
a. preventing the occurrence of criminal acts;
b. providing protection to victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders; and
e. providing information or reporting the occurrence of criminal acts of violence to law enforcement officials.
(5) Further provisions regarding community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Mayoral Regulation.

CHAPTER IX
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 37
(1) The City Government carries out monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection policies.
(2) The implementation of monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted periodically to ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of policies.
(3) The results of monitoring and evaluation are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.

CHAPTER X
FUNDING
Article 38
Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the empowerment and protection of women shall be sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, environmental social responsibility and other funds that are legal and non-binding.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 39
At the time this Regional Regulation comes into force, Regional Regulation of Pangkalpinang City Number 6 of 2014 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of Pangkalpinang City Year 2014 Number 6) as amended by Regional Regulation of Pangkalpinang City Number 6 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Pangkalpinang City Number 6 of 2014 concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of Pangkalpinang City Year 2018 Number 6), is revoked and declared invalid.

Article 40
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Pangkalpinang City.
Enacted in Pangkalpinang on 23 December 2020

MAYOR
OF PANGKALPINANG,
MAULAN AKLIL
Promulgated in Pangkalpinang on the 23rd of December 2020

REGIONAL SECRETARY
CITY
OF PANGKALPINANG,
RADMIDA DAWAM
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PANGKALPINANG CITY YEAR 2020 NUMBER 8 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PANGKALPINANG CITY BANGKA BELITUNG ISLANDS PROVINCE NUMBER(1.8/2020)