# I'm ready to translate the text, but I don't see any text provided after the words "Menimbang" and "Mengingat". 

Could you please provide the complete text you'd like me to translate?

PRINGSEWU REGENCY
LAMPUNG PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PRINGSEWU REGENCY NUMBER 01 YEAR 2015

REGARDING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF PRINGSEWU,
a. that every citizen has fundamental rights that must be guaranteed by the state to obtain a sense of security, be protected and be free from all forms of violence.
b. that women and children are vulnerable groups, therefore they need to receive protection and services from the state that can provide prevention, protection and services to victims of violence;
c. that local governments together with the community are obliged to organize prevention, protection and recovery efforts for children and women victims of violence for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning the Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning the Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
8. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 48 of 2008 concerning the Establishment of Pringsewu Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 185, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4932);
10.Law Number 36 of 2009 Concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 44, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
...
11.Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
12.Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning the Ratification of the Optional Protocol to The Convention on The Rights of The Child on The Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
13.Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
14.Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended by Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2014 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 246, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5589);
15.Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation of Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
16.Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 8 of 2012 concerning Guidelines for Strengthening Dasawisma Groups for Prevention and Early Handling of Acts of Violence Against Children (State News Number 1088 of 2012);
17.Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 1 of 2014 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;
18.Regional Regulation of Pringsewu Regency Number 01 of 2010 concerning Government Affairs of Pringsewu Regency (Regional Gazette of Pringsewu Regency Year 2010 Number 01);
To Establish ....
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
PRINGSEWU REGENCY
REGENT OF PRINGSEWU
DECIDES:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
1. Region means Pringsewu Regency.
2. Regional Government means the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of the Regional Government administration.
3. Regent means the Regent of Pringsewu.
4. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the regional people's representative institution as an element of the Regional Government administration.
5. Regional Secretary means the Regional Secretary of Pringsewu Regency.
6. Regional Apparatus Work Unit, hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD, is the regional apparatus in Pringsewu Regency.
7. Woman means an adult human of female gender.
8. Child means a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a child in the womb.
9. Child victim of violence means a child who receives harsh treatment whether physical, psychological, economic, social, sexual, and other losses resulting from state policy, acts of violence and or threats of violence within the scope of the household and society.
10. Victim means women and children who experience misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
11. Violence means any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
12. Violence against women means any act of violence against women that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
13. Violence against children means any action that results in misery or suffering to children physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom.
14. Physical violence means any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death.
15. Sexual violence means any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
16. Economic violence means any act that deliberately neglects family members in the form of not providing proper living care or maintenance.
17. Neglect means the act of neglecting women and or children within the household scope which according to the applicable law for the person concerned or due to agreement or contract he/she is obliged to provide living, care or maintenance to that person. Neglect also applies to any person who causes economic dependence by limiting and or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
18. Psychological violence means any act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, sense of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.
19. Protection of women means all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will occur or has occurred.
20. Law enforcement means actions by officials authorized by the state to implement laws and regulations.
21. Legal assistance means legal services provided by legal companions and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and or victims of violence against women and children.
22. Protection of children means all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and worth, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
23. Implementation of protection means a series of activities aimed at preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the Integrated Service Center.
24. Prevention means direct efforts made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
25. Complaint means notification either in writing or orally by interested parties to authorized institutions, in which the person concerned suffers losses due to the actions of others.
26. Service means immediate activities and actions carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
27. Companion means a person or institution that has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling therapy advocacy for strengthening and self-recovery of victims of violence.
28. Integrated Service means a series of activities to provide protection for women and children victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unit of implementation, prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
29. Integrated Service Center, hereinafter abbreviated as PPT, is a functional work unit that provides integrated services for victims of violence in the region.
30. Victim Recovery means all efforts to empower victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
31. Accompaniment means all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for self-empowerment of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to resolve the problems faced.
32. Social Reintegration means the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfillment of victims' needs.
33. Safe House (shelter) means a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2 The Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on the principles of respect for and recognition of equal rights and human dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of the human rights of Women and Children and the best interests of victims.

Article 3
Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to provide protection and services that include aspects of prevention, services and assistance, reunification and empowerment.
Article 4 The implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of acts of violence including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women and children;
c. protect, provide a sense of security for victims of acts of violence;
d. provide services to victims of violence and;
e. carry out comprehensive recovery for victims.

BAB III
SCOPE
Article 5
The scope of protection for women and children victims of violence includes prevention efforts, services and empowerment for victims of violence in the region.

CHAPTER IV
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 6
Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/or
f. other violence.

Article 7
Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or causing death.

I apologize, but I don't see any text to translate in your message. The only content visible appears to be:

"'I
~ fl.~

Could you please provide the text you'd like me to translate into English?

.I
Article 8
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 9
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or;
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.

Article 10
Neglect as referred to in Article 6 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or manage as appropriate committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or;
d. acts that result in economic dependency by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 11
Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 12
Other violence as referred to in Article 6 letter f is caused by:
a. threat of violence includes: any act unlawfully in the form of speech, writing, image, symbol, or body movement, either with or without using means that causes fear or restricts the fundamental freedom of a person; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is forced to do something in such a way that the person does something that is contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER V
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 13
Every victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to the victim's status as a family member as well as a member of society.

Article 14
In addition to the rights as referred to in Article 13, child victims of violence also receive special rights including:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services; 1
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and/or e. the right to obtain freedom;
f. the right of victims and families to obtain facilitation in the judicial process.

CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF REGIONAL GOVERNMENT Article 15 (1) The Regional Government has the duty to undertake prevention, handling and recovery efforts for victims of violence against Women and Children, by:
a. collecting data and information about Women and Children Victims of Violence;
b. conducting socialization of laws and regulations related to the protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence;
c. providing education on anti-violence values against children and women; and d. conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for Women and Children victims of violence.
(2) The Regional Government has the obligation to undertake prevention, handling and recovery efforts for victims of violence against Women and Children, to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. providing and facilitating the establishment of integrated services for victims by involving institutions and community elements;
b. encouraging community awareness about the importance of protection for victims; and c. conducting community empowerment for the prevention of acts of violence.

CHAPTER VII
INSTITUTION FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR VICTIMS
Article 16
(1) The Regional Government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) as the Implementing Institution for Prevention and Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence in the region.
(2) The PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements:
a. health;
b. psychologist;
c. law enforcement;
d. social and empowerment;
e. education and religious affairs;
f. non-governmental organizations; and
g. private sector.
(3) Further provisions regarding the PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
PREVENTION OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 17
(1) The Government in efforts to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children shall conduct empowerment of families, parents, the community by providing information, guidance and or counseling.
(2) In addition to empowerment and support as referred to in paragraph (1), the regional government shall undertake efforts as follows:
a. increase the quantity and quality of education both formal and nonformal and informal;
b. open accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. endeavor to create employment opportunities for women;
d. build community participation and concern towards prevention and from acts of violence against women and children;
e. build and provide a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. build networks and cooperation with law enforcers, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and or care for women and children victims of violence.

Article 18
(1) Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in article 16, shall be implemented by SKPD whose duties and functions are in the field of
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental;
g. security and order;
(2) Prevention of acts of violence by SKPD as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on existing regulations.

CHAPTER IX
IMPLEMENTATION, FORMS OF PROTECTION AND SERVICES
Article 19
(1) The Implementation of Protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of PPT.
(2) PPT in handling medical, legal, medicolegal, psychological and economic protection which in its implementation may conduct partnerships with Social Community Institutions engaged in the field of protection of Women and Children.
(3) The implementation of protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) must take into account religious norms, customs and the rights and obligations of parents/guardians, husbands and/or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
(4) The mechanism for handling protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20
(1) The forms of protection provided to Victims, witnesses and reporters organized by PPT are in the form of protection:
a. medical;
b. legal;
c. medicolegal (Forensic Medicine);
d. psychological; or
e. economic.
(2) The form of medical protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a, is in the form of treatment and recovery from physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
(3) The form of legal protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, is in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
(4) The form of medicolegal protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c, is in the form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field.
(5) The form of psychological protection for Victims as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, is in the form of assistance in order to restore traumatic conditions including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving problems.
(6) The form of economic protection for victims as referred to in paragraph (1), is in the form of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

BASX
REPORTING
Article 21
(1) PPT reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and children victims of violence to the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.
(2) The Head of SKPD responsible for women's empowerment reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and children victims of violence to the Regent.
(3) The Regent reports protection of women and children victims of violence to the Governor.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures and mechanisms for reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER XI
CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION Article 22 (1) The Regent implements control, guidance, and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of violence against women and children.
(2) Control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER XII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 23
(1) The community participates in the implementation of protection for victims.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing family partners at the kelurahan/village level by the community;
b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities when violence against victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, community social institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER XIII
FUNDING
Article 24 (1) Regional governments are obligated to allocate budget to the integrated service center (PPT) in implementing the protection of women and children victims of violence.
(2) The budget allocation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be adjusted to the regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XIV
SANCTION PROVISIONS
Article 25
(1) Officials appointed to organize integrated protection, services and recovery who do not carry out their obligations and responsibilities shall be subject to actions and or sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the applicable Laws and Regulations;
(2) PPT managers who in carrying out the duties of protection, services and recovery for victims of violence, violate the principles of organizing protection, services and recovery may be subject to sanctions in accordance with the internal mechanisms of PPT and sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the applicable Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XV
CLOSING PROVISIONS
,·.· Article 26 This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date it is promulgated.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Pringsewu Regency.
Enacted in Pringsewu on the date S MC\~ 10 \S

REGENT OF PRINGSEWU,
~ .s:

SUJADI
Promulgated in Pringsewu on date s- ·~~ .20\«;
Pj. REGIONAL SECRETARY OF PRINGSEWU REGENCY, / // ,·t I

./1 I
.. w£~~1>N REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PRINGSEWU REGENCY YEAR 2015 NUMBER f!J:f  ,, . .

ELUCIDATION OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PRINGSEWU REGENCY NUMBER YEAR 2015
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
One of the materials of the Amendment to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia is the guarantee of human rights and constitutional rights of citizens. The Amendment can be interpreted as a manifestation of awareness about the importance of protecting human rights and constitutional rights of citizens, which grew and became the spirit of reform. Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination.
Every citizen has human rights that must be guaranteed by the state to obtain a sense of security, to be protected and free from all forms of violence. Women and children are vulnerable groups, therefore they need to receive protection from the state that can provide prevention and protection for victims of violence.
Regional governments together with the community are obliged to organize prevention, protection and recovery efforts for children and women victims of violence for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity.
Thus far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not yet regulated protection efforts in the Region, therefore institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee its implementation.
This Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in Pringsewu Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.
Article 2
What is meant by "respect and recognition of equal rights and human dignity" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and guarantee the fulfillment of victims' rights in order to uphold human dignity.
What is meant by "non-discrimination" is not making distinctions on any grounds or in any manner, whether concerning religion and beliefs, ethnicity, race, gender, skin color, language, and politics.
What is meant by "gender equality and justice" is a process to be fair to both men and women in obtaining opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, socio-cultural, defense and security activities as well as equality in enjoying the results of development.
What is meant by "protection of the human rights of women and children" is providing human rights in the form of security to women carried out by family members, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
What is meant by "best interests of victims" is that all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.
Article 5 Sufficiently clear.
Article 6 Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.
Article 9 Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain explanations, statements, ideas, and signs that contain value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or their explanations that can be seen, heard, and read that are presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology electronically or non-electronically related to acts of violence.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d What is meant by "the right to continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage" includes: the right to have one's rights advocated and access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.
Letter e What is meant by "the right to confidential handling" is the right of victims to have their identity kept confidential at all stages of handling by officers.
Letter f What is meant by "the right to psychological and legal assistance" is a right that includes assistance by: psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious counselors, advocates, and family members.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b What is meant by "right to basic services" includes among others: the right to education, health and access to parents during the handling process.
Letter c What is meant by "right to equal protection" is related to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics, ethnicity or social life, property, disability, birth or other status.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter e What is meant by "right to obtain freedom" is freedom to express views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c Sufficiently clear.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Point e What is meant by "community self-reliance organizations" are organizations formed by members of the community who are Citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, which consist of religious organizations, community self-reliance organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.
Point f Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Point a Sufficiently clear.
Point b Sufficiently clear.
Point c I What is meant by medicolegal is the effort to collect evidence for the purpose of proof in the judicial process.
Point d Sufficiently clear.
Point e Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.
Paragraph (5) What is meant by "safe house" is a temporary shelter intended to provide protection and a sense of security to victims of violence. Temporary protection is provided for a period of up to 14 (fourteen) days and can be extended according to the condition of the victim. PPTs that do not have a shelter can network with PPTs that have a shelter.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.
Article 20 Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear.
Article 22 Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.
Article 26 Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PRINGSEWU REGENCY NUMBER  /