REGENT OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU
MALUKU PROVINCE
REGIONAL REGULATION
OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY
NUMBER 04 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
FOR WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
THE REGENT OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU,

Considering: a. that as citizens, women and children have the right to obtain protection from any acts of violence committed against them that may cause physical or psychological harm, as part of the recognition and enforcement of Human Rights;
b. that the number of acts of violence against women and children in West Southeast Maluku Regency is quite high, while protection and services have not been carried out optimally;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence.

In View of: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 Year 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1979, Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention On The Elimination Of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984, Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 46 Year 1999 concerning the Establishment of North Maluku Province, Buru Regency and West Southeast Maluku Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 175, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3895); as amended by Law Number 06 Year 2000 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 75, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3961);
•
7. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
8. Law Number 17 Year 2003 concerning State Finance (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 47, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4286);
9. Law Number 23 year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 33 Year 2004 concerning Financial Balance Between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 126, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4438);
11. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Human Trafficking (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007, Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
13. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587);
14. Government Regulation Number 25 Year 2000 concerning the Authority of the Government and the Authority of the Province as an Autonomous Region (State Gazette Year 2000 Number 54, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3952);
15. Government Regulation Number 38 Year 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning the Implementation of Child Protection;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Child Victims of Violence;
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence.

With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY
REGENT OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU
DECIDES :
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Regency of West Southeast Maluku;
2. Regional Government is the Regent and Regional Apparatus as elements of regional government administration;
3. Regent is the Regent of West Southeast Maluku;
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter referred to as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of West Southeast Maluku Regency;
5. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb;
6. Woman is every person who is physically born as a woman;
7. Victim is a woman and child who experiences acts of violence and/or threats of violence that include physical, sexual, psychological, economic, and/or social violence, in the family, community and/or society, in conflict situations, post-conflict and state;
8. Implementation is all actions that include protection, services, and recovery for victims of violence;
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by the regional government, family, advocates, social institutions, community, police, prosecutors, courts or other parties;
10. Child Protection is all activities carried out to guarantee and protect children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human rights and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination;
11. Women's Protection is all activities carried out to guarantee and protect women and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human rights and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination;
12. Service is action taken as soon as possible to victims, when seeing, hearing and knowing of, during or after the occurrence of violence against victims;
13. Companion is a person or institution that has the ability to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, therapy, legal services and advocacy, for the purpose of strengthening victim recovery;
14. Women and Children Protection Institution is an institution providing services to victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical services (including medicolegal), psycho-social and legal services;
15. Safe House is temporary housing used to provide protection for women and children victims in accordance with the standard operating procedures or abbreviated as SOP that are determined;
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and or other community organizations;
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband-wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children;
18. Household is family members and relatives such as grandchildren, nieces/nephews, older siblings, younger siblings, grandfathers, grandmothers, husbands, wives, cousins and so on and non-relatives such as domestic workers, drivers and so on who live and reside in one house.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection of victims' rights;
d. non-discrimination;
e. the best interests of victims.

Article 3
The purpose of implementing protection for women and children victims of violence is to provide protection and services to women and children victims of violence based on gender and the best interests of the child that occurs in the household and/or public sphere.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 4
Every victim of violence has the right to obtain:
a. protection and assistance;
b. legal aid;
c. health services according to medical needs;
d. spiritual services;
e. psychosocial services;
f. information;
g. identification services;
h. social rehabilitation;
i. repatriation; and
j. social reintegration.

Article 5
(1) In the event that victims of violence as referred to in article 4 require continuous handling, they have the right to stay in a safe house or alternative residence;
(2) Continuous handling as referred to in paragraph (1) constitutes handling at the rehabilitation stage carried out by individuals, groups or government and non-government institutions.

Article 6
The safe house as referred to in article 5 paragraph (1) provides a place (1) and/or temporary safe shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored;
(2) The operation and/or management of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by KPPKB;
(3) For security and at the request of the victim of violence, the manager or operator of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) may place the victim of violence in a certain location that is kept confidential;
(4) Provisions regarding the operation of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (2) are further regulated by Regent regulation.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 7
The implementation of protection for women and children is the joint obligation and responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. Individuals;
c. Family;
d. Parents/Guardians;
e. Community;
f. Social Organizations; and or
g. Other Community Organizations in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.
Article 8 The obligations and responsibilities of the regional government as referred to in article 7 letter a include:
a. establishing and implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
b. conducting cooperation in the implementation of protection for women and children from victims of violence;
c. providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection for women and children from victims of violence;
d. allocating budget for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence in accordance with regional financial capacity; and e. fostering and supervising the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
Article 9 (1) The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 7 letter e, are implemented in the form of community participation including: a. caring for, maintaining, educating, and protecting children;
•
b. developing children according to their abilities, talents and interests;
c. preventing marriage at child age;
d. preventing acts of violence against women and children;
e. providing information and/or reporting acts of violence against women and children victims of violence to law enforcement or authorized parties; and
f. participating in handling victims of acts of violence.
(2) In the event that parents are absent, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a certain reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), may be transferred to the head of the family, which is implemented in accordance with the provisions of applicable Laws and Regulations;
(3) The form of community participation as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented responsibly in accordance with Laws and Regulations.

Article 10
The obligations of the family and/or parents as referred to in Article 7 letter c and letter d, who legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of acts of violence and protect women and children as family members.

BAB V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part
Institutional

Article 11
(1) The implementation of protection for victims is carried out in an integrated manner within the framework of P2TP2A;
(2) Provisions regarding P2TP2A will be further regulated in a Regent Regulation. 42 ( 1)

Second Part
Form and Mechanism of Service

Article 12
Forms of services for victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services in the form of treatment and recovery of physical condition carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. first psychosocial assistance to victims is carried out to identify the occurrence of violence and trauma experienced by victims;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. assistance to victims of violence carried out by competent persons or institutions that have expertise in conducting counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with P2TP2A; and
f. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and is further regulated by Regent's regulation.

Third Part
Principles of Service

Article 13
Services for victims shall be conducted free of charge, promptly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatory, easily accessible and with guarantee of confidentiality.

Article 14
The P2TP2A Manager is obligated to provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 12.

CHAPTER VI
ASSISTANCE
Article 15 Assistance is carried out by persons or institutions that have expertise to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for the purpose of strengthening and recovery of victims of violence and have cooperated with P2TP2A.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 16 (1) The community participates in the protection of children and women victims of violence individually or in groups.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, social welfare institutions, community organizations, educational institutions, mass media, and the business sector.
(3) Community participation in the implementation of protection for children and women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by:
a. Providing information through socialization and education;
b. Providing input in the formulation of policies related to the protection of children and women victims of violence;
c. Reporting to the authorities if violations of the rights of children and women victims of violence occur;
d. Playing an active role in the rehabilitation and social reintegration process for children and women victims of violence;
e. Conducting monitoring, supervision, and sharing responsibility for the implementation of protection for children and women victims of violence;
f. Playing an active role in eliminating negative labeling of children and women victims of violence; and
g. Providing space for children and women victims of violence to participate and express their opinions.
(4) The role of community organizations and educational institutions as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out by taking necessary steps in accordance with their respective duties, functions, and authorities to assist in the implementation for children and women victims of violence.
(5) The role of mass media as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through the dissemination of information and educational materials that are beneficial from social, cultural, educational, religious, and health aspects for children and women victims of violence by taking into account the interests of children and women victims of violence.
(6) The role of the business sector as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. Company policies that have a perspective on children and women victims of violence;
b. Products intended for children and women victims of violence must be safe for children and women victims of violence;
c. Contributing to the fulfillment of the rights of children and women victims of violence through corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 17
(1) Regional Government is obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Guidelines and standards for recovery;
b. Technical guidance and training;
c. Provision of facilities;
d. Monitoring; and
e. Evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the objectives of protection for women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards;
(4) Supervision of the implementation of this Regional Regulation is conducted by the Regional Government and/or the community in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 18
The community may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence organized by the Regional Government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or to the DPRD.

CHAPTER VIII
FUNDING
Article 19 (1) Financing for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence shall be charged to the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of West Southeast Maluku Regency;
(2) Budget management for the implementation of protection for victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
PROHIBITIONS
Article 20
(1) Every person is prohibited from:
a. treating children and women in a discriminatory manner that results in children and women experiencing losses, whether material or moral, thereby hindering their social function; or
b. treating children and women with disabilities in a discriminatory manner.
(2) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children and women in situations and treatment of abuse and neglect;
(3) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing violence against children and women;
(4) Every person is prohibited from committing violence or threat of violence to force children and women to engage in sexual intercourse with him/her or another person;
(5) Every person is prohibited from committing violence or threat of violence, coercing, committing deceit, committing a series of lies, or persuading children and women to commit or allow obscene acts to be committed;
(6) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing kidnapping, sale and/or trafficking of children and women;
(7) Every person is prohibited from obstructing children and women from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religious teachings and/or using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development;
(8) Every person is prohibited from recruiting or exploiting children and women for military and/or other interests and allowing children and women without protection of life;
(9) Every person is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in committing economic and/or sexual exploitation of children and women;
(10) Every person is prohibited from intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children and women in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of narcotics and/or psychotropic substances;
(11) Every person is prohibited from intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering the involvement of children and women in the abuse, as well as production and distribution of alcohol and other addictive substances.

CHAPTER XI
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Article 21 Safe houses as referred to in article 6 must be established no later than 1 (one) year after this Regional Regulation is promulgated.

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 22 Matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation, insofar as concerning technical implementation, shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.
Article 23 This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of West Southeast Maluku Regency.
Enacted: in Saumlaki on date: August 4, 2017

REGENT OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU,
P WN
Promulgated on date.
in Saumlaki August 7, 2017

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY

PITERSON RANGKORATAT
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 04 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY, MALUKU PROVINCE: (7/54/2017)

EXPLANATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF MALUKU PROVINCE
NUMBER 04 YEAR 2017
CONCERNING
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN
VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Various acts of violence both against women and children within the household and outside the household continue to increase from time to time. This condition, if without serious handling, will destroy household life, society, nation and state. Therefore, the government of West Southeast Maluku Regency is obligated to provide protection to women and children victims of acts of violence which is an implementation of various laws and regulations, including Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons, Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection.

Protection of women and children from acts of violence is the obligation of the Regional Government as regulated in article 22 letter a, Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Regional Government which states "that in carrying out regional autonomy has the obligation to protect the community, maintain national unity, integrity and harmony as well as the integrity of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia".

On that basis, the government of West Southeast Maluku Regency has taken steps as an effort to provide protection to women and children victims of acts of violence, however it has not been able to provide maximum and adequate protection against acts of violence that occur in the social life of the community, especially to women and children, among others caused by the still low understanding of the community regarding the rights of women and children, handling has not been well coordinated, implementation has not been sustainable and so forth. Therefore, a regulation in the form of a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is needed to answer while providing legal certainty in the protection of women and children victims from acts of violence that occur.

The existence of a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence, gives responsibility to the Regional Government starting from prevention of acts of violence to handling victims of acts of violence. In its implementation the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies and the community. In addition, adequate funding support from the Regional Government and community participation, it is hoped that violence against women and children can be reduced and even in time will be eradicated from the face of this beloved West Southeast Maluku.

# ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
Paragraph a What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights" is that the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence is to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence as a manifestation of respect for human rights.
Paragraph b What is meant by "the principle of non-discrimination" is all actions and deeds carried out without distinguishing based on economic, social, cultural, political background, gender, age, religion, race and so forth.
What is meant by "the principle of justice and gender equality" is a process of equality and conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural activities, national defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Paragraph c What is meant by "the principle of victim protection" is protection of the self, family, honor, dignity and property under one's control, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.
Paragraph d What is meant by "the principle of non-discrimination" is the attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
• Paragraph e What is meant by "the principle of the best interests of the Victim" is all actions concerning victims carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, where the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
Sufficiently Clear

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
• Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Sufficiently clear

Article 8
Paragraph (1) Letter a What is meant by establishing and implementing protection policies, programs and activities includes:
a. Collecting data and information about women and children victims of violence;
b. Providing education about anti-violence values toward women and children;
c. Disseminating laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. Conducting monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
• Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently Clear

Article 11
Sufficiently Clear

Article 12 up to Article 23
Sufficiently clear SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST SOUTHEAST MALUKU REGENCY YEAR 2017 NUMBER 180