REGENT OF LUWU
PROVINCE OF SOUTH SULAWESI
REGIONAL REGULATION OF LUWU REGENCY
NUMBER: 2 FA BUT 2010
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
Considering: Bearing in mind:

REGENT OF LUWU,

a. that Women and Men have equal rights in participating in various fields of life;

b. that women are a national asset who play a very important role in the process of creating and developing quality generations, therefore they need to receive protection from discriminatory actions and need to be empowered to actualize their potential optimally;

violence and so that they can that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women;

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia,

2. Law Number on the Establishment of Level II Regions in Sulawesi (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year Supplement Number 1822);

Year 1959 concerning 1959 Number 74, Republic State of Indonesia

3. Law Number 1 Year 1974 concerning Marriage (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1);

4. Law Number 13 Year Year 1974 1998 concerning Elderly Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 190);

5. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165. Supplement Indonesia Number 3886);

6. Law State Gazette of the Republic Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);

-2-

7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

8. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of Criminal Acts Criminal Trafficking in Persons Year 2007 State of the Republic of Indonesia 2009 Year concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia (Gazette Number 58);

9. Law Number Year 2009 Number 12);

10. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year Supplement State Gazette 2011 Number 82, Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);

11. Law of the Republic Year 2014 Indonesia concerning Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of Persons With Disabilities (Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities) (State Gazette Year 2011 Number 107, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);

23 Number 12. Law Regional Government (State Gazette Year 2014 Number 244 Supplement State Gazette Number 5589) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 5679);

13. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence 2006 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year Number 15, Supplement State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

14. Regulation of the State Minister for the Empowerment Number 2 Year 2008 concerning the Protection of Women;

Women Guidelines for Implementation

15. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products as has been amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 Year 2018 concerning Amendment to the Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning the Formation of Regional Legal Products.

-3- With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF LUWU REGENCY
REGENT OF LUWU
DECIDES :
To Establish: REGULATION

REGION
CONCERNING
PROTECTION
WOMEN
BABI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Government is the Central Government.
2. Governor is the Governor of South Sulawesi Province.
3. Region is Luwu Regency.
4. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
5. Regent is the Regent of Luwu.
6. Gender is a concept that refers to roles and responsibilities as women and as men that are created and internalized in families, society and community culture in which we live including expectations, attitudes, characteristics, behavior of how to be a man and how to be a woman.
atau
7. Discrimination is any restriction, harassment or exclusion that is directly or indirectly based on human differentiation on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, group, class, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs, resulting in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or human rights and basic freedoms in the use of rights of life both individual and collective in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural fields and other aspects of life.
8. Women's empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capacity, knowledge and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to women carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, temporary or courts or other parties either based on court decisions.
10. Violence is any act against the law, with or without using means against physical and psychological that causes danger to life, body or causes the deprivation of a person's freedom.
11. Disability is an individual who has physical or mental limitations.
12. Regional Cooperation is an agreement between governor and governor or governor and regent/mayor or between regent/mayor and other regent/mayor, and or governor, regent/mayor with third parties, made in writing and giving rise to rights and obligations.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
Protection of Women is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality, c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.

Article 3
The Implementation of Women's Protection aims to:
a. increase the participation of women both individually and in groups as potential and resources in the implementation of social community life;
b. prevent all forms of Discrimination;
c. empower women both individually and in groups and communities experiencing gender issues so they are able to fulfill their needs independently;
d. prevent and address risks from women's vulnerability so that their survival can be fulfilled in accordance with minimum basic needs;
e. reduce the gap in opportunities between women and men in achieving development; and
f. reduce acts of Violence against women.

CHAPTER III
SCOPE
Article 4
The implementation of protection of women from acts of violence includes:
a. prevention;
b. handling; c. empowerment.
-5-

Article 5
(1) Protection of women from violence includes protection of women in the household, in the community, in the workplace and in conflict and disaster areas.
(2) Protection of women from violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes women with disabilities, elderly women.

CHAPTER IV
HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN FREEDOMS
Article 6
Human Rights and fundamental human freedoms, consist of:
a. Right to life;
b. Right to form a family and procreate;
c. Right to self-development;
d. Right to obtain justice;
e. Right to personal freedom;
f. Right to security;
g. Right to welfare; and
h. Right to participate in government.

Article 7
(1) Every Woman has the right to:
a. live peacefully, safely, in peace, happily, prosperously both physically and spiritually,
b. live in a family within the bonds of a legal marriage; c. maintain life and improve her standard of living; d. have work that she likes and is also entitled to fair employment conditions;
e. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and pathways of education in accordance with the specified requirements;
f. a healthy and clean environment;
g. receive fair wages in accordance with her work that is comparable and commensurate with human dignity,
h. elect and/or be elected in general elections, regional head elections, village head elections and/or other political office elections based on equal rights through direct, general, free, secret, honest and fair voting according to the applicable laws and regulations;
i. obtain special protection specifically in the implementation of her work or profession against matters that may threaten the safety and/or health related to women's reproductive function; and
j. special rights inherent to women due to their reproductive function are guaranteed and protected by law.
(2) Women who are adults and or are married have the right to perform legal acts independently unless otherwise determined by laws and regulations and other social norms.
-6- (3) A legal marriage can only take place based on the free will of the female party and the male party in accordance with laws and regulations.
(4) A wife during the marriage bond has equal rights and responsibilities with her husband over all matters relating to her married life, relations with her children and ownership rights and management of joint property.
(5) After the dissolution of her marriage a woman has equal rights and responsibilities with her former husband over all matters relating to her children, taking into account the best interests of the child.
(6) After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has equal rights with her former husband over all matters relating to joint property without reducing the rights of children, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(7) Every woman who is in a condition of Disability, elderly age, and pregnant is entitled to obtain facilities and special treatment.
(8) Every elderly woman, with physical and/or mental disabilities, has the right to obtain care, education, training and special assistance at the expense of the regional government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.

# BAB V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION
First Part Prevention
Article 8
The target of prevention as referred to in Article 4 letter a is every woman.

Article 9
(1) Prevention as referred to in Article 4 letter a, includes: a. collecting data and information about women victims of violence and laws and regulations; b. conducting education about anti-violence values toward women;
c. disseminating laws and regulations related to the implementation of protection for women victims of violence;
d. establishing and facilitating the implementation of integrated service institutions for women victims by involving community elements;
e. encouraging community awareness of the importance of protection for women victims of violence; 1. Increasing women's awareness of the importance of complying with ethics, religious norms and cultural norms in behavior.
(2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government of the Regency, police institutions, prosecution institutions, judicial institutions, non-governmental organizations, and the community in accordance with their respective duties, functions, and responsibilities.
7.

Second Part Handling
Article 10
The target of handling as referred to in Article 4 letter b is every woman.

Article 11
(1) The forms of services for women victims of violence that are provided include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims, carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical service for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided by companions in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have a sense of confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process;
e. economic independence services in the form of services for skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.
(2) The service mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be organized according to standard operating procedures that will be regulated in a Regent Regulation.

Article 12
The provision of integrated services to women victims of violence is carried out free of charge, quickly, safely, with empathy, non-discriminatory, easily accessible, and with a guarantee of confidentiality.

Article 13
The integrated service provider is obligated to provide services in accordance with the service principles as referred to in Article 12.
-10-

Article 21
(1) The provision and facilitation of services for the Protection of women as referred to in Article 20 letter c shall be in the form of:
a. handling of complaints/reports;
b. legal assistance;
c. health rehabilitation;
d. social rehabilitation;
e. social reintegration; or f. repatriation assistance.
(2) The provision and facilitation of services for the Protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be provided to women:
a. victims of violence;
b. victims of human trafficking;
c. elderly who are not independent;
d. with Disabilities;
e. victims of sexual exploitation;
f. victims of disasters and those in conflict-prone areas; and
g. workers/employees.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 22
(1) The community may participate in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Protection.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, groups or social community organizations.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. Responses and input in policy formulation;
b. cooperation; and/or
c. complaints/reports.
(4) The procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be further regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII
INSTITUTIONALIZATION, GUIDANCE, AND SUPERVISION
First Part Institutionalization
Article 23
(1) Handling as referred to in Article 11 is carried out in an integrated manner by related SKPD and/or service institutions that handle the protection of women from acts of violence.
-11- (2) The implementation of integrated services is coordinated by BPPKB or other name as further regulated by Regent Regulation.
(3) The implementation of integrated services is in accordance with laws and regulations.

Second Part Guidance
Article 24
(1) Regional governments are obligated to conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women victims of violence.
(2) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. Guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. Technical guidance and training;
c. Provision of facilities;
d. Monitoring,
e. Evaluation.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2), is intended to realize the protection of women from acts of violence in accordance with minimum service standards implemented by SKPD and the community.
(4) SKPD as referred to in paragraph (3) is the Regional Work Unit within the Regional Government of Luwu Regency that is related to the protection of women against acts of violence.
(1) Government

Part Three Supervision
Article 24
(1) The regional government is obligated to conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women from acts of violence. (2) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out with the principles of professionalism, transparency and accountability.
Community

Article 25
may conduct supervision of the implementation of protection of women from acts of violence organized by the regional government through a mechanism of conveying aspirations to the Regent or DPRD.

CHAPTER IX FUNDING
Article 26
activities (1) Funding for the implementation of policies, programs and Women's Empowerment and Protection in the Region is sourced from the regional revenue and expenditure budget.
-12- (2) In the event that the Region receives funding assistance for the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection from the Government, it must be carried out in accordance with the laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
Article 27
(1) To guarantee synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection, the Regional Government conducts monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection in the Region.
(3) Monitoring is conducted periodically starting from planning up to the policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection for the current year.
(4) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection is conducted at the end of each fiscal year.
(5) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for Women's Empowerment and Protection are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(6) The Regent submits a report on the implementation of integrated services for the Protection of women victims of violence to the Governor with a copy submitted to the minister in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs, and the minister in charge of home affairs.
(7) The Regent submits a report on the implementation of the establishment and development of task forces, forums, working groups or other institutions in an integrated manner to the minister in charge of home affairs with a copy to the minister in charge of women's empowerment and child protection affairs.
(8) The implementation of reporting as referred to in paragraph (6) and paragraph (7) is conducted annually and/or when necessary.

CHAPTER XI
PROHIBITIONS AND SANCTIONS
Article 28
Any person who intentionally commits violence against women shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with the laws and regulations.
-13-

CHAPTER XII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 29
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Luwu Regency.
Enacted in Belopa on the date of é august 2019

REGENT OF LUWU,
BASMIN MATTAYANG
Promulgated in Belopa on the date of 6 pistes 2019 Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF LUWU REGENCY,

RIDVAN
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF LUWU REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER .. REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF LUWU REGENCY, SOUTH SULAWESI

LUWU, PROVINCE
* ;