REGENT OF EAST LUWU
SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE
COPY
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST LUWU REGENCY
NUMBER 4 OF 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY
REGENT OF EAST LUWU,
Considering : a. that in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of women to be free from torture and treatment that degrades human dignity and to improve the quality of life, women have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, provides affirmation of the need for protection and provision of a sense of security to women;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women Against Violence;
In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 7 of 2003 concerning the Establishment of East Luwu Regency and North Mamuju Regency in South Sulawesi Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 27, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
4270);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 44 of 2008 concerning Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 181, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4928);
6. Law Number 16 of 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 104, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5248);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
9. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
10. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2010 Number 56);
11. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 12 of 2017 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Classification of Branch Offices and Regional Technical Implementation Units (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2017 Number 451);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 4 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2018 Number 532);
13. Regional Regulation of East Luwu Regency Number 8 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of East Luwu Regency of 2016 Number 8) as amended by Regional Regulation of East Luwu Regency Number 5 of 2020 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of East Luwu Regency Number 8 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of East Luwu Regency of 2020 Number 5, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of East Luwu Regency Number 124).
With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
REGENT OF EAST LUWU
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is East Luwu Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of East Luwu.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regional House of Representatives of East Luwu Regency, hereinafter referred to as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of regional government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and the Regional House of Representatives of the Regency in administering government affairs that are the authority of the Regency Region.
6. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for Women and Children Protection, hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA, is a regional technical implementation unit established by the regional government in providing services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
7. Woman is a person (human) who has genital organs, can menstruate, become pregnant, give birth to children, and breastfeed.
8. Victim is a Woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
9. Protection of women is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights from various types of acts of violence by providing consistent and systematic attention.
10. Service is an activity or series of activities in the context of fulfilling the needs of victims of violence.
11. Violence is any act unlawfully with or without using means against physical and psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body, or causes the deprivation of a person's freedom.
12. Violence against women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually or psychologically, economic exploitation, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
13. Prevention is all efforts made by government and non-government institutions aimed at providing a sense of security to women.
14. Service is action taken as soon as possible to the victim, when seeing, hearing and knowing before, during or after the occurrence of violence against the victim.
15. Assistance is all forms of efforts made by related institutions to conduct counseling, therapy, advocacy for the purpose of strengthening and recovering victims of violence.
16. Social rehabilitation service is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
17. Legal aid service is legal services provided by advocates to victims of violence.
18. Repatriation service is an effort to return victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point or from the receiving area/area where violence occurred to the area of origin or family party, family/substitute institution, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of the needs of victims of violence.
19. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite Victims with family parties or communities that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
20. Social Worker is a State Civil Apparatus who is given duties, responsibilities, authority and rights in full by authorized officials to implement social welfare in the government agency environment or other social organizations.
21. Safe House is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with determined operational standards.
22. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
23. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children.

CHAPTER II
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The purpose of this regional regulation is to provide protection for women and provide a sense of security in the fulfillment of women's rights.

Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women; b. protect women against violence;
c. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women victims of violence; d. provide services to women victims of violence; and e. realize community participation in the implementation of protection of women.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF FEMALE VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 4
Female victims of violence have the right to:
a. have their dignity and worth as human beings respected;
b. obtain information on the protection of women;
c. obtain rehabilitation and social reintegration;
d. obtain physical, psychological and sexual health recovery in accordance with the suffering experienced by victims of violence;
e. obtain empowerment and legal assistance; and f. religious guidance services.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General

Article 5
(1) Protection of women victims of violence is organized by the Regional Government.
(2) Protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Regional Apparatus with authority over women's affairs.

Article 6
The provision of services in the protection of women victims of violence is carried out by UPTD PPA;

Second Part
Prevention of Violence

Article 7
(1) In the protection of women, prevention of violence is carried out. (2) Prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by means of: a. socializing laws and regulations;
b. providing education on the dangers of violence against women; c. conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
d. establishing cooperation with government agencies or non-governmental institutions in efforts to prevent violence; and
e. establishing a prevention system, mapping of locations or areas prone to violence.
(3) Prevention of violence as referred to in paragraph (2) may coordinate with other institutions.

Third Part
Services for Women Victims of Violence

Article 8
Services for victims of violence are implemented based on the principles of:
a. no fees charged;
b. prompt;
c. safe and comfortable;
d. empathy;
e. non-judgmental;
f. non-discriminatory; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 9
Types of services for victims of violence include:
a. complaint and consultation services;
b. assistance services;
c. legal aid services;
d. health services;
e. social rehabilitation services;
f. repatriation services; and
g. social reintegration services.

Article 10
(1) Every type of service follows standard operational procedures.
(2) Every type of service must have a form.
(3) The form as referred to in paragraph (2) aims to achieve administrative order and data collection.
(4) The form as referred to in paragraph (2) is provided by UPTD PPA.

Article 11
(1) Services as referred to in Article 9 may be carried out in cooperation with the central government, provincial government, other regency/city governments, the community, and/or other social institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be set forth in a cooperation agreement.

Paragraph 1
Complaint and Consultation Services

Article 12
Complaint and consultation services as referred to in Article 9 letter a, include:
a. conducting administrative processes for reporter services;
b. conducting interviews with reporters; and
c. approval to take action.

Paragraph 2
Assistance Services

Article 13
(1) Assistance Services as referred to in Article 9 letter b, are carried out in every type of health service, rehabilitation, legal aid, social reintegration, and repatriation.
(2) Assistance is carried out by experts who have expertise in conducting counseling, therapy and/or advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of women victims of violence.
(3) Experts who provide assistance as referred to in paragraph (2) cooperate with UPTD PPA.
(4) Experts as referred to in paragraph (2) must be provided by the Regional Apparatus responsible for women's affairs.
(5) Experts as referred to in paragraph (2) consist of: a. health workers;
b. advocates;
c. social workers;
d. spiritual counselors; and
e. psychologists or psychiatrists.

Paragraph 3
Legal Aid Services

Article 14
(1) Legal aid services as referred to in Article 9 letter c, shall be carried out by advocates.
(2) Legal aid services include criminal law matters both litigation and/or non-litigation.
(3) Legal aid services as referred to in paragraph (1) include exercising power of attorney, accompanying, representing, defending, and/or performing other legal actions for the legal interests of victims.
(4) The implementation of legal aid services shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4
Health Services

Article 15
(1) Health services as referred to in Article 9 letter d, shall be carried out by health workers.
(2) Health services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out at health facilities owned by regional government or private sector.
(3) Health services as referred to in paragraph (2) aim to restore the condition of victims.
(4) Restoration of the condition of victims as referred to in paragraph (3) includes:
a. first aid to victims; and
b. follow-up services in the form of outpatient care, inpatient care in accordance with medical provisions.

Article 16
(1) Health workers are obligated to create medical records in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
(2) Every medical procedure performed by health workers must obtain consent for medical procedures from the victim or their family in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 5
Social Rehabilitation Services

Article 17
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 9 letter e, shall be carried out by social workers, spiritual counselors and psychologists or psychiatrists.
(2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in a safe house or other place determined by UPTD PPA.
(3) Social rehabilitation services shall be carried out by means of:
a. providing spiritual guidance to victims;
b. building empathetic communication with victims;
c. providing counseling services according to the needs of victims.
d. recovery of the psychological condition of victims carried out by psychologists and/or psychiatrists; and
e. psychological therapy on a regular basis.

Article 18
Social rehabilitation services carried out by social workers, spiritual counselors and psychologists or psychiatrists must obtain consent from the victim or their family.

Paragraph 6
Repatriation Services

Article 19
(1) Repatriation Services as referred to in Article 9 letter f, shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with relevant agencies.
(2) Repatriation as referred to in paragraph (1) must obtain the consent of the victim.

Paragraph 7
Social Reintegration Services

Article 20
(1) Social reintegration services as referred to in Article 9 letter g, are carried out by UPTD PPA together with other agencies and the community.
(2) Social reintegration as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by means of:
a. reuniting victims with their families and communities; b. monitoring/follow-up guidance; and
c. conducting monitoring for at least 3 (three) months after the victim returns to their family.

CHAPTER V
COOPERATION
Article 21
(1) In order to achieve the objective of protecting women from acts of violence, the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. Ministries;
b. Provincial Regional Government;
c. Regency/Municipal Regional Government;
d. Higher education institutions; and
e. Non-governmental institutions.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of acts of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses.

CHAPTER VI
GUIDANCE, SUPERVISION AND EVALUATION
Article 22
Regional governments are obligated to conduct guidance, supervision and evaluation of the protection of women.

Part One
Guidance

Article 23
(1) Regional government development includes:
a. guidelines for the protection of women; and
b. technical guidance and training.
(2) Development as referred to in paragraph (1) may be conducted by the regional government at least once a year.

Second Part
Supervision

Article 24
(1) The Regent shall supervise the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women.
(2) The implementation of supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regent through monitoring by the Regional Apparatus handling women's affairs.
(3) The supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted from the planning stage through to the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women for the current year.
(4) The monitoring results as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be reported to the Regent every 6 (six) months.

Third Part
Evaluation

Article 25
(1) The Regional Government conducts an evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) are used as input material for the formulation of policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women in the following year.
(3) The evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY AND PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION
Article 26
(1) Regional Government in the protection of women victims of violence, may involve the participation of the community and private sector.
(2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, groups or community organizations.

Article 27
(1) Individuals, groups and community organizations that participate in the protection of women as referred to in Article 26 paragraph (2), shall be provided guidance by the Regional Government through Regional Apparatus with authority over women's affairs.
(2) The guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in the form of technical guidance and training.

Article 28
Participation of the private sector based on cooperation agreements with UPTD PPA.

Article 29
The community may conduct supervision of the protection of women by conveying their aspirations to the Regent through the regional apparatus responsible for women or the DPRD.

CHAPTER VIII
REPORTING
Article 30
(1) Women's protection must report women victims of violence protection activities periodically to the Regent. (2) The Regent as referred to in paragraph (1) must report women victims of violence protection activities periodically to the Governor.

CHAPTER IX
AWARDS
Article 31
(1) The Regional Government may grant awards to any person and/or institution that with commitment gives full attention to the protection of women.
(2) Awards as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. certificate; and
b. other forms.

CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 32
Financing for the protection of women is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. Other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 33
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Luwu Regency.
Enacted in Malili on the date of 12 April 2021

REGENT OF EAST LUWU,
BUDIMAN
Promulgated in Malili on the 12th of April 2021

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF EAST LUWU REGENCY,
BAHRI SULI
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST LUWU REGENCY YEAR 2021 NUMBER 4
REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST LUWU REGENCY SOUTH SULAWESI PROVINCE NUMBER: B.HK.05.026.21

ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST LUWU REGENCY
NUMBER 4 OF 2021
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL
The State has the obligation to provide Protection to every citizen in accordance with the preamble of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Every citizen has the right to live free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth, as well as to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence. Acts of violence, particularly against women, constitute a violation of human rights. Women in this case are included in vulnerable groups, who tend to experience Violence and therefore need to receive Protection. Violence against Women constitutes a violation of human rights and therefore their dignity and worth need to be protected.

Violence is any act unlawfully with or without the use of means against physical and/or psychological aspects that causes danger to life, body or results in the deprivation of a person's freedom. Furthermore, Violence against Women is any action based on gender differences that results in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually or psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life. The existence of Women as Victims of Violence has not yet received adequate services, therefore minimum services for women victims of violence are required.

In order to prevent and overcome acts of Violence against Women in East Luwu Regency, it is deemed necessary to provide Protection for Women Victims of Violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.

This Regional Regulation regulates efforts for Protection of Women Victims of Violence, particularly in terms of services, reporting, funding, guidance and supervision of Women Victims of Violence in East Luwu Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently Clear

Article 2
Sufficiently Clear

Article 3
Sufficiently Clear

Article 4
Letter a Sufficiently Clear Letter b Sufficiently clear Letter c Sufficiently clear Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear Letter f What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and development for human beings so as to provide tranquility, peace, and coolness of heart to victims of violence by continuously providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, tawakkal, and continue to carry out their obligations to God Almighty.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear

Article 6
Sufficiently clear

Article 7
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Point a What is meant by "laws and regulations" is laws and regulations related to the protection of women.
Point b Sufficiently clear Point c Sufficiently clear Point d Sufficiently clear Point e Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) Sufficiently Clear

Article 8
Sufficiently clear

Article 9
Sufficiently clear

Article 10
Sufficiently clear

Article 11
Paragraph (1) What is meant by "social institution" is an organization or association that implements the provision of protection for women established by the community whether legally incorporated.
Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear

Article 12
Sufficiently clear

Article 13
Sufficiently Clear

Article 14
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) What is meant by "litigation" is the process of resolving legal issues within the judiciary; non-litigation is the process of resolving legal issues outside the judiciary that prioritizes the interests of both parties based on deliberation and consensus.
Paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear

Article 15
Sufficiently clear

Article 16
Sufficiently clear

Article 17
Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear Paragraph (3) letter a Sufficiently clear letter b What is meant by "empathic" is the process of identifying psychologically or emotionally by positioning oneself as the victim.
letter c What is meant by "counseling" is the process of providing information, objectively and completely, conducted systematically with the guidance of interpersonal communication, guidance techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge that aims to help a person recognize their current condition, the problems being faced, and determine a solution or efforts to overcome these problems.
Letter d Sufficiently clear Letter e Sufficiently clear

Article 18
Sufficiently Clear

Article 19
Sufficiently Clear

Article 20
Sufficiently Clear

Article 21
Sufficiently Clear

Article 22
Sufficiently Clear

Article 23
Sufficiently Clear

Article 24
Sufficiently Clear

Article 25
Sufficiently Clear

Article 26
Sufficiently Clear

Article 27
Sufficiently Clear

Article 28
Sufficiently Clear

Article 29
Sufficiently Clear

Article 30
Sufficiently Clear

Article 31
Sufficiently Clear

Article 32
Sufficiently Clear

Article 33
Sufficiently Clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST LUWU REGENCY NUMBER 130