COPY
REGENT OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU
PROVINCE OF NORTH SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY
NUMBER 7 YEAR 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF LABUHANBATU SELATAN,

Considering : a. that violence against women and children in Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency continues to increase, causing community members to feel unsafe in carrying out their lives, thus requiring integrated protection efforts;
b. that in order to optimize the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence in Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency, it is necessary to provide direction, foundation, and legal certainty to all parties involved in the implementation of protection for women and children;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence.

In View of : 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age For Admission To Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 22 of 2008 concerning the Establishment of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency in North Sumatra Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4868);
11. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
12. Law Number 6 of 2023 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2023 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6856);
13. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
14. Presidential Regulation Number 25 of 2021 concerning Child-Friendly Regency/City Policy (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2021 Number 96);
15. Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 9 of 2016 concerning the Establishment of Regional Apparatus of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency (Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency of 2016 Number 9 Series D Number 09, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 09) as amended by Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 5 of 2021 concerning Amendment to Regional Regulation of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 9 of 2016 concerning the Establishment of Regional Apparatus of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency (Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency of 2021 Number 5 Series D Number 05, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Labuhanbatu Selatan Regency Number 05).

With Mutual Agreement

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY
REGENT OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU
DECIDES:
To Establish : REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is South Labuhanbatu Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of South Labuhanbatu.
4. Discrimination is any distinction, harassment or exclusion, whether direct or indirect, based on human differences on the basis of religion, ethnicity, race, ethnic group, social status, economic status, gender, language, political beliefs that result in the reduction, deviation or elimination of recognition, implementation or use of human rights and basic freedoms in life both individually and collectively in the political, economic, legal, social, cultural and other aspects of life.
5. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of a person's freedom.
6. Child is a person who has not reached 18 years of age, including a Child who is still in the womb.
7. Woman is a person who is female in gender.
8. Violence against Women is any action that results in or may result in misery or suffering of Women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
9. Violence against Children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of Children physically, psychologically, sexually, neglect, exploitation, and other violence.
10. Victim is a Woman and Child who experiences violence and/or threat of violence.
11. Protection of Women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, police, prosecution, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that Violence against Women will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
12. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from acts of Violence and discrimination.
13. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to Victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that Violence against Victims will occur, is occurring or has occurred.
14. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany Victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy, integrated for the strengthening and recovery of Violence Victims.
15. Gender is the difference in characteristics, roles, functions and status between Women and men which is not based on biological differences, but rather based on socio-cultural relations influenced by the broader structure of society.
16. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate Gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies, programs, and development activities in the region.
17. Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection, hereinafter abbreviated as Dinas PPPA, is the office that administers the affairs of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
18. Integrated Service Center for Women's and Children's Empowerment, hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A, is an integrated Service center in efforts to empower Women and Children established by the Regional Government with active participation of the Community which includes an information center, consultation center, complaint services, initial health care, counseling, legal assistance, repatriation and social reintegration, shelter/temporary safe house, as well as a referral center.
19. Safe House is a shelter/temporary protection house for Victims, during the accompaniment process, for the safety and comfort of Victims from threats and danger from perpetrators, and is only known to interested parties such as certain personnel at UPT P2TP2A for reasons of Victim safety and security.
20. Standard Operating Procedure, hereinafter abbreviated as SOP, is the standard steps that must be taken in protecting Victims starting from complaints/identification, rehabilitation, health, Social Rehabilitation, advocacy up to repatriation and social reintegration of witnesses and/or Victims.
21. Family is the smallest unit in the Community consisting of husband and wife, or husband-wife and their Child, or father and his Child, or mother and her Child or Family by blood in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree and/or if any up to the fourth degree.
22. Household is husband, wife, and Child, people who have Family relations due to blood relations, marriage, milk kinship, care, guardianship, and/or Household workers and reside in that Household.
23. Community is individuals, Families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
24. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, hereinafter abbreviated as APBD, is the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of South Labuhanbatu Regency.
25. Social Rehabilitation is a process of refunctionalization and development to enable a person to be able to carry out their social functions properly in Community life.

Article 2
Protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect for Human Rights;
b. the right to life, survival, and development;
c. non-discrimination;
d. the best interests of the Child;
e. justice and Gender equality; and
f. protection of victims.

Article 3
This Regional Regulation is intended to provide a legal basis for the Regional Government in providing protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence.

Article 4
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. guarantee the rights of every Woman and Child to survival, growth and development;
c. non-discrimination;
d. protect Women and Children from threats, fear, torture and or treatment that degrades dignity, self-worth and human dignity;
e. prevent forms of violence against Women and Children; f. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against Women and Children;
g. protect and provide a sense of security for Women and Children; h. provide services to Women and Children victims of violence, reporters, and witnesses;
i. protect and prevent all forms of discrimination against Women and Children in the region;
j. Empowerment of Women;
k. the best interests of the Child; and
l. realize a region that is suitable for Women and Children.

Article 5
The scope of this Regional Regulation includes:
a. forms of Violence;
b. rights of Victims;
c. obligations and responsibilities;
d. implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; e. coordination and cooperation;
f. participation of the Community and business sector;
g. guidance and supervision;
h. reporting; and
i. sources of funding.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF VIOLENCE
Article 6
Forms of Violence against Women and Children may include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 7
Physical violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and/or cause death.

Article 8
Psychological violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 9
Sexual violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c is caused by: a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or specific purposes.

Article 10
Neglect as referred to in Article 6 letter d is caused by: a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of a Child properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care; b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a Child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care; c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their Household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obligated to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by means of restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the Victim is under the control of that person.

Article 11
Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter e is caused by: a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the consent of the Victim which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or Services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or capabilities of a person by other parties to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the Victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS
Article 12
Every Victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. health services in accordance with medical needs;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. special handling related to the confidentiality of the Victim; f. assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; g. guarantee of rights related to status as a Family member as well as a member of the Community; and
h. spiritual guidance services.

CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Part One
General

Article 13
The obligations and responsibilities in implementing the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence are the shared responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents or guardians.

Part Two
Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 14
The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.

Article 15
(1) Regional Government is obligated to:
a. implement policies for the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence established by the government;
b. establish policies, programs, and activities for the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; and
c. conduct cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, and various NGOs concerned with Women and Children in the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) Regional Government is responsible for providing support for facilities and infrastructure for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(3) In order to carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, Regional Government establishes action programs and activities for the protection of Women and Children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(4) Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), constitutes part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
(5) Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (3), is further regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 16
(1) The obligations and responsibilities of the Community as referred to in Article 13 letter b, shall be implemented in the form of Community participation.
(2) The form of Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes: a. establishing family partners at the Kelurahan/Village level;
b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of the rights of Women and Children; d. providing first aid to Victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities if Violence against Victims occurs in their environment.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.
(4) The form of Community participation as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be implemented responsibly in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 17
The obligations of the Family and/or parents as referred to in Article 13 letters c and d have full responsibility to prevent all forms of Violence and protect Women and Children as members of the Family.

CHAPTER V
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One
General

Article 18
In order to provide Services and protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence, the Regional Government establishes P2TP2A.

Second Part
Establishment of P2TP2A

Article 19
(1) P2TP2A as referred to in Article 18 consists of elements of the Community, universities, professional organizations, community organizations concerned with the Community.
(2) The formation of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be established by Regent's decree.
(3) The implementation of Services to Victims shall be carried out in an integrated manner by Village/Kelurahan P2TP2A, Sub-district P2TP2A, and Regency P2TP2A.
(4) P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duty to:
a. receive complaints/reports of Violence against Women and/or Children, consultation, and counseling;
b. receive and send to other Service units in a tiered manner;
c. provide legal assistance and support;
d. health;
e. Social Rehabilitation;
f. legal Services;
g. repatriation and social reintegration; and
h. provide protection to Victims, reporters and witnesses.
(5) P2TP2A may provide temporary services and protection in the form of a Safe House.
(6) In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a Safe House as referred to in paragraph (5), then Victims of Violence shall be referred to P2TP2A that has a Safe House.
(7) P2TP2A consists of several Divisions comprising:
a. Complaints Service division;
b. health Service division;
c. legal aid consultation; and
d. rehabilitation, Repatriation and Social Reintegration.

Article 20
(1) In carrying out the task of Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (4), P2TP2A coordinates with the Sub-district P2TP2A.
(2) The mechanism for implementing tasks as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted in accordance with the SOP.
(3) Further provisions regarding the tasks of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Third Part
Prevention Mechanism and Forms of P2TP2A Services

Article 21
Regional Government conducts prevention of acts of Violence against Women and Children, through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations to the Community related to the protection of the rights of Women and Children;
b. conducting empowerment and awareness to Families, parents and the Community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
c. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
d. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social Services;
e. opening employment opportunities for Women;
f. building participation and concern of the Community to implement prevention and protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence;
g. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
h. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various community non-governmental organizations that work and/or care for Women and Children;
i. opening complaint posts for protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence; and
j. training of P2TP2A members related to the implementation of their duties in conducting prevention of Violence against Women and Children.

Article 22
(1) Prevention of the occurrence of Violence against Women and Children as referred to in Article 21, shall be implemented by Regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the field of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public peace and order.
(2) Prevention of Violence by Regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional action plan.
(3) Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 23
Forms of P2TP2A Services include:
a. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of Victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Psychosocial services are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of Victims, including the provision of Safe Houses to protect Victims from various threats and intimidation against Victims and to provide social support so that Victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in resolving their problems;
c. Medico-legal services are a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
d. Legal services to assist Victims in undergoing legal processes; and e. Economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that Victims can be independent.

Fourth Part
Mechanism of Assistance by Persons and/or Institutions that Cooperate with P2TP2A

Article 24
(1) Assistance for Women and Children Victims of acts of Violence is carried out by persons and/or institutions that cooperate with P2TP2A.
(2) Assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), is conducted according to SOP.
(3) Further provisions regarding assistance as referred to in paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Five
Services and Assistance

Article 25
The Implementation of Services and assistance to Victims, is carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Article 26
(1) Forms of Services provided to Women and Children Victims of Violence, are as follows:
a. Complaint services;
b. Health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medico legal;
f. Identification services; and
g. Psychological services.
(2) Forms of Services as referred to in paragraph (1), are implemented in accordance with minimum Service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. Women's empowerment and Child protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
(3) In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), regional governments cooperate with government agencies, provincial governments, other district/city governments, the Community, Families and parents.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for Services, and handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3), are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Sixth Part
Data and Information Management

Article 27
(1) Regional Government through regional apparatus with authority over Women and Children shall compile data and information regarding the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.
(2) Data and information as referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. Women and Children who are Victims of acts of Violence; b. fulfillment of the rights of Women and Children;
c. Women and Children at risk or vulnerable; and
d. Women and Children requiring special protection.
(3) In the management of data and information on Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (2), it is obligatory to:
a. establish a data and information system;
b. create disaggregated data;
c. conduct studies on the development of problems of Women and Children regarding acts of Violence; and
d. conduct periodic publication of data and information that can be accessed by the public.
(4) As material for the completeness of data and information as referred to in paragraph (3), regional apparatus with authority over the protection of Women and Children shall cooperate with and request data from related agencies.

Article 28
(1) Data and information as referred to in Article 27 shall become material for the formulation of policies, programs, budgets, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.
(2) The formulation of policies, programs, budgets, monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented with the following mechanism: a. creating mapping, long-term, medium-term and short-term plans; b. creating agreements on the periodization of monthly and annual working meetings; c. creating agreements on the collection, mapping and presentation of data among regional apparatus organizations;
d. incorporating agreements into programs and budgets; and e. conducting scheduling of monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

Article 29
(1) Regional Apparatus with authority over Women and Children shall formulate service policy regarding the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) The formulation of service policy as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through the following mechanism:
a. formulating case reporting policy related to Women and Children who become Victims of acts of Violence;
b. preparing reporting and referral mechanisms between regional apparatus organizations with authority over the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence with relevant agencies and with P2TP2A; and
c. preparing budget for the implementation of protection policy for Women and Children against acts of Violence.

Seventh Part
Fulfillment of Facilities and Infrastructure

Article 30
(1) Regional Government, Community and private sector provide facilities and infrastructure in the protection of Women and Children, among others providing breastfeeding places for Children, child-friendly play areas, recreational and creative places, Safe Houses, as well as establishing Integrated Service Centers for the Protection of Women and Children.
(2) Facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (1) must meet the following criteria:
a. ensure safety, comfort and health;
b. motivate Children's creativity; and
c. contain educational elements.
(3) Provision of facilities and infrastructure as referred to in paragraph (2) for the fulfillment of minimum Service standards.
(4) Provision of facilities and infrastructure by the Regional Government is implemented in stages adjusted to the financial capacity of the Region.

Eighth Part
Social Welfare

Article 31
(1) The fulfillment of social welfare for Women and Children aims to prevent, reduce vulnerability risks and handle Victims of acts of Violence.
(2) The fulfillment of social welfare for Women and Children as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the Regional apparatus that oversees social issues.

Article 32
(1) The fulfillment of social welfare for Women and Children for prevention as referred to in Article 31 paragraph (1) includes:
a. enhancement of the role of Regional Government towards the protection of Children including Children with special needs, Children with disabilities and other vulnerable Children;
b. enhancement of public awareness including Children towards the protection and participation of Women and Children;
c. enhancement of the capacity of the Community, Families, including Children and social welfare institutions, regarding Child protection;
d. enhancement of the capacity of protection services for Women and Children;
e. guarantee of continuity of education in accordance with the 12 (twelve) year compulsory Basic Education program; and
f. guarantee of obtaining basic health Services.
(2) The fulfillment of social welfare for Women and Children for vulnerability risk reduction, includes:
a. identification and/or early detection of vulnerable Women and Children; b. mediation and counseling for vulnerable Women and Children;
c. services and facilitation of support for vulnerable Women and Children; and d. care support for Children who require alternative care.
(3) The fulfillment of social welfare for Women and Children for handling Victims, includes:
a. fulfillment of the rights of Women and Children who become Victims; b. referral services;
c. rehabilitation; and
d. reintegration.
(4) The handling of Child Victims as referred to in paragraph (3) shall have the right to obtain protection from local mass media coverage both electronic and print to guarantee the future of the Child.

Ninth Part
Gender Mainstreaming

Article 33
To implement the protection of Women and Children, the Regional Government shall conduct Gender Mainstreaming which includes:
a. providing guidance for regional apparatus in formulating Gender integration strategies conducted through planning, preparation, implementation, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation of development policies, programs and activities.
b. developing a Gender-based information system;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of Gender Mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, as well as non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and social affairs that take into account Gender aspects and are Child-friendly;
e. conducting protection of Women especially protection for Victims of Violence, Women workers, Women Victims of human trafficking, elderly Women, and Women with disabilities, and areas affected by disasters; and
f. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of Gender mainstreaming.

Article 34
(1) Every regional apparatus is obligated to conduct gender-responsive budgeting planning.
(2) Gender-responsive budgeting planning as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be coordinated by the regional apparatus in the field of Women and Children.

Article 35
(1) Regional Government may establish a Gender Mainstreaming Working Group.
(2) The Working Group as referred to in paragraph (1) shall consist of members from regional apparatus and related vertical agencies as well as non-governmental institutions, universities, business sectors and religious-based institutions as well as Communities working for the protection of Women and Children.
(3) The establishment of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be stipulated by Regent's Decree.
(4) Each member of the Working Group as referred to in paragraph (2) may appoint a Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point.

Article 36
(1) The duties of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in Article 35 paragraph (1), include:
a. facilitating the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to Regional apparatus, Sub-districts, Urban Villages and Villages;
b. preparing work programs in the context of implementing Gender Mainstreaming;
c. developing work networks in accordance with duties and functions as well as authority to encourage the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming;
d. implementing socialization, advocacy, coordination, and training on Gender Mainstreaming;
e. raising and discussing Gender issues that may potentially create gaps through Forum Group Discussion (FGD);
f. collecting, formulating reports from SKPD, Sub-district Heads, Urban Village Heads, and Village Heads regarding the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in their respective work units; and
g. preparing and submitting reports on the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to the Regent.
(2) Further provisions regarding the duties of the Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Tenth Part
Social Behavior Change That is Pro-Child

Article 37
(1) Social behavioral change is carried out with the aim of changing ways of thinking, attitudes and actions in accordance with parenting and education patterns that protect Children.
(2) Behavioral change is intended to change policies, programs and budget allocations along with their action plans to change the social behavior of individuals, groups, government and non-government institutions to implement Child protection.
(3) Regional Apparatus authorized to implement behavioral change as regulated in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are Regional Apparatus in charge of social affairs, religion, health, education, Community empowerment, population, manpower, information and communication as well as Child protection under the coordination of Regional Apparatus Organizations in charge of Women and Child protection.

Article 38
Forms of behavioral change that can be implemented to carry out Child Protection as referred to in Article 37 paragraph (2) include:
a. developing and nurturing the Child in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests;
b. preventing marriage at child age;
c. caring for, maintaining, educating and protecting the Child;
d. preventing brawls between students;
e. providing opportunities for mothers to provide exclusive breastfeeding for the Child;
f. instilling noble character and respect for parents;
g. instilling cultural identity, local language, love for the environment; and
h. providing special protection to Children in emergency situations, Children in conflict with the law, Children from minority and isolated groups, Children exploited economically and/or sexually, Children who are trafficked, Children who are Victims of narcotics abuse, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza), Child Victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, Child Victims of Violence both physical and/or mental, Children with disabilities, and Child Victims of maltreatment and neglect, Child Victims of HIV/AIDS transmission and Child Victims of social conflict.

Eleventh Part
Policy on the Development of Child-Friendly Regency

Article 39
(1) The development of a Child-Friendly Regency aims to build Regional Government initiatives that lead to efforts to transform the concept of Child rights into policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of Child rights.
(2) The Child-Friendly Regency Development Policy as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented based on principles that include: a. good governance;
b. non-discrimination;
c. culture and local wisdom;
d. the best interests of the Child; and
e. respect for the views of the Child;
f. inclusive; and
g. multi-cultural.
(3) The Child-Friendly Regency Development Policy is directed at strengthening institutions for the fulfillment of Child rights and special protection, including: a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. rights to Family environment and alternative care;
c. rights to basic health and Child welfare;
d. rights to education, leisure time utilization and cultural activities; and e. rights to special protection.
(4) Further provisions regarding Child-Friendly Regency Development as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI
COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
Part One
Coordination

Article 40
(1) The Regent coordinates the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence with:
a. the government;
b. regency/city regional governments;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; and
e. community institutions.
(2) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
c. education affairs;
d. social affairs;
e. legal affairs;
f. labor affairs; and
g. other affairs.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) is implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their authority.

Part Two
Cooperation

Article 41
(1) In certain circumstances the Regional Government may conduct cooperation with: a. other regional governments;
b. police;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
e. social workers;
f. Companion volunteers;
g. spiritual counselors;
h. other law enforcers, to assist Victims in the court hearing process.
i. national commission on Violence against Women;
j. Indonesian Child Protection Commission or Child Protection Institution; and/or
k. certain parties desired for the benefit of Victims.
(2) Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of: a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health Services;
d. assistance to Victims;
e. counseling;
f. Social Rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

CHAPTER VII
COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION
Article 42
(1) Every person may participate in providing protection to Women and Children from acts of Violence.
(2) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by: a. reporting acts of Violence against Women and/or Children; b. providing first aid to Victims;
c. independently disseminating the rights of Women and Children; and/or d. establishing independent community social institutions.

Article 43
(1) Community social institutions as referred to in Article 42 paragraph (2) letter d, in implementing the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence must coordinate with P2TP2A.
(2) The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of Women and Children against acts of Violence.
(3) Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of: a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of Violence against Women and Children; and
b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VIII
GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION
Article 44
(1) Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence.
(2) Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out periodically by Regional Apparatus having authority for the empowerment of Women and Children against acts of Violence.
(3) Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
(4) Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 45
The guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 44, shall be carried out in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for Women and Children from acts of Violence in accordance with minimum Service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX
REPORTING
Article 46
(1) Regional Apparatus responsible for the affairs of empowerment of Women and Children from acts of Violence reports the implementation of protection provision for Women and Child Victims of Violence to the Regent.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) is submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. Services; and
d. performance.
(3) Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER X
SOURCES OF FUNDS
Article 47
Funds for the implementation of protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence, are sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 48
(1) Regional Governments may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that carry out protection of Women and Child Victims of Violence.
(2) Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with the financial capacity of the Region and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 49
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of South Labuhanbatu Regency.
Enacted in Kotapinang on the date of 10 October 2023

REGENT OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU,
H. EDIMIN
Promulgated in Kotapinang on October 10, 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF THE REGENCY,
HERI WAHYUDI M
REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 7 SERIES D NUMBER 07 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE : (7-99/2023) Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION,
Y. ARIFIN, SH, MH
NIP.19810112 201101 1003
ELUCIDATION
OF
REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY
NUMBER 7 OF 2023
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
I. GENERAL
Violence against Women and Children constitutes a violation of Human Rights, therefore their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed without discrimination. Based on empirical evidence, it is revealed that Women and Children are groups that frequently become victims of violence. Many factors cause the occurrence of violence against Women and Children, among them is the patriarchal cultural factor that still widely occurs in society which views Women as lower than men. In addition, incorrect perceptions about violence against Women and Children are also still commonly found, which consider violence as a normal matter and the right of the perpetrator. Violence against Women and Children can be seen from the type, perpetrator, location of incident, time, age and consequences of acts of violence. Violence against Women and Children as mentioned above is general in nature and has no relevance to the type of education, occupation and income, social position, religion and belief, nationality, ethnicity and race attached to men and Women. This means that in all types of social strata, violence against Women and Children can and continues to occur as long as the imbalance in the relationship between men and Women is still believed and manifested in social life. In order to prevent and overcome Violence against Women and Children in South Labuhanbatu Regency so that they are protected from Violence, threats of Violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, a legal umbrella in the form of regional regulations is required.
Thus far, laws and regulations governing the protection of Women and Children from acts of Violence have not yet regulated protection efforts at the Regional level, therefore institutional support and regulations that can guarantee its implementation are needed.
The formulation of this Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is intended to provide a legal foundation for the Regional Government in providing protection for Women and Children in the area of South Labuhanbatu Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
Article 1
Sufficiently clear.

Article 2
Letter a What is meant by "the principle of respect for human rights" is that the implementation of protection for Women and Children victims of violence is to guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of victims of violence as a manifestation of respect for human rights.
Letter b What is meant by "the right to life, survival, and development" are the Rights as regulated in the provisions of the 1945 Constitution.
Letter c What is meant by "Non-discriminatory" is an attitude and treatment toward victims by not making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.
Letter d What is meant by the principle of the best interests of the Child is that in all actions concerning Children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.
Letter e What is meant by "the principle of Gender equality and justice" is a process of equality and conditions for men and Women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so as to be able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social and cultural activities, national defense and security and equality in enjoying the results of such development.
Letter f What is meant by "the principle of protection of victims' Rights" is protection of the personal self, Family, honor, dignity, and property under one's control, a sense of security and protection from threats of fear, freedom from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity.

Article 3
Sufficiently clear.

Article 4
Sufficiently clear.

Article 5
Sufficiently clear.

Article 6
Sufficiently clear.

Article 7
Sufficiently clear.

Article 8
Sufficiently clear.

Article 9
Sufficiently clear.

Article 10
Sufficiently clear.

Article 11
Sufficiently clear.

Article 12
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13
Sufficiently clear.

Article 14
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15
Sufficiently clear.

Article 16
Sufficiently clear.

Article 17
Sufficiently clear.

Article 18
Sufficiently clear.

Article 19
Sufficiently clear.

Article 20
Sufficiently clear.

Article 21
Sufficiently clear.

Article 22
Sufficiently clear.

Article 23
Sufficiently clear.

Article 24
Sufficiently clear.

Article 25
Sufficiently clear.

Article 26
Sufficiently clear.

Article 27
Sufficiently clear.

Article 28
Sufficiently clear.

Article 29
Sufficiently clear.

Article 30
Sufficiently clear.

Article 31
Sufficiently clear.

Article 32
Sufficiently clear.

Article 33
Sufficiently clear.

Article 34
paragraph (1) What is meant by "Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting" is budget planning that accommodates justice for Women and men in obtaining access, benefits, participation, decision-making, controlling resources as well as equality of opportunities and chances in enjoying the results of development.
paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Article 35
paragraph (1) What is meant by "Gender Mainstreaming Working Group" is a consultation forum for implementers and drivers of Gender mainstreaming from various agencies/institutions in the Region.
paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.
paragraph (3) Sufficiently clear.
paragraph (4) What is meant by "Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point" is regional apparatus personnel who have the capability to implement Gender mainstreaming in their respective work units.

Article 36
Sufficiently clear.

Article 37
Sufficiently clear.

Article 38
Letter a Sufficiently clear.
Letter b Sufficiently clear.
Letter c Sufficiently clear.
Letter d Sufficiently clear.
Letter f Sufficiently clear.
Letter g Sufficiently clear.
Letter h Sufficiently clear.
Letter i What is meant by "Children in emergency situations" includes the conditions of: Children who are refugees, Children who are Victims of unrest, Children who are Victims of natural disasters, and Children in armed conflict situations.

Article 39
Sufficiently clear.

Article 40
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41
Sufficiently clear.

Article 42
Sufficiently clear.

Article 43
Sufficiently clear.

Article 44
Sufficiently clear.

Article 45
Sufficiently clear.

Article 46
Sufficiently clear.

Article 47
Sufficiently clear.

Article 48
Sufficiently clear.

Article 49
Sufficiently clear.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTH LABUHANBATU REGENCY NUMBER 07