MAYOR OF PALEMBANG
PROVINCE OF SOUTH SUMATRA
REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALEMBANG CITY
NUMBER 9 YEAR 2022
CONCERNING
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

MAYOR OF PALEMBANG,

Considering: a. that every citizen has the right to obtain protection and guarantee of their basic rights, and has the right to receive fair treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in achieving life welfare;

b. that laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children in regulating efforts for women and children to be free from acts of violence in the region require regulations that can guarantee their implementation;

c. that all forms of acts of violence against citizens, especially women and children, constitute a form of violation of human rights, therefore the state, government, society, and family are obligated and responsible for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;

d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In View of
1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;

2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Including Municipalities, Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);

3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);

4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 .....
- 2 - of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);

5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);

6. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);

7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);

8. Law Number 25 of 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);

9. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);

10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 1 of 2022 concerning Financial Relations between the Central Government and Regional Governments (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 4, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 6757);

11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

12. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);

13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;

14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;

15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 903);

16. Regional Regulation Number 16 of 2010 concerning Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence (Regional Gazette of South Sumatra Province of 2010 Number 3 Series E);

17. Regulation .....
- 3 - 
17. Regional Regulation Number 3 of 2017 concerning the Implementation of Family Resilience Development (Regional Gazette of South Sumatra Province of 2017 Number 3);

With the Mutual Approval of
THE REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PALEMBANG CITY
and

MAYOR OF PALEMBANG
DECIDES:
To Establish: REGIONAL REGULATION ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. City is the City of Palembang.
2. City Government is the Government of the City of Palembang.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Palembang.
4. Regional Apparatus is the Regional Apparatus within the City Government.
5. Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Community Empowerment is the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Community Empowerment of the City of Palembang.
6. Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as UPT PPA, is a Technical Implementation Unit established by the government to provide services for women and children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems.
7. Women are all women who are both inside and outside the household.
8. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 years including a child who is still in the womb.
9. Act of Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
10. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of an act of violence.
11. Reporter is a person, family, and community who sees and hears that an act of violence has occurred against a woman or any woman who becomes a victim of an act of violence by another person.
12. Protection of Women and Children in Conflict with the Law is a form of service that must be implemented by law enforcement officers or security officers to provide a sense of security, both physical and psychological to victims or witnesses from threats, disturbances, terror, and violence from any party given at the stage of investigation, inquiry, prosecution and or examination in court hearings.
13. Protection .....
.. ., - 5 -
27. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and their child, or father and his child, or mother and her child or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
28. Family Resilience is the dynamic condition of a family that has tenacity and toughness and contains physical material and psychic spiritual mental capabilities to live independently and develop themselves and their family to live harmoniously in improving physical and spiritual welfare.
29. Community is a group of citizens who inhabit an official government administrative area (at the level of Neighborhood Association, Citizens Association, Sub-district and District) and work together in life for a sufficiently long time and obey existing rules.
30. Religious Leaders consist of Ustadz/Ustadzah, Ulama, Pastors, Priests, Monks, Pedanda/Pandita/Sulinggih and other religious leaders who have gender sensitivity/awareness.
31. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to provide assistance to victims to conduct counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy in order to provide strengthening and recovery of victims of violence as stipulated in a decision of an authorized official.

Article 2
Protection of women and children from acts of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. local wisdom;
d. non-discrimination;
e. best interests of women and children;
f. active participation; and
g. restoration of conditions.

Article 3
The regulation of protection of women and children from acts of violence aims to:
a. prevent violence against women and children
b. protect, provide a sense of security for women and children·
c. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence; and
d. carry out empowerment of women victims of violence.

Article 4
The scope of regulation for the protection of women and children from acts of violence includes:
a. forms of acts of violence;
b. rights and obligations;
c. protection of women and children;
d. guidance and supervision; and
e. funding.

I'm ready to help translate the text into English while preserving all numbering, signposting, clause markers, and the original structure. However, I don't see any text provided after "BAB II ..... - 6 -" in your message.

Please provide the text you'd like me to translate, and I'll translate it according to your specifications.

CHAPTER II
FORMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE
Article 5
Forms of acts of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 6
(1) The form of physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is that physical violence is any act that results in pain according to medical experts, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or causes death.
(2) The form of psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is that psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
(3) The form of sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c is that sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual relations, in an unnatural manner or unwanted by one of the parties for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.
(4) The form of neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is that neglect is the act of releasing and or abandoning the responsibility of care, nurturing, education and livelihood towards every person who is a family member.
(5) The form of exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e is that exploitation is utilizing all forms of potential whether physical, psychological and intelligence of women or children for economic gain or personal pleasure of the perpetrator.

CHAPTER III
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Part One
Rights of Women and Children

Article 7
Women and children from acts of violence receive the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity and worth as human beings respected; b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of their identity;
f. the right to restitution;
g. the right .....
- 7 -
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right of children to education;
j. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and
k. the right to assistance.

Second Part
Obligations of the Government, Community and Family

Paragraph 1
City Government

Article 8
(1) In the effort to protect women and children from acts of violence, the obligation is to:
a. guarantee the rights of women and children without discrimination in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; b. establish and implement policy programs and activities for the protection of the rights of women and children; c. facilitate the formation of community organizations concerned with women and children;
d. conduct cooperation with the community and/or community organizations and the private sector in the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. conduct rehabilitation and empowerment of women and children who are victims of acts of violence; f. provide special protection to women and children victims of various acts of violence; and
g. take preventive action in order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children. (2) The responsibility in the effort to protect women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by regional apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.
(3) Further provisions regarding the obligations of the City Government as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Paragraph 2
Society

Article 9
(1) Participate in prevention and provide support for the development of prevention programs against violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
(2) Provide information and/or report violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence to the competent authorities.
(3) Supervise the law enforcement process regarding cases of violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
(4) Units .....
- 8 - (4) Small group units in society consisting of religious scholars, intellectuals, customary community units are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
(5) Community Participation referred to in paragraph (1) means that community responsibility is based on laws and regulations and the values of local wisdom of the local community.

Paragraph 3
Family

Article 10
The family in efforts to protect the rights of women and children is responsible for:
a. protecting women and children from conflict and violence in the household that degrades the dignity of women and children;
b. providing equal opportunities to women and children to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural; and
c. preventing violations of the rights of women and children in the household.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
Part One
Prevention

Article 11
(1) In order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children, the City Government:
a. conducts socialization regarding the prevention of violence against women and children by optimizing the role of community units, community leaders, religious leaders, community organizations and mass media;
b. provides guidelines on handling acts of violence against women and children;
c. develops an integrated database and information system on acts of violence against women and children;
d. strengthens the function of community organizations engaged in the protection and advocacy of women and children; and
e. provides public facilities that are comfortable and safe for women and children.
(2) The responsibility of the City Government in efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by regional apparatus for women and children in accordance with their duties and functions.
(3) Further provisions regarding the planning of prevention of violations of the rights of women and children shall be integrated by the City Government into regional development planning.

Article 12 .....
- 9 -

Article 12
In the framework of preventing violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence, the community:
a. plays an active role in monitoring various conditions occurring in their environment that may lead to violations of the rights of women and children;
b. strengthens the role of community organizations, religious organizations and the family environment; and
c. prevents the occurrence of unregistered marriages and child marriage.

Article 13
In order to prevent violations of the rights of women and children from acts of violence, the family:
a. protects women and children from various violations of rights within the household;
b. encourages the formation of a harmonious, educational, independent and responsible family; and
c. serves as a place of initial counseling and mediation for every family member who is suspected of experiencing violations of the rights of women and children.

Second Part
Handling

Article 14
(1) The implementation of handling of women and children victims of acts of violence includes:
a. handling of complaints from victims of violence;
b. health services; and
c. law enforcement and legal assistance.
(2) The implementation of handling of women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out through integrated services.
(3) Integrated services as referred to in paragraph (2) for women and children victims of acts of violence are conducted with the principles of:
a. responsive;
b. non-discrimination;
c. equal and respectful relations;
d. maintaining confidentiality;
e. providing a sense of security and comfort;
f. respecting individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respecting the choices and decisions of victims;
i. sensitive to the background and condition of victims;
j. using language that is appropriate and understood by victims;
k. fast and simple;
l. empathy;
m. fulfillment of the rights of women and children; and
n. legal certainty.

Article 15 .....
- 10 -

Article 15
The handling of women and child victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) letter a is carried out by:
a. hospitals;
b. community health centers;
c. Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children; d. Safe houses;
e. Women Crisis Centre;
f. Agency for Marriage Counseling, Development and Preservation; g. Police;
h. Prosecutor's Office;
i. Courts;
j. Ministry of Law and Human Rights;
k. Legal Aid Institutions; and
1. Other Institutions.

Article 16
(1) Complaints of acts of violence against women and children may be made by reporters consisting of victims, families, the community and/or community organizations.
(2) Reporters as referred to in paragraph (1) may be made through complaints:
a. directly or direct findings;
b. through telephone or the like; and
c. through letter.
(3) In addition to handling complaints submitted by reporters, officers at service institutions are also authorized to handle women and children victims of acts of violence obtained through other information.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for complaint handling services shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 17
(1) Health services in the handling of women and children victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (1) letter b for women and children victims of acts of violence shall be conducted comprehensively, accessible 24 hours, quality and conducted with maximum health service standards.
(2) Women and children victims of acts of violence have the right to health services, including:
a. medical services;
b. medico-legal services; and
c. psychosocial counseling.
(3) Medical services as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims conducted by medical personnel and paramedics.
(4) Medico-legal services as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b, constitute a form of medical services for the purposes of evidence in the legal field.
(5) Services .....
- 12 - (2) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. counseling services;
b. provision of safe houses;
c. spiritual guidance; and
d. economic recovery.
(3) The implementation of services as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be organized by:
a. UPT PPA is tasked with carrying out operational technical activities in its working area in providing services for women and children victims of violence, discrimination, special protection, and other problems;
b. the position of UPT PPA is under and responsible to the Head of the Agency that organizes government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection at the city level; and
c. religious institutions.

Article 21
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter a aim to:
a. assist victims in recognizing their problems and finding effective ways to overcome them independently;
b. empower victims to determine their future; c. provide moral support for victims in facing the legal processes they undergo; and
d. make victims feel accepted in the community environment. (2) Counseling services are conducted by social rehabilitation officers who are gender responsive, consisting of:
a. counselors who have obtained certificates;
b. psychologists; and
c. psychiatrists.
(3) Counseling services are conducted in places that guarantee a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information from victims. (4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; and
d. site visits.

Article 22
(1) Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 20 paragraph (2) letter b, the City Government may provide a safe house for women and victims of acts of violence in the form of intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.
(2) The location of the safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) must be kept confidential.
(3) The criteria for women and children victims of acts of violence who require a safe house include:
a. their life is threatened;
b. receiving rejection from family or community; c. requiring intensive services but their residence is relatively far; and
d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house. (4). Implementation .....
- 15 -

CHAPTER VII
CLOSING PROVISIONS
Article 30
This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.
In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered, with its placement in the Regional Gazette of Palembang City.
Dite Palembang novt,.... 2022

EXPLANATION
-- REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALEMBANG CITY YEAR 2022 NUMBER NOR G REGIONAL REGULATION OF PALEMBANG CITY, SOUTH SUMATRA PROVINCE : ( 1 . U 'f / 2.0 2:z..)