Women's Empowerment

SUBULUSSALAM CITY

QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY

NUMBER 20 OF 2023

CONCERNING

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

BISMILLAHIRRAHMANIRRAHIM

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MOST GRACIOUS, THE MOST MERCIFUL

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY ALLAH

MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM,

Considering:

a. that women have a strategic role in development so that the improvement of the quality of life of women needs to receive recognition in accordance with local wisdom and the guidance of Islamic Sharia;
b. that based on the mandate of Qanun Number 6 of 2009 concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection Articles 4 and 5 which regulate the scope of women's empowerment and protection which is the authority of the District City Government;
c. that in reality, the quality of life of women is still low and vulnerable to threats of violence, persecution, torture, domestic violence, trafficking in women, exploitation and discrimination against women which need to be immediately stopped by providing protection in accordance with human dignity;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, it is necessary to establish a Qanun of Subulussalam City concerning Women's Empowerment;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
3. Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning the Governance of Aceh (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 62, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4633);
4. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 927).

With Mutual Approval

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY

MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish: QANUN

OF

SUBULUSSALAM

CITY

CONCERNING

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Qanun what is meant by:
1. City is Subulussalam City.
2. City Government is the Mayor as an element of the administration of Regional Government who leads the implementation of governmental affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Subulussalam.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRK in the administration of Governmental Affairs which are the authority of the Region.
5. Revenue and Expenditure Budget of Subulussalam City hereinafter referred to as the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget abbreviated as APBK is the annual financial plan of the City Government which is discussed and approved jointly by the Mayor and DPRK and established by Qanun.
6. City Medium-Term Development Plan hereinafter abbreviated as RPJMK is a planning document for a period of 5 (five) years.
7. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Woman with disability is a person who has not been able to accommodate with the surrounding environment because of having disorders, limitations of activities resulting in restrictions on participation.
9. Women's rights are all rights owned by every woman which are human rights.
10. Empowerment is an effort to increase the ability of women to obtain access and control over all resources in all aspects of life.
11. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and guarantee of women's rights in all aspects of life.
12. Victim is a woman who experiences threats of violence and or violence inside and or outside the household and or becomes an object of trafficking/exploitation, and or discrimination in all its forms and aspects.
13. Violence is any act against a person, especially women, which results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully, whether within or outside the scope of the household.
14. Discrimination is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex, which has the effect or purpose of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or other fields by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women.
15. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and / or community organizations.
16. Community Participation is the involvement of the community in the process of identifying problems and potentials that exist in the community, selection and decision-making about alternative solutions to address problems, implementation of efforts to overcome problems, involvement in the process of evaluating changes that occur.
17. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and a collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman and / or child.
18. Public sphere is in the area or region of the community or women who play a role outside the home.
19. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
20. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-strengthening of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
21. Institution is an agency/office/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
22. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a generic term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence such as the Integrated Service Center for Women's and Children's Empowerment, Safe House, Children's Social Protection House, Trauma Center Protection House, Women's Social Protection House, Shelter, etc.
23. UPTD PPA is a technical and integrated service unit in handling women and children victims of violence.

Article 2

Women's empowerment is implemented based on the principles of
a. respect for the values of Islamic sharia and Acehnese customs;
b. legal certainty;
c. public interest;
d. orderly administration of government;
e. respect for human rights;
f. justice and gender equality and inclusion;
g. professionalism, accountability and transparency;
h. non-discrimination; and
i. protection and fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 3

Women's empowerment has the following objectives:
a. to recognize the existence of equal rights under the law so as to increase women's participation in development stages;
b. to improve the quality of life of women so that they are able to play a balanced role with men in various relevant aspects of life;
c. to provide guarantees to women to be able to fulfill their rights as human beings in all aspects of life;
d. to provide a sense of security to women in all aspects of life; and
e. to serve as a guideline for the Government of Subulussalam City in carrying out empowerment
f. and protection of women.

Article 4

1. Women's empowerment and protection activities are carried out and coordinated by the Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of women's empowerment and protection.
2. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out together with agencies, offices, educational institutions, the business world and community organizations related to women's empowerment and protection.

Article 5

1. For the implementation of women's empowerment and protection, planning and supervision, a budget is provided in the Subulussalam City Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBK).
2. All budgets for women's empowerment and protection are coordinated by the Regional Work Unit whose scope of duties and responsibilities is in the field of women's empowerment and protection.

Article 6

Women's empowerment is based on two pillars consisting of:
a. Protection
b. Empowerment

CHAPTER II

WOMEN'S RIGHTS

Article 7

1. Every woman has basic rights as a human being that must be protected, promoted, upheld and fulfilled in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
2. Matters related to reproduction and nature do not prevent women from obtaining their rights in women's empowerment and protection.

Article 8

Women's rights as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (1) include:
a. Women obtain equal rights and obligations to life in marriage and family, both as parents to their children and as husband and wife partners, and there must be no coercion in marriage.
b. Women obtain the right to education and teaching at all types, levels, and pathways of education, without any obstacles and pressure in order to improve their skills and quality of life.
c. Women obtain the right to work and positions in all institutions, both government and non-government institutions and at all levels for the purpose of increasing income and family welfare.
d. Women obtain the right to special protection in carrying out their work or profession, both in the public and domestic spheres, against matters that threaten their safety and/or health in relation to reproductive functions.
e. Women receive access to optimal and quality health information and services.

Article 9

1. Women have the right to hold political positions, both in the executive and legislative environments proportionally.
2. Women have the right to carry out various political activities in accordance with laws and regulations.
3. Women have the right to be actively involved in social, cultural and customary organizations for the development of themselves and their intellectual abilities.
4. Women have the right to be nominated as legislative members by national political parties or local political parties in accordance with their abilities.

Article 10

1. Women have the right to participate fully in every process of planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation in development stages.
2. To fulfill the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1), women have the right to receive capacity building.

CHAPTER III

PROTECTION

Part 1

Purpose and Objectives

Article 11

1. Protection is intended as all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
2. Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) includes providing guarantees in the fulfillment of basic rights and improving access and quality of various services needed by women in the form of:

a. Providing complaint/report handling services for victims of violence against women;
b. Providing special services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
c. Providing health services for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters from basic level to advanced referral;
d. Providing social rehabilitation for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
e. Carrying out law enforcement and legal assistance for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
f. Carrying out repatriation and social reintegration by building social safety networks starting from the gampong, sub-district and city levels;
g. Providing fulfillment of basic needs and specific needs of women;
h. Opening information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women, including the use of information technology and social media;
i. Providing protection in carrying out their work or profession against matters that may threaten their safety and or health in relation to women's reproductive functions;
j. Providing protection for women to carry out their religious sharia and rights that bind in the implementation of sharia; and
k. In carrying out religious sharia activities as referred to in paragraph k is for women who embrace Islam and other religions.

Part 2

Responsibility of the City Government (1) Government

Article 12

The City is obliged to provide support for the development of service institutions for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters, both provided by the government and the private sector. (2) The City Government is obliged to:
a. Establish an Integrated Crisis Center (PKT) and/or Integrated Service Center (PPT) at Regional General Hospitals, Police Hospitals, Private Hospitals to provide services for women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence and women victims of conflict and natural disasters;
b. Establish an Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection or UPTD PPA as a Technical Implementation Unit under the City Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning; and
c. Establish a Shelter and Trauma Center (RPTC) as a facility to provide protection and assist women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters in psychosocial and traumatic recovery.

Article 13

The City Government is obliged to prepare guidelines in implementing protection for women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters not limited to:
a. Preparation of service guidelines at Hospitals and other service units;
b. Preparation of referral guidelines for both government and private sectors;
c. Preparation of prevention and handling guidelines at the basic service level; and
d. Preparation of Guidelines for the Development of Community Health Centers Capable of Managing cases of violence against women

Article 14

1. Every service provider institution is obligated to conduct disaggregated data collection on women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are handled in accordance with the documentation format that has been established.
2. Case handling mechanisms may be through non-litigation and litigation channels (3) Non-litigation channels as referred to in paragraph (2) are efforts to resolve cases of violence against women outside the court system.
4. Litigation channels as referred to in paragraph (2) are efforts to resolve cases of violence against women using the court system.

Article 15

1. Non-litigation channels in handling cases of violence against women may be conducted through restorative justice mechanisms and customary justice mechanisms.
2. Gampong apparatus and other government apparatus are obligated to involve women in the process of resolving cases of violence through non-litigation.

Article 16

1. The city government is obligated to provide information and access to all forms of protection against actions that harm women.
2. Forms of protection as referred to in paragraph (1) include fulfillment of basic rights, security, consultation and legal aid, psychosocial assistance, social reintegration and other actions needed. (3) The City Government is obligated to provide free legal aid to women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, poor women, minority women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters who are unable to afford it and face legal problems.
4. Legal aid as referred to in paragraph (3) must be provided in accordance with human dignity.

Article 17

1. The City Government is responsible for providing guarantees to support officers to obtain access to information and assistance to women victims for the legal process they undergo.
2. Guarantees as referred to in paragraph (1) are provided through a Mayor's Decree for Support Workers for Women Victims.

CHAPTER IV

EMPOWERMENT

Part 1

Purpose and Objectives (1) Empowerment

Article 18

of women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is intended to create conditions that enable women's potential to develop and engage in economic, political, social and cultural activities and have a strategic role in decision-making.

2. Empowerment of women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters is adjusted to capacity building programs through:
a. Strengthening independence, namely efforts to increase knowledge, skills and work skills to more easily obtain employment;
b. The City Government conducts development of small industries and home industries managed by women;
c. Productive Economic Enterprises, namely efforts to foster entrepreneurial spirit and skills;
d. Opening access to capital, marketing, networking and maintaining local production results both at national and international levels;
e. The government guarantees and protects licenses for local products as referred to in paragraph (d) from piracy; imitation and other actions that harm local products in accordance with laws and regulations; and
f. Increasing expertise, knowledge and leadership so that women have opportunities to be actively involved in strategic positions at the village, sub-district and city levels.

Article 19

1. In order to improve the quality of life of women, the City Government is responsible for:a. Respecting and guaranteeing women's rights without discrimination in accordance with human dignity;
b. Implementing gender mainstreaming Establishing a gender mainstreaming working group;
d. Increasing women's empowerment in roles, quality and capacity in the fields of:
1. Religion;
2. politics;
3. law;
4. social; and economice. Strengthening and developing institutions providing women's empowerment services in the region.
2. The City Government's responsibility in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by the Regional Government which administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part 2

Government Obligations Toward Women

Article 20

1. The City Government is obligated to improve the quality of life of women from the village, sub-district and city levels. (2) The City Government is obligated to provide equal opportunities to women and men in improving their quality of life proportionally.
3. The city government is obligated to provide special educational and training institutions or productive skills institutions for women as preparation for entering the workforce or creating independent businesses.
4. The city government is obligated to realize the level of social welfare for women.
5. The city government is obligated to provide facilities and infrastructure to accelerate the improvement of social welfare for women.
6. Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) is the fulfillment of clothing, food, shelter, education, health, employment and environmental peace/tranquility needs.

Article 21

1. The city government provides adequate employment opportunities based on the level of education and skills possessed by women, women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
2. The city government coordinates with agencies/institutions/business entities and employment providers to ensure partiality toward women in employment opportunities.
3. Job information and job seeker selection are conducted in an accountable, fair, transparent and inclusive manner.
4. The City Government may take temporary special measures by prioritizing women with disabilities, women with HIV/AIDS, minority women, poor women, women victims of violence, women victims of conflict and natural disasters.
5. Women as referred to in paragraph (4) in obtaining employment according to their knowledge or skills by developing policy mechanisms for private companies and government as well as state-owned enterprises.

CHAPTER V

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND COORDINATION

Article 22

1. The Mayor conducts control, guidance, and supervision of the implementation of the Women's Rights Fulfillment program.

2. control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by the SKPK responsible for women's affairs.

Article 23

1. The Mayor establishes a city-level Coordination Team in implementing the Women's Rights Fulfillment and women's empowerment program.
2. The coordination team as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by Mayor's Decree.

Article 24

The City Government organizes and facilitates capacity building activities for human resources on guidance, supervision of the implementation of the Women's Rights Fulfillment and women's empowerment program for all SKPKs, Community Institutions, Business World, women's Forums and Media on a regular, tiered basis according to needs.

CHAPTER VI

MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Article 25

1. The Mayor conducts monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection. (2) Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
3. Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out at each SKPK and in a tiered manner between levels of government.
4. Monitoring and evaluation is carried out before the preparation of programs or activities for the following year. (5) The implementation of monitoring and evaluation is carried out in cooperation with sub-district and village governments as well as civil society organizations.
6. Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented in accordance with the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 26

1. The Mayor is responsible for preparing annual reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.

(2) Reporting on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection is carried out in a tiered manner starting from the village level.

3. The Keuchik submits periodic reports to the Camat every three months.
4. The Camat submits periodic reports to the Mayor through the head of Bappeda every six months.
5. The Head of City Bappeda submits reports to the Mayor periodically every six months including reporting on the City PUG Working Group.
6. City BAPPEDA also conducts general evaluations of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection based on RPJMK and SKPK Renja.
7. The Mayor submits reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and protection periodically to the Governor of Aceh every year.
8. Reports are submitted to the Governor of Aceh with a copy to the DPRK (9) Reports as referred to in paragraph (1) are also copied to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.

Article 27

1. The Mayor may establish a special team to conduct monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and protection.
2. The establishment of the monitoring and evaluation team referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out through cooperation with Universities, Women's/Gender Study Centers or Non-Governmental Organizations.
3. The Monitoring and Evaluation Team will be under the coordination of or led by City BAPPEDA with members consisting of the Head of the Office of Women's Empowerment, Child Protection and Family Planning as vice chairman, one representative from each sub-district and civil society groups.
4. The Monitoring and Evaluation Team in carrying out its duties and responsibilities will be supported by City Bappeda.

Article 28

The Monitoring and Evaluation Team as stipulated in Article 27 has the following duties: carry out monitoring and evaluation of the annual planning process and results;
b. provide input to SKPK in all matters related to Gender Mainstreaming;
c. provide input and suggestions regarding gender-responsive work programs;
d. ensure the involvement of at least 30% women in every development process from planning, implementation and reporting;
e. support the integration of Musrembang proposals related to women's empowerment and protection into the SKPK Work Plan;
f. evaluate gender-based SKPK programs;
g. ensure women receive benefits from development implementation;
h. prepare annual reports to the Mayor/Deputy Mayor; and
i. provide recommendations for planning, budgeting and implementation of gender-perspective development at the next stage.

Article 29

(1) The City Government provides a public complaint mechanism (channel) regarding the achievements of women's empowerment and protection as well as the level of public service satisfaction.

2. Facilities and infrastructure as well as public complaint mechanisms are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 30

1. Every member of the community has the right to obtain opportunities to participate in women's empowerment and protection.
2. Every member of the community has the right to obtain or provide information on violations of women's rights. (3) The community has the right to submit suggestions and opinions in efforts to empower and protect women.

CHAPTER VIII

FUNDING

Article 31

1. Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City is sourced from the City Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
2. Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City may also be sourced from the Aceh Revenue and Expenditure Budget, the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget. (3) Funding for women's empowerment and protection in the City may be sourced from religious funds collected through Baitul Mal and other lawful sources.
4. The use of religious funds as referred to in paragraph (3) is further regulated through Mayor regulation.

Article 32

1. In the preparation of APBK and APBG, costs must be allocated for the purpose of improving women's empowerment and protection.
2. Special autonomy funds that are part of the City must be partially allocated to finance activities as referred to in this qanun.

CHAPTER IX

OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 33

To accelerate efforts to empower and protect women, the Subulussalam City Government is obliged to implement special policies.

CHAPTER X

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 34

Matters not yet regulated in this qanun will be further regulated by Mayor Regulation, after obtaining consideration from the Ulama Consultative Council (MPU).

Article 35

This Qanun comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone knows, orders the promulgation of this qanun by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Subulussalam.

Enacted in Subulussalam On the date of 20 November 2023M 6 Jumadil Awal 1445H

MAYOR OF SUBULUSSALAM

AFFAN ALFIAN

Promulgated in Subulussalam On the date of 21 November 2023M 7 Jumadil Awal 1445 H
Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY

CITY OF SUBULUSSALAM

SAIRUN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 20. REGISTRATION NUMBER OF QANUN OF SUBULUSSALAM CITY ACEH PROVINCE:
