PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

REGENT OF NORTH GORONTALO

GORONTALO PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH GORONTALO REGENCY

NUMBER 4 OF 2019

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF NORTH GORONTALO

Considering:

a. that in order to protect the constitutional rights of women and children in accordance with the mandate of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, the Government of North Gorontalo Regency is responsible for the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence.
b. that North Gorontalo Regency which has the Philosophy of Custom Based on Sharia, Sharia Based on the Book of Allah, upholds Religious Values and Customs as well as noble Character, the Government of North Gorontalo Regency is morally fully responsible for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
c. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades dignity, self-esteem and human dignity and has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence.
d. that the increase in violent treatment of women and children in North Gorontalo Regency is an act that degrades human dignity, so that the role of the Government of North Gorontalo Regency is required so that women and children are protected from acts of violence.
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children Against Acts of Violence.

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 38 of 2000 concerning the Establishment of Gorontalo Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 182, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4010);
4. Law Number 11 of 2007 concerning the establishment of North Gorontalo Regency;
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
6. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
8. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
9. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
10. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning the Division of Government Affairs between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 437);
11. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
18. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products;

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF NORTH GORONTALO

REGENT OF NORTH GORONTALO

DECIDES:

To Establish:
REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is North Gorontalo Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of North Gorontalo.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution positioned as an element of the Regional Government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Forum for the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence hereinafter abbreviated as FP2ATK is a forum established based on this Regional Regulation whose membership comes from related agencies and communities concerned with protection from acts of violence.
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
8. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and organizations and/or community organizations.
9. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband wife and their child, or father and his child, or mother and her child, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
10. Every person is an individual or corporation.
11. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of liberty unlawfully.
12. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
13. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
14. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
15. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
16. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
17. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their development.
18. Cooperation is an activity or effort carried out by several people to achieve common goals.
19. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
20. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
21. Victim recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of domestic violence to be more empowered, both physically and psychologically.
22. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service provider institution for victims established by the Regional Government.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of Victims of Acts of Violence;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. for Victims of acts of violence; and
e. legal certainty.

Article 3

Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of Violence against Women and Children;
b. protect Women and provide services to Women and Child Victims of Acts of Violence; and
c. empower Women and Child Victims of Acts of Violence.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 4

The Scope of this Regional Regulation consists of:
a. protection of women; and
b. protection of children.

Article 5

Protection of women as referred to in Article 4 letter a includes:
a. prevention of acts of violence;
b. integrated services for victims of acts of violence;
c. empowerment of victims of acts of violence.

Article 6

Protection of children as referred to in Article 4 letter b includes:
a. protection of children who are victims of acts of violence; and
b. special protection of children.

CHAPTER IV

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One

General

Article 7

The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect women from acts of violence that occur in public or private life in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence;
d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and
h. threats of certain actions.

Article 8

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 7 is obliged to make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence;
c. provide emergency assistance; and/or
d. assist in the process of submitting applications for protection orders.

Part Two

Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 9

1. The Regional Government conducts prevention as referred to in Article 5 letter a by:
a. socializing laws and regulations;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education on the dangers of domestic violence;
d. conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
e. forming work networks in efforts to prevent violence;
f. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
g. establishing a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; and
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms.
2. In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) must be implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social community institutions; and
f. business world and other institutions.

Article 10

1. The Regional Government is obliged to prepare programs or activities for Prevention as referred to in Article 9 paragraph (1) in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan;
2. Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) to support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Article 11

1. Regional Apparatus that administers government affairs in the field of women's empowerment implements prevention as referred to in Article 9;
2. Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in conducting prevention may cooperate with Vertical Agencies.

Part Three

Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 12

1. The Regional Government implements integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social rehabilitation services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and/or
g. repatriation and reintegration.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms in police lines;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/or
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
3. The implementation of services for victims of acts of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A with other social institutions;
4. P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (3) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner;
5. Integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) are implemented in accordance with standard operating procedures;
6. Provisions regarding Standard Operating Procedures as referred to in paragraph (5) are regulated by Governor Regulation.

Part Four

Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 13

1. Empowerment of victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c conducted by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.
2. Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

CHAPTER V

CHILD PROTECTION

Part One

Protection of Children Who Are Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 14

1. Protection of children who are victims of acts of violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is the responsibility of the Regional Government;
2. Protection of child victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is implemented by:
a. formulating policies for prevention, reduction of recurrent risk, handling of victims and child data and information systems;
b. organizing maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children, both within and outside institutions;
c. providing shelters, maintenance and care for neglected children and organizing special protection for children.

Article 15

1. Provisions regarding prevention and service for acts of violence in the protection of women as referred to in Articles 7 through Article 13 apply mutatis mutandis to the protection of children from acts of violence;
2. In addition to conducting prevention as referred to in paragraph (1), also by increasing family capacity in child protection and child-rearing skills.

Part Two

Special Protection of Children

Article 16

1. Special protection of children as referred to in Article 6 letter b is provided to:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. Children who are victims of pornography;
g. Children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. Children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j . Children victims of sexual crimes;
k. Children victims of terrorism networks;
1. Children with Disabilities;
m. Children victims of abuse and neglect;
n. Children with deviant social behavior; and
o. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their Parents' condition.
2. The Regional Government in implementing the handling of special protection of children as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VI

COOPERATION AND COORDINATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

General

Article 17

1. The Regional Government conducts cooperation and coordination in order to ensure the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
2. Cooperation and coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by Regional Apparatus that administer government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two

Institutional Framework for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 18

1. The Regional Government in conducting cooperation and coordination on the protection of women and children from acts of violence, establishes FP2ATK;
2. FP2ATK membership consists of elements:
a. regional government;
b. vertical agencies;
c. educational institutions; and
d. community organizations concerned with the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
3. The Organizational Structure of FP2ATK as referred to in paragraph (2) consists of:
a. policy formulation working group;
b. socialization working group;
c. service working group; and
d. data, information, monitoring and evaluation working group.
4. The establishment and term of office of FP2ATK members as referred to in paragraph (1), are stipulated by Regent Decree.

Article 19

1. FP2ATK has the duties to:
a. provide input in policy formulation;
b. coordinate with Regional Apparatus and other social institutions;
c. socialize laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
d. collect and develop data and information related to the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
e. conduct review, monitoring, evaluation, and supervision of the implementation of protection of women and children from acts of violence; and
f. provide reports, suggestions, input, and considerations to the Regent.

Article 20

FP2ATK as referred to in Article 18 paragraph (2) is assisted by a Secretariat at the SKPD that handles women's empowerment and child protection affairs.

Article 21

Further provisions regarding the mechanism and working procedures of FP2ATK are regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 22

1. The Regional Government in the context of services for victims of acts of violence, establishes P2TP2A;
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) has the duties to:
a. provide services, including:
1. receive complaints/reports of violence against women and/or children, consultation, and counseling;
2. receive and send case referrals from Regency/City Regional Government or institutions established by Regency/City Regional Government;
3. provide legal assistance and accompaniment;
4. health;
5. social rehabilitation;
6. legal services; and
7. repatriation and social reintegration.
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence, reporters and witnesses.
3. The appointment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is stipulated by Regent Decree.
4. Regional Apparatus conducts guidance for P2TP2A in carrying out duties as referred to in paragraph (2).

Part Three

Cooperation

Article 23

1. In certain circumstances the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. other regional governments;
b. police;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
e. social workers;
f. volunteer assistants;
g. spiritual counselors;
h. other law enforcers, to assist victims in the court hearing process;
i. national commission on violence against women;
j. Indonesian child protection commission or Child Protection Institution; and/or
k. certain parties desired for the benefit of victims.
2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

Part Four

Coordination

Article 24

1. The Regent coordinates the protection of women and children from acts of violence with:
a. government;
b. Regency/City regional government;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; and
e. community institutions.
2. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
c. education affairs;
d. social affairs;
e. legal affairs;
f. labor affairs; and
g. other affairs.

CHAPTER VII

COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION

Article 25

1. Every person may participate in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence;
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by:
a. reporting acts of violence against women and/or children;
b. providing first aid to victims of Acts of Violence;
c. independently socializing the rights of women and children; and/or
d. establishing independent community social institutions.

Article 26

In the event that community social institutions implement protection of women and children from acts of violence, they must coordinate with FP2ATK.

Article 27

1. The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children; and
b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER IX

INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM

Article 28

1. The Regional Government prepares and compiles an information and reporting system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence;
2. The Information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER X

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 29

1. The Regional Government implements guidance and supervision of FP2ATK and other social institutions;
2. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be by the Regional Apparatus implementing women and child empowerment affairs;
3. The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) must be reported to the regional government.

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 30

Financing for the activities of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence may be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other lawful and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XI

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 31

In the event that FP2ATK as referred to in Article 18 has not been established, the existing P2TP2A shall continue to carry out the duties and functions of integrated services for women and children victims of acts of Violence in the Region.

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 32

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation must be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 33

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of North Gorontalo Regency.

Enacted in Kwandang

on 31 May 2019

REGENT OF NORTH GORONTALO,

INDRA YASIN

Promulgated in Kwandang

on 31 May 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF NORTH GORONTALO,

RIDWAN/VASIN,SH.MH.

NIP. NIP. 1965^4^31993031001

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH GORONTALO REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 4

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH GORONTALO REGENCY (4/18/2019)

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF NORTH GORONTALO

NUMBER YEAR 2019 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and disposition without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in North Gorontalo Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, protection must be provided to women and children victims of violence in the form of regional regulations. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not regulated protection efforts in the Region, so institutional and regulatory support is needed to ensure its implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and children victims of violence in North Gorontalo Regency

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Point a
What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and or causes death.

Point b
What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Point c
What is meant by "economic violence" is an act that restricts a person from working inside or outside the home to earn money and goods, including allowing a working person to be exploited, while someone does not fulfill the economic needs of the family.

Point d
What is meant by "social violence" is an act of a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life to a person or may cause physical damage or damage to another person's property.

Point e
What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Point f
What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:
a. an act that results in the non-fulfillment of;
b. the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
c. an act of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as appropriate;
d. an act of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
e. an act that results in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Point g
Sufficiently clear.

Point h
What is meant by "threat of certain actions" is any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Paragraph (l)
Point a
What is meant by "complaint service" is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.

Point b
What is meant by "health services" is an effort that includes promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.

Point c
What is meant by "counseling" is a process of providing objective and complete information, carried out systematically with interpersonal communication guidance, counseling techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge aimed at helping a person recognize their current condition, the problems being faced, and determine a solution or effort to overcome those problems.

Point d
What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and development for humans so as to provide peace, tranquility and coolness of heart to humans by always providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, trusting in God and continue to carry out their obligations.

Point e
What is meant by "social rehabilitation services" is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.

Point f
What is meant by "legal aid and assistance services" is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children that are gender sensitive.

Point g
What is meant by "repatriation and reintegration" is an effort to return women and child victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of origin.

Paragraph (2)

Point a

Sufficiently clear.

Point b

Sufficiently clear.

Point c
What is meant by "Service Center and Safe House" is what is known as a trauma center, while a safe house is known as a shelter.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Paragraph (1)
Point 0
What is meant by "stigmatization" is the giving of a 'mark' or stigma to a person, or a group of people with a certain meaningful understanding in a particular situation and context openly or covertly to influence the thinking power or evaluative power of a person or group of people towards something.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Paragraph 2
Number 1
Sufficiently clear.

Number 2
Sufficiently clear.

Number 3
Sufficiently clear.

Number 4
Sufficiently clear.

Number 5
Sufficiently clear.

Number 6
Sufficiently clear.

Number 7
What is meant by "social reintegration and repatriation is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF NORTH GORONTALO REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 242
