IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

GOVERNMENT OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY

COPY

REGIONAL REGULATION OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY

NUMBER 10 OF 2012

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

THE REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,

Considering:

a. that the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia guarantees the welfare of each of its citizens, including protection of women's rights and children's rights which are human rights;
b. that in order to improve the position, role, and quality of women is an effort to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life;
c. that every child is a bud, potential, and the next generation of the nation's struggle, and is expected to be able to bear such responsibility in the future, therefore they need to be given the widest possible opportunity to grow and develop optimally, both physically, mentally and socially, and have noble character, so that protection efforts need to be made and to realize child welfare by providing guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and treatment without discrimination;
d. that violence against women and children is a crime against humanity which constitutes a violation of human rights;
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 12 of 1950 concerning the Establishment of Regency Regions within the Province of East Java (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1950 Number 41, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 90) as amended by Law Number 2 of 1965 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1965 Number 19, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 2730);
3. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
4. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
5. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
6. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
7. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition And Immediate Action for The Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 3941);
8. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
11. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
12. Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
13. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
14. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 144, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
15. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
16. Law Number 19 of 2011 concerning Ratification of the Convention On The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 107, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5251);
17. Government Regulation Number 58 of 2005 concerning Regional Financial Management (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 140, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4578);
18. Government Regulation Number 79 of 2005 concerning Guidelines for Guidance and Supervision of Regional Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2005 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4593);
19. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
20. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government, and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
21. Government Regulation Number 44 of 2008 concerning Provision of Compensation, Restitution, and Assistance to Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 84, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4860);
22. Presidential Decree Number 36 of 1990 Concerning Ratification of the Convention on The Rights of The Child;
23. Presidential Decree Number 23 of 2011 concerning the National Action Plan for Human Rights of Indonesia 2011-2014;
24. Joint Decree of 3 (three) Ministers and the Chief of Police Number: 14/MenegPemberdayaan Perempuan/Dep.V/X/2002 Number 1329/MENKES/SKB/X/2002, Number 75/HUK/2002, Number POL.B/3048/2002, concerning Integrated Services for Victims of Violence against Women and Children;
25. Presidential Decree Number 59 of 2002 concerning the National Action Plan for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour;
26. Presidential Decree Number 52 of 2004 National Commission for the Elderly;
27. Presidential Regulation Number 65 of 2005 concerning the National Commission on Violence Against Women;
28. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 13 of 2006 concerning Guidelines for Regional Financial Management as amended several times most recently by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 21 of 2011 (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 310);
29. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
30. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 53 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 694);
31. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 2 of 2009 concerning Principles of Regional Financial Management (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency of 2009 Number 1 Series E);
32. Regional Regulation of Trenggalek Regency Number 22 of 2011 concerning Organization and Work Procedures of Regional Apparatus of Trenggalek Regency (Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency of 2011 Number 1 Series D);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY

and

THE REGENT OF TRENGGALEK

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is Trenggalek Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Trenggalek Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of Trenggalek.
4. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is the Regional House of Representatives of Trenggalek Regency.
5. Implementation is the form of execution of protection of women and children including protection of women and children victims of violence.
6. Protection of Women is all efforts made by the family, government and others aimed at women to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights as a form of respect for human rights.
7. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
8. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or threat of violence.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
10. Protection of Children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
11. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
12. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substances (drugs) abuse, children victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of abuse and neglect.
13. Protection of Women and Children Victims of violence is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the Regional Government, family, advocates, police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against Women and Children will or has occurred.
14. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development policies and programs.
15. Child rights mainstreaming is a strategy to integrate child issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of legislation, policies, programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.
16. Neglected child is a child whose needs are not properly fulfilled, whether physical, mental, spiritual, or social.
17. Child with disability is a child who experiences physical and/or mental obstacles that interfere with their growth and development properly.
18. Child with excellence is a child who has extraordinary intelligence, or has special potential and/or talent.
19. Adopted child is a child whose rights are transferred from the environment of parental authority, legal guardian, or other person responsible for the care, education, and raising of the child, into the family environment of adoptive parents based on a court decision or determination.
20. Foster child is a child who is cared for by a person or institution, to be given guidance, maintenance, care, education, and health, because their parents or one of their parents is unable to guarantee the child's proper growth and development.
21. Custody is the power of parents to care for, educate, maintain, foster, protect, and develop children in accordance with their religion and abilities, talents, and interests.
22. Child's rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected, and fulfilled by parents, family, community, government, and the state.
23. Community is individuals, families, groups, and social organizations and/or community organizations.
24. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
25. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
26. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
27. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises custody as a parent over a child.
28. Every person is an individual or corporation.
29. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children (PPTPA) is a network of cooperation that carries out the function of integrated services for the protection of women and children victims of violence.
30. Safe House (Shelter) is a shelter for women and children including families and witnesses of violence victims.
31. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other community organizations.
32. Human Trafficking is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits, so as to obtain consent from the person holding control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
33. Criminal Act of Human Trafficking is any act or series of acts that meet the elements of a criminal act determined in the Law on Human Trafficking.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

1. The implementation of Protection of Women is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia covering:
a. respect for human rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination; and
d. protection of victims.
2. The implementation of child protection is based on Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia as well as the basic principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child covering:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and
d. respect for the views of the child.

Article 3

The objectives of implementing protection of women are:
a. to ensure the fulfillment of women's rights;
b. to protect women and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against women; and
c. to maintain the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.

Article 4

The objectives of implementing child protection are:
a. to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity;
b. to protect children and prevent all forms of violence and discrimination against children; and
c. to realize children who are of quality, noble character, and prosperous.

CHAPTER III

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

Part One

Rights and Obligations of Women

Article 5

Every Woman has the right:
a. to live and the right to maintain life and her livelihood;
b. to form a family and continue descendants through lawful marriage;
c. to develop herself through the fulfillment of her basic needs;
d. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, in order to improve the quality of her life and for the welfare of humankind;
e. to advance herself in fighting for her rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i. to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
j. to protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property under her control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something which is a basic right;
k. to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;
l. to live in physical and spiritual prosperity, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m. to social security that enables her full development as a dignified human being;
n. to equality of position in law and government;
o. to work and a livelihood worthy of humanity;
p. in efforts to defend the state;
q. to communicate and obtain information to develop her personal and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process, and convey information using all types of available channels;
r. to embrace her respective religion and to worship according to her religion and beliefs; and
s. to obtain education.

Article 6

Every person must respect the human rights of others in the orderly life of society, nation and state.

Part Two

Obligations of Regional Government

Article 7

The Regional Government is obliged to implement efforts to protect women.

Article 8

1. To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 7, the Regional Government shall organize gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. organizing protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i. facilitating the integration of protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating protection of women especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business world for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
l. developing gender-based information systems; and
m. providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
2. Further provisions regarding forms of protection of women and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Three

Community Participation

Article 9

1. To provide protection for women as referred to in Article 8, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, Social Community Institutions, religious institutions and/or other lawful institutions.

CHAPTER IV

CHILD PROTECTION

Part One

Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 10

Every child has the right:
a. to survival, growth, development and participation in a reasonable manner in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence and discrimination;
b. to a name as personal identity and citizenship status;
c. to worship according to his/her religion, think, and express in accordance with the level of intelligence and age, under parental guidance;
d. to know his/her parents, be raised, and cared for by his/her own parents;
e. to obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
f. to obtain education and teaching in the context of developing his/her personality and level of intelligence in accordance with interests and talents;
g. to express and be heard his/her opinion, receive, seek, and provide information in accordance with the level of intelligence and age for self-development in accordance with the values of decency and propriety;
h. to rest and utilize leisure time, socialize with peers, play, recreate, and create in accordance with interests, talents, and level of intelligence for self-development;
i. to receive protection from discriminatory treatment, exploitation, both economic and sexual, neglect, violence, abuse, injustice, other mistreatment, while in the care of parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for care;
j. to be cared for by his/her own parents, unless there are valid reasons and/or legal rules showing that the separation is in the best interests of the child and is a last consideration; and
k. to obtain protection from abuse in political activities, involvement in armed conflicts, involvement in social unrest, involvement in events containing elements of violence and involvement in warfare.

Article 11

1. Every child has the right to obtain protection from being the target of persecution, torture, or imposition of inhuman punishment.
2. Every child has the right to obtain freedom in accordance with the law.
3. Arrest, detention, or criminal imprisonment of a child shall only be carried out if in accordance with applicable law and can only be carried out as a last resort.

Article 12

1. Every child who is deprived of liberty has the right to:
a. receive humane treatment and placement separated from adults;
b. obtain legal assistance or other assistance effectively at every stage of applicable legal proceedings; and
c. defend themselves and obtain justice before an objective and impartial juvenile court in a closed hearing.
2. Every child who is a victim or perpetrator of sexual violence or who is in conflict with the law has the right to confidentiality.

Article 13

Every child who is a victim or perpetrator of a criminal act has the right to obtain legal assistance and other assistance.

Article 14

1. In the event that for any reason the parents cannot guarantee the growth and development of the child, or the child is in a state of neglect, then the child has the right to be cared for or adopted as a foster child or adopted child by another person in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
2. In the event that parents, guardians, or caregivers of a child commit any form of treatment as referred to in Article 10 letter j, then the perpetrator shall be subject to aggravated punishment in accordance with Laws and Regulations.

Article 15

Especially for children with disabilities, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Articles 10 through 12 and Article 14, they also have the right to:
a. obtain special education, while children who have excellence also have the right to receive special education; and
b. obtain rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare standards.

Article 16

Every child is obliged to:
a. respect parents, guardians, and teachers;
b. love family, community, and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship in accordance with the teachings of their religion; and
e. implement ethics and noble morals.

Part Two

Obligations and Responsibilities

Paragraph 1

General

Article 17

Regional Government, community, family, and parents are obliged and responsible for the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 2

Obligations and Responsibilities of Regional Government

Article 18

Regional Government is obliged in child protection efforts.

Article 19

1. To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 18, Regional Government shall organize child rights mainstreaming including:
a. establish the implementation of child rights mainstreaming;
b. coordinate and facilitate child rights mainstreaming;
c. facilitate institutional strengthening and development of child mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. coordinate and facilitate child-responsive programs and activities and the development of communication, information, and education about child rights mainstreaming;
e. implement child rights mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. improve the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. integrate development efforts related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. coordinate the implementation of improving the quality of life of children related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
i. seek child protection especially for victims of violence, children with disabilities in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. facilitate the integration of child protection especially protection for victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
k. coordinate child protection especially protection for victims of violence, children with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
l. facilitate the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of child rights mainstreaming; and
m. provide and organize integrated or non-integrated services for child victims of violence, children with disabilities, and neglected children.
2. Further provisions regarding forms of child protection and mechanisms for mainstreaming children's rights as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 20

Regional Government is obliged and responsible to respect and guarantee the human rights of every child without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Article 21

Regional Government is obliged and responsible to provide support for facilities and infrastructure in the implementation of child protection.

Article 22

1. Regional Government guarantees the protection, maintenance, and welfare of children with due regard to the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons who are legally responsible for the child.
2. Regional Government supervises the implementation of child protection.

Article 23

Regional Government guarantees children to exercise their rights in expressing opinions in accordance with the age and level of intelligence of the child.

Paragraph 3

Obligations and Responsibilities of the Community

Article 24

The obligations and responsibilities of the community towards child protection are implemented through community role activities in the implementation of child protection.

Paragraph 4

Obligations and Responsibilities of Family and Parents

Article 25

1. Parents are obliged and responsible to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children in accordance with their abilities, talents, and interests; and
c. prevent marriage at child age.
2. In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to any reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family, which shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Three

Status of Children, Custody, Guardianship, Care and Adoption of Children

Article 26

Regarding the status of children, custody, guardianship, care and adoption of children shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Part Four

Implementation of Protection

Paragraph 1

Religion

Article 27

1. Every child receives protection to worship according to their religion.
2. Before the child can determine their choice, the religion embraced by the child follows the religion of their parents.

Article 28

1. Regional Government, community, family, parents, guardians, and social community institutions guarantee the protection of children in embracing their religion.
2. Protection of children in embracing their religion as referred to in paragraph (1) includes guidance, mentoring, and practice of religious teachings for children.

Paragraph 2

Health

Article 29

1. Regional Governments are obliged to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health efforts for children, so that every child obtains an optimal degree of health from the womb.
2. The provision of facilities and organization of comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) is supported by community participation.
3. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) include promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, both for basic health services and referrals.
4. Comprehensive health efforts as referred to in paragraph (3) are organized free of charge for families who are unable to afford them.
5. The implementation of the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) through paragraph (4) shall be adjusted to the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 30

1. Parents and families are responsible for maintaining the health of children and caring for children from the womb.
2. In the event that parents and families are unable to carry out the responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government is obliged to fulfill them.
3. The obligations as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 31

Regional Governments, families, and parents are obliged to ensure that children who are born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.

Article 32

1. Regional Governments, families, and parents are obliged to protect children from efforts to transplant their body organs to other parties.
2. Regional Governments, families, and parents are obliged to protect children from acts of:
a. removal of children's body organs and/or children's body tissues without regard to the health of the child;
b. buying and selling of children's organs and/or body tissues; and
c. health research that uses children as research objects without parental consent and does not prioritize the best interests of the child.

Paragraph 3

Education

Article 33

1. Regional Governments are obliged to organize basic education of at least 9 (nine) years for all children.
2. Parents are obliged to fulfill the right of children to obtain basic education of at least 9 (nine) years.

Article 34

Regional Governments, families, and parents are obliged to provide the widest possible opportunity for children to obtain education.

Article 35

Education as referred to in Article 33 is directed at:
a. development of attitudes and personality abilities of children, talents, mental and physical abilities to achieve their optimal potential;
b. development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
c. development of respect for parents, cultural identity, language and their own values, national values where the child resides, from where the child originates, and civilizations that are different from one's own civilization;
d. preparation of children for a responsible life; and
e. development of respect and love for the environment.

Article 36

Children with physical and/or mental disabilities are given equal opportunities and accessibility to obtain regular education and special education.

Article 37

Children who have excellence are given opportunities and accessibility to obtain special education.

Article 38

1. Regional Governments are responsible for providing education costs and/or free assistance or special services for children from underprivileged families, neglected children, and children residing in remote areas.
2. The responsibility of Regional Governments as referred to in paragraph (1) also includes encouraging the community to play an active role.

Article 39

Children in and around schools must be protected from acts of violence committed by teachers, school administrators or their friends in the school concerned, or other educational institutions.

Paragraph 4

Social

Article 40

1. Regional Governments are obliged to organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, both in institutions and outside institutions.
2. The organization of maintenance as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by community institutions.
3. To organize the maintenance and care of neglected children, government institutions and community institutions, as referred to in paragraph (2), may cooperate with various related parties.
4. In the case of organizing maintenance and care as referred to in paragraph (3), supervision is carried out by regional apparatus institutions that administer affairs in the social field in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 41

1. Regional Governments in organizing maintenance and care are obliged to strive for and assist children, so that children can:
a. participate;
b. freely express opinions and think in accordance with their conscience and religion;
c. freely receive oral or written information in accordance with the age stage and development of the child;
d. freely associate and assemble;
e. freely rest, play, recreate, create, and engage in cultural arts; and
f. obtain play facilities that meet health and safety requirements.
2. Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are developed and adjusted to the age, level of ability of the child, and their environment so as not to hinder and disturb the development of the child.

Article 42

In the event that a child is neglected because for some reason their parents neglect their obligations, the institution as referred to in Article 40, family, or authorized official may submit an application to the court to determine the child as a neglected child.

Article 43

1. The court determination as referred to in Article 42 simultaneously determines the place of shelter, maintenance, and care of the neglected child concerned.
2. Regional Governments or authorized institutions are obliged to provide a place as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Five

Special Protection

Article 44

Regional Governments and other state institutions are obliged and responsible for providing special protection to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse (napza), children who are victims of kidnapping, sale and trafficking, children who are victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children who are victims of mistreatment and neglect.

Article 45

Children in emergency situations as referred to in Article 44 consist of:
a. children who become refugees;
b. children who are victims of riots;
c. children who are victims of natural disasters; and
d. children in armed conflict situations.

Article 46

Special protection for children who become refugees as referred to in Article 45 letter a is implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 47

Special protection for children who are victims of riots, disaster victims, and children in armed conflict situations as referred to in Article 45 letter b through letter d, is implemented through:
a. fulfillment of basic needs consisting of food, clothing, housing, education, health, learning and recreation, security guarantees, and equal treatment; and
b. fulfillment of special needs for children with disabilities and children who experience psychosocial disorders.

Article 48

Every person is prohibited from recruiting or exploiting children for military and/or other interests and leaving children without protection of life.

Article 49

1. Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in Article 44 includes children in conflict with the law and child victims of criminal acts, and is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and the community.
2. Special protection for children in conflict with the law as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. treatment of children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;
b. provision of special child assistance officers from an early stage;
c. provision of special facilities and infrastructure;
d. imposition of appropriate sanctions for the best interests of the child;
e. continuous monitoring and recording of the development of children in conflict with the law;
f. provision of guarantees to maintain relationships with parents or family; and
g. protection from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling.
3. Special protection for children who are victims of criminal acts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented through:
a. rehabilitation efforts, both in institutions and outside institutions;
b. efforts to protect from disclosure of identity through mass media and to avoid labeling;
c. provision of safety guarantees for victim witnesses and expert witnesses, whether physical, mental, or social; and
d. provision of accessibility to obtain information regarding case developments.

Article 50

1. Special protection for children from minority and isolated groups as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through the provision of infrastructure and facilities to be able to enjoy their own culture, acknowledge and practice their own religion, and use their own language.
2. Everyone is prohibited from obstructing children as referred to in paragraph (1) from enjoying their own culture, acknowledging and practicing their religion, and using their own language without neglecting access to community and cultural development.

Article 51

1. Special protection for children who are exploited economically and/or sexually as referred to in Article 44 is the obligation and responsibility of the Regional Government and the community.
2. Special protection for children who are exploited as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out through:
a. dissemination and/or socialization of the provisions of Laws and Regulations relating to the protection of children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
b. monitoring, reporting, and imposition of sanctions; and
c. involvement of various Regional Government agencies, companies, labor unions, Community Social Institutions, and the community in the elimination of economic and/or sexual exploitation of children.
3. Everyone is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in the exploitation of children as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 52

1. Special protection for children who are victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances, and other addictive substances (napza) as referred to in Article 44, and involved in their production and distribution, shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.
2. Everyone is prohibited from intentionally placing, allowing, involving, ordering to involve children in the abuse, production and distribution of napza as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 53

1. Special protection for child victims of abduction, sale, and trafficking of children as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through supervision, protection, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts by the Regional Government and the community.
2. Everyone is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in abduction, sale, or trafficking as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 54

1. Special protection for child victims of violence as referred to in Article 44 includes physical, psychological, and sexual violence carried out through efforts to:
a. disseminate and socialize the provisions of Laws and Regulations that protect child victims of acts of violence; and
b. monitor, report, and impose sanctions.
2. Everyone is prohibited from placing, allowing, committing, ordering to commit, or participating in violence as referred to in paragraph (1).

Article 55

1. Special protection for children with disabilities as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through efforts to:
a. treat children in a humane manner in accordance with the dignity and rights of the child;
b. fulfill special needs; and
c. obtain the same treatment as other children to achieve full social integration and individual development as much as possible.
2. Everyone is prohibited from treating children by disregarding their views in a discriminatory manner, including labeling and equalization in education for children with disabilities.

Article 56

1. Special protection for child victims of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in Article 44 shall be carried out through supervision, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation by the Regional Government and the community.
2. Everyone is prohibited from placing, allowing, involving, ordering to involve children in situations of mistreatment and neglect as referred to in paragraph (1).

Part Six

Community Participation

Article 57

1. The community has the right to obtain the widest possible opportunity to participate in child protection.
2. The role of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, child protection institutions, community social institutions, educational institutions, religious institutions, business entities, and mass media.

Article 58

The role of the community shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER V

PROTECTION OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

Rights of Victims

Article 59

Every victim has the right to:
a. obtain protection from the family, Regional Government, police, prosecution, court, advocates, social institutions or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the Court;
b. obtain health services in accordance with medical needs;
c. obtain special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. obtain assistance from social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
e. obtain spiritual guidance services;
f. obtain protection from threats that endanger oneself, life and/or property whether before, during or after the case examination process from the Police;
g. obtain health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation and social reintegration if the person concerned experiences suffering both physically and psychologically;
h. obtain restitution for victims of human trafficking crimes or their heirs in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations; and
i. other rights regulated in the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 60

Every victim has the right to report and obtain assistance both psychologically and legally and to obtain guarantees of their rights relating to their status as a wife, mother, child, family member or as a member of the community.

Article 61

The rights as referred to in Article 59 letter c shall also be given to the families of witnesses and/or victims up to the second degree, if the families of witnesses and/or victims receive threats either physically or psychologically from other people in connection with the testimony of witnesses and/or victims.

Part Two

Obligations of the Regional Government and the Community

Article 62

The Regional Government is obligated to implement prevention of acts of violence, criminal acts of trafficking in persons, and protection efforts for victims.

Article 63

1. To implement the provisions as referred to in Article 62, the Regional Government:
a. formulates policies on efforts to prevent violence and prevent criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
b. formulates policies on the elimination of violence;
c. conducts communication, information, education, socialization, and advocacy regarding violence against women and children as well as criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children;
d. establishes institutions as a forum for cooperation in the protection and recovery of victims;
e. implements mechanisms for medical services, medicolegal services, psychosocial services, legal services, assistance services, spiritual guidance services, and victim recovery services;
f. provides infrastructure and facilities for the protection and recovery of victims;
g. facilitates the resocialization of victims, so that victims can resume their social functions in society; and
h. provides health rehabilitation services, social rehabilitation, repatriation, and social reintegration for victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons against women and children.
2. Further provisions regarding the forms and mechanisms of victim protection as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 64

1. Families and communities are obligated to prevent the occurrence of violence and the occurrence of criminal acts against women and children.
2. Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence is obligated to make efforts in accordance with their capabilities to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims;
c. provide emergency assistance; and
d. assist in the process of submitting applications for protection orders.

Part Three

Community Participation in Victim Protection

Article 65

1. The community participates in assisting efforts to prevent and handle victims of violence as well as criminal acts against women and children.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is realized through actions of providing information and/or reporting the existence of violence as well as criminal acts against women and children to law enforcement or authorities, or participating in handling victims of violence as well as criminal acts against women and children.
3. To implement the participation as referred to in paragraph (2), the community is entitled to obtain legal protection.
4. The Regional Government in providing victim protection may cooperate with the community or social community institutions.

CHAPTER VI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 66

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Trenggalek Regency.

Enacted in Trenggalek

on 30 April 2012

REGENT OF TRENGGALEK,

Promulgated in Trenggalek

on 5 July 2012

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY,

SUKIMAN

MULYADI WR

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY YEAR 2012 NUMBER 3 SERIES E True copy of the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION

ANIK SUWARNI, SH, M.Si Pembina Tk. I

NIP . 19650919199602 2 001

Reg. Number 188.342/XIV/406.004/2012 Date 9 July 2012

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY

NUMBER 10 YEAR 2012 CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

The existence of Regional Regulations that favor vulnerable or subordinated groups, particularly women and children, is urgently needed in connection with the many social problems that result in the deprivation of the human rights of women and children.

The human rights of women and children are part of human rights contained in the 1945 Constitution and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child as well as the ratification of the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women, however the enforcement of the human rights of women and children has still not been able to encourage political commitment in the Region.

The form of implementation of women's protection carried out by the Government is to implement gender mainstreaming, namely a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Regional development program policies within the framework of National development.

Children are a trust as well as a gift from God Almighty, which we must always protect because inherent in them are dignity, honor, and rights as human beings that must be upheld. From the perspective of national and state life, children are the future of the nation and the next generation of the nation's ideals, so that every child has the right to survival, growth, and development, to participate and has the right to protection from acts of violence and discrimination as well as civil rights and freedoms.

Although Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection has included the rights of children, the implementation of the obligations and responsibilities of parents, families, communities, government, and the state to provide protection to children, a Regional Regulation is still needed as a juridical basis for the implementation of these obligations and responsibilities in the Region. Thus, the formation of this Regional Regulation is based on the consideration that child protection in all its aspects is part of development activities in the Region, particularly in advancing national and state life.

Parents, families, and communities are responsible for safeguarding and maintaining these human rights in accordance with the obligations imposed by law. Likewise, in the context of implementing child protection, the state and Regional Government are responsible for providing facilities and accessibility for children, especially in ensuring their optimal and directed growth and development.

This Regional Regulation affirms that the responsibility of parents, families, communities, Regional Government and the state is a series of activities carried out continuously for the protection of children's rights. This series of activities must be sustainable and directed to ensure the growth and development of children, both physically, mentally, spiritually and socially. This action is intended to realize the best life for children who are expected to be potential successors to the nation, resilient, having nationalism imbued with noble character and Pancasila values, and having a strong will to maintain the unity and integrity of the nation and state.

Child protection efforts need to be implemented as early as possible, namely from the fetus in the womb until the child is 18 (eighteen) years old. Starting from the concept of comprehensive, complete, and comprehensive child protection, this Regional Regulation places the obligation to provide protection to children based on the following principles:
a. non-discrimination;
b. the best interests of the child;
c. the right to life, survival, and development; and d. respect for the views of the child.

In conducting guidance, development and protection of children, the role of the community is needed, whether through child protection institutions, religious institutions, non-governmental organizations, community organizations, social organizations, business world, mass media, or educational institutions.

The form of implementation of child protection carried out by the Regional Government is through mainstreaming children's rights, namely integrating children's issues and rights into every stage of development which includes planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of legislation, policy programs, activities and budgets with the principles of the best interests of the child.

The integrity and harmony of a happy, safe, peaceful and tranquil household is the aspiration of everyone in the household. The Republic of Indonesia is a state based on Belief in the One and Only God guaranteed by Article 29 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. Thus, every person within the household in exercising their rights and obligations must be based on religion. This needs to be continuously developed in order to build household integrity.

To realize this integrity and harmony, it is highly dependent on each person within the household, especially the quality level of behavior and self-control of each person within the household.

Household integrity and harmony can be disrupted if quality and self-control cannot be controlled, which ultimately can lead to domestic violence resulting in insecurity or injustice towards people within the household.

To prevent, protect victims, and take action against perpetrators of domestic violence, the state and society are obliged to carry out prevention, protection, and action against perpetrators in accordance with the Pancasila philosophy and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia. The state views that all forms of violence, especially domestic violence, are violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as a form of discrimination. The state's view is based on Article 28 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, along with - 42 - its amendments. Article 28G paragraph (1) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to protection of self, family, honor, dignity, and property under their control, and has the right to a sense of security and protection from the threat of fear to do or not do something that is a human right". Article 28H paragraph (2) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia stipulates that "Every person has the right to receive facilities and special treatment to obtain equal opportunities and benefits in order to achieve equality and justice".

Current developments show that acts of physical, psychological, sexual violence, and household neglect in reality occur so that adequate legal instruments are needed to eliminate domestic violence.

The Regional Regulation regulates the prevention and protection as well as recovery of victims of violence, and regulates the obligations of law enforcement officers, health workers, social workers, volunteer assistants, or spiritual counselors to protect victims so that they are more sensitive and responsive to household interests which from the outset are directed towards household integrity and harmony. To prevent domestic violence, the Regional Government is obliged to carry out tasks in the field of women's empowerment to carry out preventive actions, among others, organizing communication, information, and education on the prevention of violence against women and children.

Based on these considerations, it is time to establish a Regional Regulation that is regulated comprehensively, clearly, and firmly in the implementation of the protection of women and children including the protection of women and children victims of violence.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Paragraph (1)
Point a
Sufficiently clear.

Point b
What is meant by "gender equality" is a condition in which women and men enjoy equal status and have the same conditions to fully realize their human rights and potential for the integrity and continuity of the household proportionally.

Point c
Sufficiently clear.

Point d
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Point a
Sufficiently clear.

Point b
What is meant by "the principle of the best interests of the child" is that in all actions concerning children carried out by the government, society, legislative bodies, and judicial bodies, the best interests of the child must be the primary consideration.

Point c
What is meant by "the principle of the right to life, survival, and development" is the most fundamental human right for children that is protected by the state, government, society, family, and parents.

Point d
What is meant by "the principle of respect for the views of the child" is respect for the rights of children to participate and express their opinions in decision-making, especially if it concerns matters that affect their lives.

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Point a
Sufficiently clear.

Point b
Sufficiently clear.

Point c
This provision is intended to give freedom to children in order to develop their creativity and intellectuality (reasoning ability) in accordance with the child's age level. The provisions of this article also affirm that such development must still be under the guidance of their parents.

Point d
The provision regarding the right of the child to know who their parents are, in the sense of their origins (including their wet nurse), is intended to avoid the severance of lineage and blood relations between the child and their biological parents, while the right to be raised and cared for by their parents is intended so that the child can obey and respect their parents.

Point e
Sufficiently clear.

Point f
Sufficiently clear.

Point g
Sufficiently clear.

Point h
Sufficiently clear.

Point i
Discriminatory treatment, for example treatment that differentiates ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnic group, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition.

Exploitative treatment, for example actions or conduct that instrumentalizes, utilizes, or exploits children to obtain personal, family, or group benefits. Neglectful treatment, for example actions or conduct that deliberately ignores the obligation to maintain, care for, or look after the child as appropriate.

Cruel treatment, for example actions or conduct that is tyrannical, vicious, brutal, or shows no compassion toward the child.

Violent and abusive treatment, for example conduct that injures and/or harms the child, and not merely physical, but also mental and social.

Unjust treatment, for example actions of partiality between one child and another, or arbitrariness toward the child.

Other wrongful treatment, for example actions of harassment or indecent conduct toward the child.

Point j
What is meant by "separation" is not eliminating the relationship of the child with their parents.

Point k
What is meant by "protection" includes activities that are direct and indirect in nature, from actions that endanger the child physically and psychologically.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Paragraph (1)
Point a
Sufficiently clear.

Point b
What is meant by "other assistance" for example social guidance from social workers, consultation from psychologists and psychiatrists, or assistance from linguists.

Point c
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

What is meant by "other assistance" includes medical, social, rehabilitation, vocational, and educational assistance.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

What is meant by "right" is intended to ensure their life in accordance with human dignity, increase self-confidence, and the ability to participate in community, national, and state life.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

What is meant by "support for facilities and infrastructure" for example schools, playgrounds, sports fields, places of worship, health centers, art buildings, recreation areas, breastfeeding rooms, childcare centers, and special detention centers for children.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
What is meant by "the child may determine their choice of religion" if the child is already rational and responsible, and meets the requirements and procedures in accordance with the provisions of the religion they choose, and the provisions of applicable laws and regulations.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

What is meant by "diseases that threaten survival and cause disability" for example HIV/AIDS, TB, leprosy, polio.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

Article 34

Sufficiently clear.

Article 35

Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Sufficiently clear.

Article 37

Sufficiently clear.

Article 38

Sufficiently clear.

Article 39

Sufficiently clear.

Article 40

Paragraph (1)
What is meant by "in institutions" is through the government orphanage system and private orphanages, while "outside institutions" is the family/individual care system.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear.

Article 41

Sufficiently clear.

Article 42

Sufficiently clear.

Article 43

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
What is meant by "institution" is a social community institution.

Article 44

What is meant by "other State institutions" are the police, prosecutor's office, courts, and legal aid institutions.

Article 45

Sufficiently clear.

Article 46

Sufficiently clear.

Article 47

Point a
Sufficiently clear.

Point b
What is meant by "psychosocial disorders" include among others psychological trauma and developmental disorders of children in early age.

Article 48

Sufficiently clear.

Article 49

Sufficiently clear.

Article 50

Sufficiently clear.

Article 51

Sufficiently clear.

Article 52

Sufficiently clear.

Article 53

Sufficiently clear.

Article 54

Sufficiently clear.

Article 55

Sufficiently clear.

Article 56

Sufficiently clear.

Article 57

Sufficiently clear.

Article 58

Sufficiently clear.

Article 59

Point a
What is meant by "social institution" is an institution or social organization that cares about the issue of domestic violence, for example legal aid institutions.

Point b
Sufficiently clear.

Point c
Sufficiently clear.

Point d
What is meant by "social worker" is a person who has professional competence in social work obtained through formal education or practical experience in the field of social work/social welfare that is officially recognized by the government and carries out professional social work duties.

Point e
Sufficiently clear.

Point f
Sufficiently clear.

Point g
Sufficiently clear.

Point h
Sufficiently clear.

Point i
Sufficiently clear.

Article 60

Sufficiently clear.

Article 61

Sufficiently clear.

Article 62

Sufficiently clear.

Article 63

Sufficiently clear.

Article 64

Sufficiently clear.

Article 65

Paragraph (1)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (4)
What is meant by "cooperation" is as a manifestation of community participation.

Article 66

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF TRENGGALEK REGENCY NUMBER 11
