PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA

PROVINCE OF NORTH MALUKU

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY

NUMBER 7 OF 2022

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA,

Considering:

a. that women and children have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor;
b. that all forms of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c. that based on Article 12 of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection are mandatory governmental affairs for regional governments;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letters a, b, and c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation of East Halmahera Regency concerning Protection of Women and Children;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 4 of 1979 concerning Child Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1979 Number 32, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3143);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 20 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 138 Concerning Minimum Age FOR Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate Action For the Elimination of the worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
7. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 208, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as last amended by Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
8. Law Number 1 of 2003 concerning Establishment of North Halmahera Regency, South Halmahera Regency, Sula Islands Regency, East Halmahera Regency and Tidore Islands in North Maluku Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 21, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 4264);
9. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
10. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
11. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
12. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
13. Law Number 25 of 2009 concerning Public Services (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2009 Number 112, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5038);
14. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
15. Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning Ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
16. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
17. Law Number 30 of 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601);
18. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation in Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

With Mutual Approval.

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY

and

REGENT OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY

DECIDES:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the Region of East Halmahera Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Regional Government of East Halmahera Regency.
3. Regent is the Regent of East Halmahera.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Regent and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Technical Regional Apparatus is a Regional Apparatus whose scope of duties and responsibilities includes the affairs of Women's Empowerment and/or Child Protection.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person who is recognized by law as a woman.
8. Women's Empowerment is any effort to improve physical, mental spiritual, social capacity, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
9. Fulfillment of Children's Rights is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering either physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or deprivation of a person's freedom unlawfully.
11. Victim is a woman and/or child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
12. Protection is all prevention, service and empowerment actions to protect and guarantee the rights of women and children from acts of violence.
13. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women and children.
14. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or having occurred violence against victims.
15. Empowerment is the strengthening of women victims of violence to be able to work and work independently after they are recovered and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.
16. Health Rehabilitation is an effort to restore the condition of victims including physical, psychological and social health so that victims can carry out their roles again properly and naturally both in the family and in society.
17. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
18. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional area to their area of origin.
19. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
20. Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children, hereinafter abbreviated as P2PTP2A, is the Regional Technical Implementation Unit (UPTDD) of the Integrated Service Center for the Protection of Women and Children integrated into the technical Regional Apparatus of East Halmahera Regency.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children is implemented based on the principles of:
a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of the Child;
e. the right to life, survival, and development;
f. empowerment; and
g. legal certainty.

Article 3

This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children;
b. maintain the integrity of the household in order to realize a harmonious family;
c. prevent violence against women and children;
d. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
e. provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence;
f. provide protection to reporters and witnesses; and
g. carry out empowerment for women victims of violence.

CHAPTER III

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One

Women's Empowerment

Paragraph 1

Rights of Women

Article 4

Every Woman has the right:
a. to life and the right to maintain life and livelihood;
b. to form a family and continue offspring through lawful marriage;
c. to develop themselves through the fulfillment of their basic needs;
d. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture, in order to improve the quality of life and for the welfare of humanity;
e. to advance themselves in fighting for their rights collectively to build society, nation and state;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair and proper remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to obtain equal opportunities in government;
i. to freedom of association, assembly and expression of opinion;
J. to protection of self, family, honor, dignity and property under their control, and the right to a sense of security and protection from threats of fear to do or not do something that is a human right;
k. to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain political asylum from other countries;
l. to live prosperously physically and mentally, to reside and obtain a good and healthy living environment, and the right to obtain health services;
m. to social security that enables their full development as dignified human beings;
n. to equality of position in law and government: to decent work and livelihood for humanity; in the defense of the state;
o. to communicate and obtain information to develop their personal and social environment, and the right to seek, obtain, own, store, process, and convey information using all types of available channels;
p. to embrace their respective religions and to worship according to their religion and beliefs; and
q. to obtain education.

Paragraph 2

Forms of Women's Empowerment

Article 5

1. In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life, women must be empowered.
2. Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in economic, socio-cultural, political, and legal activities.

Article 6

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility in efforts to empower women.
2. Women's empowerment efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 7

The implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation and capital assistance; and e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 8

Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) shall be implemented through:
a. enhancement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. enhancement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, primarily in the field of reproductive health.
c. enhancement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 9

1. The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and d self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
2. The implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 10

1. The implementation of women's empowerment in the field as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) includes:
a. enhancement of awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
2. The implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Article 11

(1) To implement Women's Empowerment as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government shall organize gender mainstreaming including:
a. establishing the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
b. coordinating, facilitating, and mediating gender mainstreaming;
c. facilitating institutional strengthening and development of gender mainstreaming mechanisms in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions;
d. implementing gender mainstreaming related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
e. improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
f. integrating efforts to improve the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
g. coordinating the implementation of improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
h. organizing the protection of women, especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
i. facilitating the integration of women's protection, especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities, in conflict areas and disaster-affected areas;
j. coordinating the protection of women, especially protection for victims of violence, female workers, elderly women and women with disabilities;
k. facilitating the strengthening and development of networks of community institutions or organizations and the business sector for the implementation of gender mainstreaming;
1. developing a gender-based information system; and m providing and organizing integrated or non-integrated services for women victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities.
2. Further provisions regarding the forms of women's empowerment and gender mainstreaming mechanisms as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Paragraph 3

Community Participation

Article 12

1. To carry out women's empowerment as referred to in Article 6, the Regional Government may involve community participation.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, Social Community Institutions, religious institutions and/or other legitimate institutions.

Part Two

Child Protection

Paragraph 1

Rights and Obligations of Children

Article 13

Every child has the right to obtain:
a. birth registration;
b. health;
c. education; and
d. social welfare.

Article 14

Every child has the obligation to:
a. respect parents, guardians and teachers;
b. love family, community and care for friends;
c. love the homeland, nation and state;
d. perform worship in accordance with their religion and beliefs;
e. study and develop themselves in accordance with their abilities and talents, interests; and
f. have noble character.

Paragraph 2

Birth Registration

Article 15

The implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the field of birth registration, as referred to in Article 13 letter a, the Regional Government is obliged to organize the registration of children's births with the issuance of birth certificates in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 3

Health

Article 16

1. Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the health field as in Article letter b, the regional government is obliged to provide facilities and organize comprehensive health services for children, so that every child obtains optimal health status from the womb which is carried out in stages adjusted to the regional financial capacity and supported by community participation.
2. Comprehensive health services as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b. exemption from cost burdens for malnourished children, children undergoing dialysis due to kidney failure, children with major thalassemia, children with disabilities, children with special needs, street children, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (NAPZA) abuse, children who are victims of violence, such as neglect, economically exploited, sexually exploited and victims of human trafficking.
3. Children as referred to in paragraph (2) are children from poor families except as otherwise regulated in accordance with the health financing program established by the government.

Article 17

The Regional Government, community, family and parents shall endeavor to ensure that children born are protected from diseases that threaten the continuity of life and/or cause disability.

Paragraph 4

Education

Article 18

1. The implementation of Fulfillment of Children's Rights in the education field as referred to in Article 13 letter c, the Regional Government shall guarantee the implementation of a 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program for all children.
2. Every organizer of an education unit is obliged to provide opportunities for children to obtain educational services without discrimination.

Article 19

Every organizer of an education unit is prohibited from expelling children from educational institutions unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the child's education.

Article 20

Every organizer of an education unit is obliged to coordinate with relevant child protection agencies if they find children dropping out of school due to being victims of acts of violence.

Article 21

Children with disabilities and children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including special and inclusive education.

Article 22

Early Childhood Education for children aged 0 (zero) to 3 (three) years and 4 (four) to 6 (six) years may be organized by Posyandu institutions, Taman Posyandu, Early Childhood Education Posts and similar Early Childhood Education unit institutions.

Article 23

For children who do not pursue formal education, they may pursue education through non-formal education units comprising:
a. For children who are 14 (fourteen) years of age and above and do not pursue formal elementary school education or equivalent may pursue non-formal Package A education or equivalent to Elementary School (SD)/Madrasah Ibtidaiyah (MI);
b. For children who are 17 (seventeen) years of age and above and do not pursue formal junior high school education or equivalent may pursue non-formal Package B education or equivalent to Junior High School (SMP) / Madrasah Tsanawiyah (MTs); or
c. For children who are 21 (twenty-one) years of age and above and do not pursue formal junior high school education or equivalent may pursue non-formal Package C education or equivalent to Senior High School (SMA)/Vocational High School (SMK)/Madrasah Aliyah/Madrasah Aliyah Kejuruan (MAK);

Paragraph 5

Social Welfare

Article 24

1. Implementation of Protection and empowerment of children in the field of social welfare as referred to in Article 13 letter d, the Regional Government is obliged to organize social welfare for:
a. children in conflict with the law;
b. child victims of violence who are exploited economically and sexually, neglected children, child victims of kidnapping and child victims of trafficking in persons;
c. child victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substance abuse (NAPZA);
d. children infected with HIV/ AIDS;
e. children who do not have parents and are cared for by other parties or families who are unable;
f. street children;
g. child victims of natural disasters or social disasters;
h. children with disabilities;
1. children of migrant worker families;
J. children living in or around prostitution locations; and
k. child victims of other maltreatment.
2. Social welfare as referred to in paragraph (1) may be in the form of provision of services:
a. health;
b. education;
c. legal aid;
d. assistance;
e. social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. empowerment;
h. social assistance; and/ or
i. reintegration.

Article 25

1. The Regional Government is obliged to protect the fulfillment of the rights of child workers in the informal sector.
2. Child Workers in the informal sector as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. domestic workers;
b. shoe shiners;
c. street vendors;
d. scavengers;
e. parking attendants;
f. children working in agriculture, animal husbandry and plantations;
g. children working in mining; and
h. other informal sector work that employs children.
3. Every person who employs children in the informal sector must pay attention to the requirements:
a. minimum age of 15 (fifteen) years, except for the category of Worst Forms of Child Labor minimum 18 (eighteen) years;
b. obtain written consent from the parent/guardian of the child worker;
c. have a written employment agreement between the employer and the parent/guardian of the child worker and obtain validation from the competent authority;
d. not employed at night;
e. working time of a maximum of 3 (three) hours per day;
f. not employed in a place or environment that can interfere with the child's growth and development process, whether physical, mental, moral and intellectual or the child's health;
g. provide opportunities to obtain education in accordance with their talents and interests;
h. employ for light types of work; and
i. provide one day off per week.

Article 26

Fulfillment of Children's Rights as referred to in Article 25 is in the form of:
a. counseling to stakeholders about children's rights;
b. psychological, medical and legal service assistance and socio-economic reintegration;
c. family empowerment through provision of training, business capital stimulus and assistance;
d. scholarships to continue formal education to higher levels; and
e. non-formal education and skills training for those who do not pursue formal education.

Part Three

Forms of Violence

Article 27

Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect;
e. exploitation; and/ or
f. other violence.

Article 28

Physical violence as referred to in Article 27 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causing death.

Article 29

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 27 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/ or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 30

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 27 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 31

Neglect as referred to in Article 27 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the non-fulfillment of a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of a child as appropriate, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/ or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/ or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 32

Exploitation as referred to in Article 27 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent including prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/ or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/ or
c. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all prostitution or indecency activities.

Article 33

Other violence as referred to in Article 27 letter f is caused by:
a. threat of violence includes: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that cause fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

Part Four

Prevention of Violence against Women and Children

Article 34

1. Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government and coordinated by the technical Regional Apparatus.
2. Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. conducting guidance towards harmonious household integrity;
b. forming work networks in violence prevention efforts;
c. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
d. establishing a violence prevention system;
e. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence; and
f. providing critical education regarding the rights of women and children to the community.

Article 35

In addition to the Regional Government, prevention efforts as referred to in Article 34 paragraph (1) are carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. the community;
c. educational institutions; and
d. Non-Governmental Organizations.

Part Five

Handling of Women and Children Victims of Violence

Article 36

The implementation of handling of women and children victims of violence is carried out with:
a. speed;
b. safety and comfort;
c. a sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charges; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 37

Forms of handling of women and children victims of violence include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. medical rehabilitation services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services; and
f. social reintegration services.

Article 38

Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 37 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims;
b. case identification; and
c. the purpose of the action taken.

Article 39

Assistance services as referred to in Article 37 letter b include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
c. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the police, prosecutor's office and court;
d. protecting the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
e. providing a sense of security to victims; and
f. providing continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 40

Medical rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel; and
c. referral to health services.

Article 41

1. Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 37 letter d are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims.
2. The form of services as referred to in paragraph (1) is through social support.
3. Social support as referred to in paragraph (2) is carried out through:
a. spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 42

Legal services as referred to in Article 37 letter e are to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced; and
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process runs as it should.

Article 43

1. Social reintegration services as referred to in Article 37 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
2. Social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. relevant agencies and institutions both government and non-government; and
b. village community institutions and/or local community leaders.

CHAPTER IV

INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN (P2TP2A)

Article 44

1. The Regional Government in organizing the protection of women and children from acts of violence, establishes P2TP2A as a regional technical service implementing unit (UPTDD) integrated into the Technical Regional Apparatus.
2. The organization of protection and services for women and children victims of violence is carried out in an integrated manner by P2TP2A.
3. The organization of services for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing fast and free services to victims;
b. organizing protection and fulfillment of victims' rights to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal assistance;
c. cooperating with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants needed for victims;
d. networking with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperating with witness and victim protection institutions, social shelters or trauma centers owned by the government, community or other institutions for health recovery of victims;
e. providing convenience, comfort and safety for victims;
f. maintaining the confidentiality of victims; and
g. providing fulfillment of legal assistance for victims.
4. Further provisions regarding the establishment, procedures and mechanisms for organizing P2TP2A are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 45

Every woman and child victim of violence receives the following rights:
a. the right to complaint handling;
b. the right to have their dignity respected as human beings;
c. the right to receive protection from family, community, regional government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
d. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims;
e. the right to determine their own decisions;
f. the right to special handling related to victim confidentiality;
g. the right to obtain information;
h. the right to confidentiality of identity;
1. the right to social rehabilitation;
J. the right to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with laws and regulations; and
k. the right to spiritual guidance services.

Article 46

Women and children victims of violence in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 45, also receive the following special rights:
a. the right to survival;
b. the right to grow and develop;
c. the right to receive equal protection; and
d. the right to participate in community life.

CHAPTER VI

PROHIBITIONS

Article 47

1. Every business operation whose activities may interfere with the growth and development of children is prohibited from receiving child visitors.
2. Business operations as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. discotheques;
b. nightclubs;
c. bars;
d. adult karaoke;
e. pubs;
f. massage parlors;
g. steam bath/sauna parlors; and.
h. other similar business fields.

Article 48

Every operator of hotels, motels, inns, tourism guesthouse businesses and similar business activities is prohibited from renting rooms to children without being accompanied by parents or adult family members or supervising teachers/persons in charge in the context of carrying out school activities or other activities.

Article 49

1. Every operator of internet service businesses, play stations and types of children's games based on information and communication technology is required to manage and design child-friendly places.
2. Every business operator as referred to in paragraph (1) shall:
a. arrange rooms/booths with sufficient lighting and not closed off;
b. not accept children wearing uniforms and/or during school hours;
c. locally block sites containing elements of pornography and pornographic acts; and d limit visiting hours and supervise the use of existing facilities.

CHAPTER VII

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Article 50

1. To ensure synergy, balance and effectiveness of integrated measures in the implementation of policies, programs, activities, protection of Women and children, the Government conducts monitoring.
2. Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by technical Regional Apparatus and P2TP2A.
3. Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is to determine the progress and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women and children.
4. Monitoring is conducted periodically through coordination and direct monitoring of Regional Apparatus implementing policies and activities for the protection of Women and child victims of violence.
5. Monitoring is conducted from planning to implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women and children every year.

Article 51

1. Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the Protection of Women and child victims of violence is conducted at the end of each Budget year or if necessary according to needs.
2. The results of the evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of Women and child victims of violence are used as input for the formulation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of Women and child victims of violence for the following year.
3. Evaluation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

FINANCING

Article 52

Funding for the implementation of Protection of Women and children is sourced from:
a. Regional revenue and expenditure budget; and/or
b. Other legal and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 53

1. The Regent conducts guidance and supervision over the implementation of this regional regulation.
2. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include providing implementation instructions, guidance, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children.

CHAPTER X

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 54

1. In the implementation of Protection of Women and children, the community may:
a. form family partners at the Village/Sub-district level by the community;
b. conduct independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
c. provide first aid to victims; and
d. report to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector and/or mass media.

CHAPTER XI

ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS

Article 55

1. Any person or business entity that violates the provisions as referred to in Article 47, Article 48, Article 49 shall be subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. Written warning;
b. License suspension;
c. Administrative fine; and
d. License revocation.
2. Written warning as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is given 3 (three) times with an interval between one warning and another of at least 1 (one) month.
3. License suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is imposed if written warnings have been given as referred to in paragraph (2).
4. License suspension as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b may be withdrawn if the person or business entity committing the violation pays an administrative fine of Rp. 30,000,000,- (thirty million rupiah).
5. If within the period specified in the license suspension, the administrative fine is not paid, then license revocation will be carried out.

CHAPTER XII

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 56

At the latest 1 (one) year, calculated from the effective date of this Regional Regulation, the Implementing Regulations of this Regional Regulation must have been stipulated.

Article 57

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of East Halmahera Regency.

EAST,

Promulgated in Maba on 7 March 2022 REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY YEAR 2022 NUMBER 1 7 1 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY NORTH MALUKU PROVINCE NUMBER 6/2022

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY

NUMBER 7 YEAR 2022 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

I. GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in East Halmahera so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and honor, protection needs to be provided to women and child victims of violence in the form of regional regulations. So far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and child victims of violence have not regulated protection measures in the Region so that institutional support and regulations are needed that can guarantee their implementation. Regional Regulations regulate protection measures for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment of women and child victims of violence in East Halmahera.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

sufficiently clear.

Article 2

sufficiently clear.

Article 3

sufficiently clear.

Article 4

sufficiently clear.

Article 5

sufficiently clear.

Article 6

sufficiently clear.

Article 7

sufficiently clear.

Article 8

sufficiently clear.

Article 9

sufficiently clear.

Article 10

sufficiently clear.

Article 11

sufficiently clear.

Article 12

sufficiently clear.

Article 13

sufficiently clear.

Article 15

sufficiently clear.

Article 16

sufficiently clear.

Article 17

sufficiently clear.

Article 18

sufficiently clear.

Article 19

sufficiently clear.

Article 20

sufficiently clear.

Article 21

sufficiently clear.

Article 22

sufficiently clear.

Article 23

sufficiently clear.

Article 24

sufficiently clear.

Article 25

sufficiently clear.

Article 26

sufficiently clear.

Article 27

sufficiently clear.

Article 28

sufficiently clear.

Article 29

sufficiently clear.

Article 30

sufficiently clear.

Article 31

sufficiently clear.

Article 32

sufficiently clear.

Article 33

sufficiently clear.

Article 34

sufficiently clear.

Article 35

sufficiently clear.

Article 36

sufficiently clear.

Article 37

sufficiently clear.

Article 38

sufficiently clear.

Article 39

sufficiently clear.

Article 41

sufficiently clear.

Article 42

sufficiently clear.

Article 43

sufficiently clear.

Article 44

sufficiently clear.

Article 45

sufficiently clear.

Article 46

sufficiently clear.

Article 47

sufficiently clear.

Article 48

sufficiently clear.

Article 49

sufficiently clear.

Article 50

sufficiently clear.

Article 51

sufficiently clear.

Article 52

sufficiently clear.

Article 53

sufficiently clear.

Article 54

sufficiently clear.

Article 55

sufficiently clear.

Article 56

sufficiently clear.

Article 57

sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF EAST HALMAHERA REGENCY NUMBER 175
