Women's Empowerment and Child Protection

REGIONAL GAZETTE

PADANGSIDIMPUAN CITY

MAYOR OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN

NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN CITY

NUMBER 3 OF 2021

CONCERNING

WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

MAYOR OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN,

Considering:

a. that women and children are creatures of Almighty God who have human rights guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, therefore women and children must be protected from all forms of violence and discrimination;
b. that violence against women and children in the Region tends to increase, therefore the Regional Government and/or community need to play an active role optimally to provide protection, so that women and children are prevented and free from violence or threats of violence, torture, or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth;
c. that protection of women and children is a mandatory concurrent affair which is the authority, obligation, and responsibility of the Regional Government, therefore regulation is needed as a basis for implementing comprehensive and integrated protection of women and children;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in Padang Sidempuan City;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 4 of 2001 concerning Establishment of Padang Sidempuan City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 84 of 2001, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4111);
6. Law Number 20 of 2003 concerning National Education System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2003 Number 78, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4301);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
8. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection into Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 237, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5946);
11. Government Regulation Number 10 of 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1983 Number 13, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3250) as amended by Government Regulation Number 45 of 1990 concerning Amendment to Government Regulation Number 10 of 1983 concerning Marriage and Divorce Permits for Civil Servants (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1990 Number 61, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3424);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
13. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
14. Presidential Instruction Number 5 of 2014 concerning National Movement Against Sexual Crimes Against Children;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
16. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Evaluation of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
17. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 of 2011 concerning Policy for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
18. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 12 of 2011 concerning Indicators of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
19. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 13 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Development of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities;
20. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 2036), as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 Concerning Formation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2019 Number 157);
21. Regional Regulation of North Sumatra Province Number of 2004 concerning Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor (Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Number 18 of 2004, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Series E Number 12);
22. Regional Regulation of North Sumatra Province Number 6 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Trafficking of Women and Children (Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Number 19 of 2004, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of North Sumatra Province Series E Number 13);
23. Regulation of the Governor of North Sumatra Number 17 of 2012 concerning Task Force for Child-Friendly Regency/City (KLA) of North Sumatra Province;
24. Decree of the Governor of North Sumatra Number 188-44/502/KPTT/2013, dated August 16, 2013 concerning Determination of Child-Friendly Regencies/Cities of 2013;

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN CITY

and

MAYOR OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Padang Sidempuan.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Padang Sidempuan.
5. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD of Padang Sidempuan City is a Regional People's Representative Institution which is positioned as an element of Regional Government Administration.
6. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the Mayor and the Regional House of Representatives in the administration of governmental affairs that are the authority of the region.
7. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
8. Women Empowerment and Child Protection System is the entire process of organizing women empowerment and child protection carried out comprehensively, inclusively, and integratively starting from the stage of complaint/report handling services, health services, social rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal assistance, up to repatriation and social reintegration for women and children victims of crime and violence to their social environment.
9. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Gender is a concept that refers to the roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of and can be changed by the social and cultural conditions of society.
11. Victim is a person who suffers physical, mental, and/or economic loss caused by a criminal act.
12. Violence is any act that causes injury or death to another person or causes physical damage or damage to another person's property.
13. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
14. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
15. Victim is a woman and child who experiences violence and/or suffering as a result of violence and/or threat of violence.
16. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and his children, and mother and her children and among those who are their dependents.
18. Social Rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
19. Repatriation is an effort to return victims of violence from the regional area to their area of origin.
20. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
21. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the regional government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
22. Companion is a person or representative from an institution who has the expertise to accompany victims to conduct counseling, therapy and advocacy for strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
23. Safe house is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with established operational standards.
24. Child-Friendly City hereinafter abbreviated as KLA is a city that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of government, community and business commitments and resources that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
25. Child-friendly city task force hereinafter abbreviated as KLA task force is a coordinative institution at the city level that coordinates policies, programs and activities to realize KLA.
29. Business Entity is an institution that daily carries out activities seeking profit and gain, but has a commitment to the protection of women and children.
26. Business Entity is an institution that daily carries out activities seeking profit and gain, but has a commitment to the protection of women and children
27. Social welfare is a condition of fulfillment of material, spiritual, and social needs of citizens so that they can live properly and are able to develop themselves, so that they can carry out their social functions.
28. Gender mainstreaming hereinafter abbreviated as PUG is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
29. Integrated Service Center for Women and Child Protection hereinafter abbreviated as P2TP2A is an integrated service center in efforts to empower women in various fields of development, as well as protection of women and children from various types of discrimination and acts of violence, including trafficking in persons, established by the regional government or community-based, which includes: referral centers, business consultation centers, reproductive health consultation centers, legal consultation centers, integrated crisis centers (PKT), integrated service centers (PPT), trauma recovery centers (trauma centers), women's crisis handling centers (women crisis centers), training centers, science and technology information centers (PIPTEK), safe houses (shelters), transit houses, children's friend telephone (TESA) 129, or other forms.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES

Article 2

The implementation of Women and Child Protection is carried out based on the principles of:
a. respect and fulfillment of victims' rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims;
e. legal certainty;
f. legal protection;
g. empowerment.

CHAPTER III

PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES

Article 3

1. The purpose of establishing this Regional Regulation is to provide a legal certainty foundation in Women Empowerment and Child Protection activities in the Region.
2. The implementation of Women and Child Protection aims to:
a. improve the quality of life of women, children, and family quality;
b. increase the institutional capacity of women empowerment and child protection including the development of gender and child data systems;
c. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment;
d. provide guidance to the regional government in planning policies and strategies for the protection of women and children; and
e. prevent violations of the rights of women and children.

CHAPTER IV

SCOPE OF PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 4

The scope of implementation of protection of women and children, includes:
a. rights and obligations of women and children;
b. forms of violence;
c. prevention;
d. services for acts of violence;
e. implementation of protection of women and children;
f. data information system for women and children;
g. children's forum;
h. institutional implementation of protection of women and children;
i. Child-Friendly City;
j. community participation;
k. cooperation;
1. guidance and supervision;
m. funding;
n. criminal provisions; and
o. Closing provisions.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS

Part One

Rights of Women and Children

Article 5

1. Every woman has the right to:
a. obtain protection from acts of discrimination;
b. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
c. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence, and neglect;
d. obtain decent work according to her ability;  ­
e. obtain work leave while receiving wages/salary in accordance with laws and regulations;
f. obtain education and teaching in all types, levels and pathways of education;
g. obtain special protection in the implementation of work or profession against matters that may threaten safety and or health in connection with women's reproductive function; and
h. ownership and management of joint property in marriage in accordance with laws and regulations.
2. Every child has the right to:
a. live, grow, develop and participate reasonably in accordance with human dignity and dignity;
b. obtain protection from acts of discrimination;
c. obtain protection from economic exploitation and sexual exploitation;
d. obtain protection from physical, psychological, sexual violence, and neglect;
e. a name as self-identity and citizenship status;
f. obtain a birth certificate free of charge;
g. to embrace religion and worship according to the teachings of their religion with the guidance of parents/guardians;
h. not to be forced to change religion by foster parents, adoptive parents and by anyone;
i. to be recognized and know their parents, raised and cared for by their own parents;
j. obtain health services and social security in accordance with physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs;
k. obtain education and teaching in accordance with their interests and talents;
l. obtain care, education, training, self-improvement and ability to participate in community and state life for children with physical, mental disabilities and special needs;
m. express and be heard their opinions; and
n. rest and utilize leisure time for self-development.

Part Two

Obligations of Regional Government

Article 6

1. The obligations of the Regional Government in efforts to protect women include:
a. establish and implement policy programs and activities for the protection of women's rights;
b. cooperate with the community and/or Community Organizations in the implementation of women's protection in accordance with laws and regulations;
c. conduct rehabilitation and empowerment of women who are victims of violence;  ­
d. provide special protection to women victims of violence and human trafficking; and
e. take preventive action in order to prevent violations of women's rights.
2. The obligations of the Regional Government in efforts to protect children include:
a. be responsible for respecting the fulfillment of children's rights without distinguishing ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status, birth order, and physical and/or mental condition;
b. be obliged and responsible to implement and support national policies in the implementation of child protection in the region;
c. the policy as referred to in letter b can be realized through regional efforts to build a child-friendly regency/city;
d. be obliged and responsible to provide support for facilities, infrastructure, and availability of human resources in the implementation of child protection;
e. guarantee the protection, maintenance, and welfare of children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, or other persons who are legally responsible for the child;
f. supervise the implementation of child protection.
g. guarantee children to use their rights in expressing opinions in accordance with the age and level of intelligence of the child.

Part Three

Obligations of the Community

Article 7

1. The obligations of the community in efforts to protect women and children:
a. participate in prevention and provide support for the development of prevention programs for violations of the rights of women and children;
b. provide information and/or report violations of the rights of women and children to the authorities; and
c. supervise the law enforcement process against cases of violations of the rights of women and children.
2. The obligations of the community as referred to in paragraph (1) are based on laws and regulations and the values of local wisdom of the local community.
3. The obligations and responsibilities of the community towards child protection are carried out through community role activities in the implementation of child protection.
4. The obligations and responsibilities of the community towards child protection are carried out through community role activities in the implementation of child protection.
5. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in paragraph (4) are carried out by involving community organizations, academics, and child observers.  ­

Part Four

Obligations of the Family

Article 8

The family in efforts to protect women's rights is obliged to:
a. protect women from conflict and violence in the household that degrades the dignity of women;
b. provide equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the fields of education, social, economic, political and cultural; and
c. prevent violations of women's rights in the household.

Article 9

1. The family in efforts to protect children's rights is obliged to:
a. care for, maintain, educate, and protect children;
b. develop children according to their abilities, talents, and interests;
c. prevent marriage at child age;
d. provide character education and instill moral values in children.
2. In the event that parents do not exist, or their whereabouts are unknown, or due to a reason, cannot carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) may be transferred to the family.

CHAPTER VI

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 10

Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence; and/or
d. domestic neglect.

Article 11

Physical violence as referred to in Article 10 letter a results in:
a. the victim becoming ill or seriously injured;
b. the death of the victim; and
c. causing disease or obstruction to carrying out work, position or livelihood or daily activities.

Article 12

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.  ­

Article 13

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c is in the form of:
a. acts of sexual harassment;
b. coercion of sexual relations in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
c. coercion of sexual relations with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 14

Domestic neglect as referred to in Article 10 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after children as they should be, committed by parents, guardians, or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of the household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract, they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

CHAPTER VII

PREVENTION

Article 15

1. Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the PPPA Office.
2. Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. building networks and collaboration with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, as well as educational institutions, health institutions, hospitals, various NGOs concerned with women and children;
b. building community and family participation and awareness towards the prevention and protection of women and children from acts of violence;
c. establishing a violence prevention system that provides a complete and easily accessible information system;
d. conducting socialization regarding laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence;
e. providing critical education on the rights of women and children as victims of violence to the community; and
­f. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.

Article 16

1. Prevention of acts of violence against women and children as referred to in Article 16, is carried out by the PPPA Office and regional apparatus/related institutions in the fields of;
a. education;
b. employment;
c. health;
d. social affairs;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public order and security.
2. Prevention of acts of violence by the PPPA Office and regional apparatus/related institutions as referred to in paragraph (1), is carried out in an integrated and sustainable manner.

CHAPTERVIII

SERVICES FOR VICTIMS OF ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Article 17

Implementation of Victim Recovery Activities Includes:
a. health services;
b. victim assistance;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance; and
e. resocialization;

Article 18

1. Health Services are provided by health workers at health facilities owned by the government, regional government, and the community, including the private sector, by providing treatment services and health recovery for victims.
2. Victim assistance is provided by health workers, social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors by providing counseling, spiritual guidance and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims.
3. Provision of counseling is carried out by social workers, volunteer assistants, by listening empathetically and exploring problems for the psychological strengthening of victims.
4. Spiritual guidance is provided by spiritual counselors by providing explanations regarding their rights and obligations, as well as strengthening faith and piety in accordance with the religion and beliefs they adhere to.
5. Resocialization of victims is carried out by social institutions and social organizations so that victims can resume their social functions in society.

CHAPTER IX

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN­

Article 19

Those responsible for the implementation of protection of women and children are as follows:
a. Mayor of Padang Sidempuan as Protector of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
b. Heads of Regional Apparatus Organizations, Director of General Hospital, Chairperson of Women's Organizations Association as Supervisors of the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
c. Head of the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Padang Sidempuan City as Chairman of those Responsible for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
d. Head of the Social Service Office of Padang Sidempuan City as Vice Chairman of those Responsible for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
e. Chief of Padang Sidempuan Police as Vice Chairman of those Responsible for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
f. Head of the Women's Empowerment Division as Coordinator of those Responsible for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
g. Head of the Child Protection Division as Secretary of those Responsible for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
h. Head of the Section for Handling and Protection of Victims of Violence and Head of the Child Protection Section as Service Section for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
i. Advocates/Peradi as Legal Assistance Section for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
j. Head of the Section for Improving the Quality of Life of Women and Head of the Section for Child Growth and Development as Network Development Section for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;
k. Head of the Section for Handling Social Problems of Children with Special Needs and Head of the Section for Protection of Women's Rights as Reporting Section for the Implementation of Protection of Women and Children;

CHAPTERX

INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN DATA

Article 20

1. Information system is a system for collecting, preparing, storing, processing, analyzing and/or disseminating information.
2. Gender and Child Data System is the institutionalization of the implementation of gender and child data consisting of components-components-components of regulations, institutions, and mechanisms in ministries/agencies and regions in the context of planning, implementation, evaluation, and reporting of results of policies/programs/activities of development that is gender responsive and child-friendly.
3. Gender Data is data regarding relational relationships in status, roles and conditions between men and women.
4. Disaggregated Data is data disaggregated by sex, age, status and condition of women in all areas of development including health, education, economy and employment, politics and decision-making, law and socio-culture and violence.
5. Types of gender and child data:
a. gender data:
1\. gender data in the economic field including gender issues in labor, cooperatives, small and medium enterprises, industry and trade, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and marine affairs, transportation, science and technology and infrastructure;
2\. gender data in the political, social and legal fields;
3\. data on protection of women's rights; and
4\. data on family welfare and resilience development.
b. child data:
1\. civil rights and freedoms;
2\. family environment and alternative care;
3\. basic health and welfare;
4\. education, leisure time utilization and cultural activities;and
5\. special protection.
6. Gender analysis is the process of analyzing disaggregated data by sex conducted systematically with the intention of identifying gender issues and factors that can influence development, particularly related to gender equality issues that are the goals of development.

Article 21

1. The Guidelines for the Implementation of the Gender and Child Data System are intended as a reference for ministries/agencies and regions in providing and utilizing disaggregated data for planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of gender-responsive and child-friendly development policies/programs/activities.
2. Improving the availability and utilization of gender and child data and information in the formulation, planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programs/activities.

Article 22

1. The Guidelines for the Implementation of the Gender and Child Data System aim to:
a. strengthen and encourage institutional arrangements (regulations, institutions, mechanisms) for data systems disaggregated by sex and age in ministries/agencies and regions, which are reliable, can be presented quickly, accurately, comprehensively, and up-to-date;
b. establish or strengthen coordination mechanisms among ministries/agencies and regions in the implementation of disaggregated data collection;
c. improve the availability and utilization of disaggregated data for planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting of results of gender-responsive and child-friendly development policies/programs/activities in ministries/agencies and regions.
2. The Implementation of the Electronic-Based Gender and Child Data System of Padang Sidempuan City includes the transmission, verification, input and publication of data (3) Utilization of the Gender and Child Data System of Padang Sidempuan City consists of:
a. regional apparatus within the Government of Padang Sidempuan City;
b. agencies domiciled in Padang Sidempuan City; and
c. the general public/public.

Article 23

1. Gender Mainstreaming or abbreviated as PUG is a strategy carried out rationally and systematically to achieve and realize gender equality and gender justice in a number of aspects of human life (household, community and State), through policies and programs that take into account the experiences and aspirations, needs and problems of women and men in the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all policies in various aspects of life and development.
2. In an effort to accelerate gender mainstreaming institutionalization in all SKPD, a PUG Working Group is formed.
3. Members of the PUG Working Group are all heads/leaders of SKPD. (4) The Mayor appoints the head of Bapeda as chairman of the PUG Working Group and the head of the SKPD responsible for women's empowerment as Secretary of the PUG Working Group.
5. The establishment of the PUG Working Group is determined by Mayor's Decree.

Article 24

The PUG Working Group as referred to in article 23 has the following tasks:
a. promoting and facilitating PUG to each SKPD;
b. conducting socialization and advocacy of PUG to Sub-district Heads, Village Heads and Sub-district Heads;
c. preparing an annual work program;
d. encouraging the realization of gender-responsive planning and budgeting;
e. preparing the PUG Working Group work plan annually;
f. being accountable to the Mayor through the Deputy Mayor;
g. formulating policy recommendations to the Mayor;
h. preparing a Gender Profile;
i. monitoring the implementation of PUG in each agency;
j. establishing a technical team to conduct analysis of the regional budget;
k. preparing the Regional Action Plan (RANDA) for PUG and;
l. encouraging the implementation of selection and appointment of Focal Points in each SKPD.

Article 25

1. The PUG Focal Point in each SKPD consists of officials and/or staff responsible for planning and/or programs.

2021, No. 3 -87-

2. The PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), has the following tasks:a. promoting gender mainstreaming in the work unit;
b. facilitating the preparation of Gender-responsive SKPD work plans and budgeting;
c. conducting training, socialization, advocacy of gender mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the SKPD;
d. encouraging the implementation of gender analysis on policies, programs, and activities in the work unit; and
e. facilitating the preparation of gender data in each SKPD;
3. The PUG Focal Point as referred to in paragraph (1), is selected and appointed by the head/leader of the SKPD.

Article 26

1. Regional Apparatus/Agencies submit reports on the women and children data information system to the Mayor through the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of Padang Sidempuan City.
2. Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out annually and/or at any time if necessary.

Article 27

1. Every person, community organization, university and business entity has the right to utilize the women and children data information system of Padang Sidempuan City by citing the data.
2. Every person, community organization, university and business entity may partner as a provider or user of gender and child data and information to the organizer of the women and children data information system of Padang Sidempuan City for subsequent verification, input and publication.

CHAPTER XI

CHILDREN'S FORUM

Article 28

1. The Regional Government is obliged to establish a children's forum at the Padang Sidempuan City level as participation through the children's forum.
2. The children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) represents children, both representation of children's geographic domicile, components of children's socio-cultural groups and children's educational backgrounds and accommodates the interests of children with special needs.
3. In every formulation of policies related to children, the Regional Government must consider and accommodate the opinions of children conveyed through the children's forum.
4. The establishment of the children's forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is determined by Mayor's Decree.
5. Sources of funding for the implementation of children's forum activities may come from:
a. contributions from members of the children's forum; -
b. donations from the community/private parties that are legal and non-binding in nature;
c. assistance from the City Government; and/ord. other sources of funding in accordance with statutory regulations.

Article 29

1. Establishment of the Padang Sidempuan City Children's Forum, participants in the meeting to establish the district/city children's forum are delegates or representatives of the sub-district children's forum of at least one boy and one girl, the number of representatives is adjusted to the needs and the number of sub-districts in the Padang Sidempuan City area.
2. Establishment of the Sub-district Children's Forum, participants in the meeting to establish the Sub-district Children's Forum are delegates or representatives of the village/sub-district children's forum of at least one boy and one girl. The number of representatives is adjusted to the needs and the number of villages/sub-districts in the sub-district area.
3. Establishment of the Village/Sub-district Children's Forum, children are invited to represent their respective activity groups, at least one boy and one girl from each children's activity group, subsequently the child representatives from the activity groups become the main participants in the establishment of the Village/Sub-district Children's Forum.

CHAPTER XII

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Article 30

In the context of implementing the Protection of Women and Children, the following are established:
a. Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment and Children (P2TP2A);
b. Family Welfare Consultation Institution; and
c. Other institutions in accordance with needs and/or provisions of statutory regulations.

This excerpt sits under: CHAPTER IX > WOMEN AND CHILDREN-

Article 31

1. In order to handle family psychosocial problems, restore family psychosocial conditions and strengthen family resilience, a Family Welfare Consultation Institution shall be established in the region.
2. With regard to the Family Welfare Consultation Institution, the Mayor has the following authorities:
a. implementing policies for the operation of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
b. implementing norms, standards, procedures, and criteria regarding the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
c. implementing service standards of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
d. implementing and managing institutional data of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;  ­
e. implementing capacity strengthening of human resources and institutions of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
f. providing facilitation of facilities and infrastructure for services of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution;
g. implementing family welfare cooperation;
h. implementing coordination with relevant agencies, the business sector and the community; and/or
i. implementing monitoring and evaluation.

Article 32

1. Services of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution shall be organized by prioritizing strategies to build networks and partnerships.
2.  Types of services of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution consist of:
a. consultation;
b. counseling;
c. information;
d. advocacy;
e. referral; and
f. outreach
3. Networks and partnerships as referred to in paragraph (1) consist of:
a. potential and sources of social welfare;
b. Hospitals;
c. Indonesian National Police;
d. Legal Aid Bureaus/Institutions/Posts;
e. Trauma Center Shelters;
f. Integrated Service Centers for Women and Children Empowerment;
g. other public services that can serve as networks and partnerships of the Family Welfare Consultation Institution.
4. Networks and partnerships as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be conducted through:
a. cooperation;
b. coordination; and/or;
c. collaboration;
5. Further provisions regarding the Family Welfare Consultation Institution shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 33

1. The Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) is under the coordination of regional apparatus work units (SKPD) or other units that handle women's empowerment and child protection.
2. The Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) as referred to in paragraph (1) does not have authority in the formulation of policies related to women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 34

The Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment and Protection (P2TP2A) functions as:
a. an information center for women and children;  ­
b. a service center for women and victims of violence; and
c. an empowerment center for women and children.

Article 35

1. The Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment and Protection (P2TP2A) at City Level shall be established based on a Mayor Decree and a Sub-District Head Decree for the sub-district level.
2. Membership of the Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment and Protection (P2TP2A) may come from elements of regional apparatus, professional organizations, academics, community leaders and other elements as needed.
3. Further provisions regarding P2TP2A shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 36

The Family Learning Center (PUSPAGA) is a form of preventive service under the coordination of the Office of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection as a manifestation of state concern in improving family life and family resilience through education or parenting programs, parenting skills, child protection skills, ability to increase child participation in the family as well as counseling program services for children and families.

CHAPTER XIII

CHILD-FRIENDLY CITY

Part One

Principles and Objectives

Article 37

To ensure the fulfillment of children's rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination, real integrated efforts are needed among the Regional Government, community and business sector through the development of a Child-Friendly City.

Article 38

The development of a Child-Friendly City as referred to in Article 37 shall be implemented based on the following principles:
a. good governance, namely transparency, accountability, participation, information disclosure, and rule of law;
b. non-discrimination, namely not differentiating ethnicity, race, religion, gender, language, political views, national origin, economic status, physical or psychological condition of the child, or other factors;
c. the best interests of the child, namely making what is best for the child the primary consideration in every policy, program, and activity;
d. the right to life, survival, and development of the child, namely guaranteeing the right to life, survival and development of the child to the maximum extent possible; and
­e. respect for the views of the child, namely recognizing and ensuring that every child who has the ability to express their opinion is given the opportunity to express their views freely on all matters affecting them.

Article 39

The development of a Child-Friendly City is directed at the fulfillment of children's rights which include:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time utilization, and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.

Article 40

1. In order to realize a Child-Friendly City, stages of Child-Friendly City development shall be prepared which include:
a. preparation;
b. planning;
c. implementation;
d. monitoring;
e. evaluation; and
f. reporting.
2. In every stage of Child-Friendly City development, the views of children obtained through child consultation must be considered.

Article 41

1. To make the development of a Child-Friendly City effective, a Child-Friendly City Task Force shall be established as determined by Mayor Decree.
2. Membership of the Child-Friendly City Task Force may come from the Regional Government, child representatives, the business sector, religious leaders, community leaders and other parties as needed.

Article 42

1. The main tasks of the Child-Friendly City Task Force are as follows:
a. coordinating various efforts for Child-Friendly City development;
b. preparing a Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development;
c. conducting socialization, advocacy and communication for Child-Friendly City development;
d. monitoring the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development;
e. conducting evaluation at the end of each year on the implementation of policies, programs and activities in the Regional Action Plan for Child-Friendly City Development; and
f. submitting reports to the Mayor.
2. Further provisions regarding the Child-Friendly City Task Force shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.  ­

CHAPTER XIV

FUNDING

Article 43

1. The Regional Government is obligated to provide a budget for the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs and activities.
2. Financing for the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection activities as referred to in paragraph (1) is sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget (APBD); and
b. other legal and non-binding sources based on the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER XV

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 44

1. The community may participate in the implementation of women's empowerment activities.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by individuals, community groups and community organizations.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. cooperation;
b. active role in policy formulation; and
c. complaints/reports.
4. The procedures for community participation as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER XVI

COOPERATION

Article 45

1. Regional cooperation is a joint effort between regions with other regions, between regions with third parties, and/or between regions and institutions or regional governments abroad based on a balance of efficiency and effectiveness of public services and mutual benefit.
2. Regional cooperation with third parties, hereinafter abbreviated as KSDPK, is a joint effort carried out by regions with third parties in the context of implementing governmental affairs that are regional authorities to improve community welfare and accelerate the fulfillment of public services.
3. In order to achieve the objectives of protecting the rights of women and children from acts of violence, the regional government cooperates with:
a. other provinces;
b. regencies/cities; and
c. non-governmental institutions.
4. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (3) includes:
a. exchange of data and information;
b. rehabilitation of victims of violence;
c. repatriation and social reintegration; and
d. provision of evidence and witnesses to be followed up in accordance with applicable law.

Article 46

The regional government provides services for victims in the form of:
a. facilitating the establishment of UPT P2TP2A in each regency/city;
b. facilitating facilities and infrastructure for UPT P3TP2A;
c. facilitating the Coordination Forum for the Protection of Victims of Violence as a network for handling victims.

CHAPTER XVII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 47

1. The Regional Government is obliged to conduct guidance and supervision of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. formulation of policies and regulations to be used as guidelines and standards in the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection;
b. technical guidance and training, including:
1\. providing training for government officials and law enforcement officers on the prevention and handling of violence;
2\. providing training for religious leaders, community leaders, traditional leaders, educators, journalists and media managers in order to prevent violence against women and children;
3\. providing training to health workers who provide health services to women and children victims of violence at community health centers, integrated service units and general hospitals;
4\. providing training to social rehabilitation officers and spiritual guidance officers in order to protect women and children victims of violence;
5\. providing training to PUG working groups and focal points of each Regional Apparatus for the preparation of activity programs based on gender responsive planning and budgeting.
c. provision of facilities and infrastructure in implementing women's empowerment and child protection.
d. facilitation of the formation of nagari that care for women and children;
e. provision of information through print and electronic media related to the protection of women and children.
3. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. monitoring carried out in the form of submission of reports on the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection programs by the Head of Regional Apparatus to the Mayor periodically once every 3 (three) months; and
b. evaluation of the implementation of women's empowerment and child protection periodically once every 3 (three) months carried out by the relevant Regional Apparatus.
4. The results of supervision as referred to in paragraph (3) constitute evaluation material for the policy of women's empowerment and child protection programs.
5. Further provisions regarding guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER XVIII

CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 48

Any person who commits a criminal act/violence as referred to in Article 11, Article 12, Article 13, and Article 14 shall be threatened with criminal punishment in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XIX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 49

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Padang Sidempuan City.

Enacted in Padang Sidempuan on March 16, 2021

MAYOR OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN,

Signed.

IRSAN EFEND NASUTION

Promulgated in Padang Sidempuan on March 17, 2021

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF

PADANG SIDEMPUAN CITY,

Signed.

LETNAN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN CITY YEAR 2001 NUMBER 3

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF PADANG SIDEMPUAN CITY, NORTH SUMATRA PROVINCE: (3-40/2021) Copy in accordance with the original.

LEGAL SECTION,

MHD. ERWIN,S.H.

NIP. 19720525 200312 1 006
