PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

REGENT OF BULELENG

PROVINCE OF BALI

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY

NUMBER 5 OF 2019

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

REGIONAL GOVERNMENT OF BULELENG REGENCY

YEAR 2019

Whereas:

a. that every citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence that degrade human dignity;
b. that women and children are among vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence, therefore they need to receive optimal protection;
c. that based on the provisions of Article 12 paragraph (2) letter b of Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government, women's empowerment and child protection constitute mandatory government affairs for regional governments;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Protection of Women and Children From Acts of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 69 of 1958 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions within the Level I Regional Areas of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1655);
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as has been amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587); as has been amended several times, most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 17 of 2016 concerning the Stipulation of Government Regulation in Lieu of Law Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
12. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Child Protection;
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 of 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
19. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
20. Regional Regulation of Bali Province Number 6 of 2014 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Bali Province Year 2014 Number 6, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of Bali Province Number 6 Year 2014);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BULELENG REGENCY

and

REGENT OF BULELENG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Buleleng Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Buleleng Regency. 3. Regent is the Regent of Buleleng.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Buleleng Regency.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs which are the authority of the Region.
6. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.
7. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and organizations and/or community organizations.
8. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood relatives in a straight line upward or downward up to the third degree.
9. Every person is an individual or corporation.
10. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
11. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
12. Violence against children is any action that results in or may result in suffering of children physically, sexually, economically, socially and psychologically.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, court, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
15. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect Children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Special Protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
17. Cooperation is an activity or effort carried out by several people to achieve common goals.
18. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
19. Companion is a social worker who has professional competence in their field.
20. Victim recovery is all efforts to strengthen victims of violence, both physically and psychologically.
21. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an Integrated Service Unit established by the Regional Government to carry out the functions and main tasks of integrated services for Women and Children Victims of Violence, including complaint services, Health Rehabilitation, Social Rehabilitation, Repatriation, Social Reintegration, and Legal Aid.
22. Minimum Service Standards hereinafter abbreviated as SPM is a performance benchmark for integrated service units in providing services for handling reports/complaints, health services, Social Rehabilitation, law enforcement and legal aid, as well as Repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Children Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence is implemented based on the principles of:

a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims of acts of violence;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims of acts of violence; and e. legal certainty.

Article 3

Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence aims to:

a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children;
b. protect Women and provide services to women and children victims of acts of violence; and
c. empower women and children victims of acts of violence.

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 4

Every Woman and Child Victim of Violence has the right:

a. to be respected for their dignity as human beings;
b. to receive Protection from family, community, Regional Government and/or other parties either temporarily or based on a court Protection order;
c. to physical, psychological and sexual health recovery according to the suffering experienced by victims of violence;
d. to special handling related to the confidentiality of Victims;
e. to assistance by social workers and legal aid at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations;
f. to spiritual guidance services; and
g. to resolution through mediation, if it is the best solution for the interests of the victim; and
h. to determine their own decisions.

CHAPTER IV

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

Part One

General

Article 5

The Regional Government is responsible for efforts to protect women and children from acts of violence in the form of:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence;
d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect;
g. coercion or deprivation of liberty; and
h. threats of certain actions.

Article 6

Every person who hears, sees, or knows of the occurrence of violence as referred to in Article 5 is obliged to make efforts to:
a. prevent the continuation of criminal acts;
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence;
c. provide emergency assistance; and /or d. assist in the process of submitting an application for protection order.

Article 7

Protection of child victims of acts of violence is carried out by:
a. formulating policies for prevention, vulnerable risk reduction, handling of victims and child data and information systems;
b. organizing maintenance, care, and social rehabilitation of neglected children, both within and outside institutions;
c. providing shelter, maintenance and care for neglected children; and
d. organizing special protection for children.

Part Two

Prevention of Acts of Violence

Article 8

1. The Regional Government shall prevent acts of violence against women and children by:
a. socializing laws and regulations;
b. providing counseling/guidance;
c. providing education on the dangers of domestic violence;
d. conducting seminars/workshops or the like;
e. forming work networks in efforts to prevent violence;
f. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
g. establishing a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence; and
h. increasing public awareness in behaving in accordance with religious norms.
2. In addition to carrying out prevention as referred to in paragraph (1), prevention of acts of violence against children shall also be carried out by increasing family capacity in child protection and parenting skills.
3. In addition to the Regional Government, prevention as referred to in paragraph (1) is obliged to be implemented by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions;
d. health institutions;
e. social community institutions;
f. Desa pakraman; and
g. business world and other institutions.

Article 9

1. The Regional Government is obliged to prepare programs or activities for Prevention as referred to in Article 8 paragraph (1) in the Regional Work Plan and Regional Strategic Plan;
2. Programs or activities as referred to in paragraph (1) shall support the realization of the Regional Long-Term Development Plan and Regional Medium-Term Development Plan.

Article 10

1. Regional Apparatus that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment shall implement prevention as referred to in Article 8;
2. Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in carrying out prevention may cooperate with vertical agencies.

Part Three

Integrated Services for Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 11

1. The Regional Government shall implement integrated services for victims of acts of violence through activities:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance;
e. social rehabilitation services;
f. legal aid and assistance services; and
g. repatriation and reintegration.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) must be supported by facilities in the form of:
a. special service rooms within the police force;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and/or d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.
3. Services as referred to in paragraph (1), including the preparation of visum et repertum, shall be carried out free of charge.
4. The provision of services to victims of acts of violence shall be carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government together with P2TP2A with other social institutions;
5. P2TP2A and other social institutions as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from other service units in a networked manner;
6. Integrated services for victims of acts of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) shall be implemented in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures;
7. Provisions regarding Standard Operating Procedures as referred to in paragraph (6) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part Four

Empowerment of Victims of Acts of Violence

Article 12

1. Empowerment of victims of acts of violence against women shall be carried out by the Regional Government in the form of:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.
2. Empowerment of victims of acts of violence against children shall be carried out by the Regional Government in the form of providing education, guidance, and counseling.
3. Empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus in accordance with their duties and functions.

Part Five

Special Protection for Children

Article 13

1. Special protection for children shall be provided to:
a. Children in emergency situations;
b. Children in conflict with the law;
c. Children from minority and isolated groups;
d. Children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. Children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. Children who are victims of pornography;
g. Children with HIV/AIDS;
h. Children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
i. Children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
j. Children victims of sexual crimes;
k. Children victims of terrorism networks;
l. Children with disabilities;
m. Children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
n. Children with deviant social behavior; and
o. Children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.
2. The Regional Government shall implement special protection for children as referred to in paragraph (1) in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER V

COOPERATION AND COORDINATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

Part One

General

Article 14

1. The Regional Government shall conduct cooperation and coordination in order to ensure the implementation of protection for women and children from acts of violence;
2. Cooperation and coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented by Regional Apparatus that administer governmental affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two

Institutional Framework for the Protection of Women and Children

Article 15

1. The Regional Government in the context of services for victims of acts of violence against women and children, shall establish P2TP2A;
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall function as:
a. an information center for women and children;
b. a service center for women and children victims of violence; and
c. an empowerment center for women and children.
3. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) is obliged to:
a. provide services as quickly as possible and free of charge to witnesses and/or victims;
b. provide protection and fulfillment of the rights of witnesses and/or victims to health rehabilitation, social rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration and legal aid;
c. cooperate with certain institutions in providing translators and volunteer assistants required for witnesses and/or victims;
d. network with government or private hospitals for treatment and health recovery of victims and cooperate with witness and victim protection institutions, social protection houses or government-owned trauma centers, community or other institutions for victim health recovery.  e. provide convenience, comfort, and safety for witnesses and/or victims;
f. maintain confidentiality of witnesses and/or victims;
g. provide fulfillment of legal aid for witnesses and/or victims; and
h. in the event that integrated service provision is carried out in a networked manner, be responsible for the entire referral process of services required by victims.
4. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall have the duties to:
a. provide integrated services to victims of violence; and
b. provide protection to victims of acts of violence, reporters and witnesses.
5. The provision of integrated services as referred to in paragraph (4) letter a shall be implemented in accordance with Standard Operating Procedures established by the Regional Government.
6. The appointment of P2TP2A management as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.

Part Three

Cooperation

Article 16

1. In certain circumstances the Regional Government may cooperate with:
a. other regional governments;
b. police;
c. advocates;
d. health workers;
e. social workers;
f. companion volunteers;
g. spiritual counselors;
h. other law enforcers, to assist victims in the court hearing process;
i. national commission on violence against women;
j. Indonesian child protection commission or child protection institutions; and/or
k. certain parties desired for the benefit of victims.
2. Cooperation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization;
b. provision of legal aid;
c. health services;
d. victim assistance;
e. counseling;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. spiritual guidance; and/or
h. repatriation and social reintegration.

Part Four

Coordination

Article 17

1. The Regent coordinates the protection of women and children from acts of violence with:
a. the government;
b. provincial government;
c. vertical agencies;
d. educational institutions; and e. community institutions.
2. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. religious affairs;
b. health affairs;
c. education affairs;
d. social affairs;
e. legal affairs; and
f. manpower affairs.

CHAPTER VI

COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS PARTICIPATION

Article 18

1. Every person may participate in providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may be carried out by:
a. reporting acts of violence against women and/or children;
b. providing first aid to victims of Acts of Violence;
c. independently socializing the rights of women and children; and/or.
d. establishing independent community social institutions.

Article 19

In the event that community social institutions implement protection of women and children from acts of violence, they are obligated to coordinate with P2TP2A.

Article 20

1. The Regional Government encourages the business sector to participate in the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. Participation as referred to in paragraph (1) may take the form of:
a. socialization to employees within the company environment regarding the dangers of acts of violence against women and children; and
b. assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.

CHAPTER VII

MINIMUM SERVICE STANDARDS

Article 21

Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence, include services for:
a. handling complaints/reports of Victims of Violence against Women and Children;
b. health services for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
c. Social rehabilitation for Women and Child Victims of Violence;
d. law enforcement and legal aid for Women and Child Victims of Violence; and
e. repatriation and social reintegration for Women and Child Victims of Violence.

Article 22

Minimum Service Standards as referred to in Article 21 have performance indicators including:
a. coverage of Women and Child Victims of Violence who receive complaint handling by trained officers in integrated service units;
b. coverage of Women and Child Victims of Violence who receive health services by trained health workers at Community Health Centers and Hospitals;
c. coverage of Social Rehabilitation services provided by trained Social Rehabilitation officers for Women and Child Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
d. coverage of spiritual guidance services provided by trained spiritual guidance officers for Women and Child Victims of Violence in integrated service units;
e. coverage of law enforcement from the investigation level to court decisions on cases of Violence against Women and Children;
f. coverage of Women and Child Victims of Violence who receive legal aid services;
g. coverage of Repatriation services for Women and Child Victims of Violence; and
h. coverage of social reintegration services for Women and Child Victims of Violence.

CHAPTER VIII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 23

1. The Regional Government guides and supervises P2TP2A and other social institutions.
2. Guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by regional apparatus that administer women and child empowerment affairs.
3. The results of the implementation of guidance and supervision as referred to in paragraph (2) are reported to the Regent.

CHAPTER IX

INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEM

Article 24

1. The Regional Government prepares and compiles an information and reporting system for the protection of women and children from acts of violence.
2. The Information and reporting system as referred to in paragraph (1) is in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 25

1. The Regent is responsible for making a report on the implementation of Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Child Victims of Violence in the Region to the Governor with a copy submitted to the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection and the Minister of Home Affairs.
2. Reporting of implementation as referred to in paragraph (1) is conducted annually.

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 26

Financing for activities for the Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence, may be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other lawful and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 27

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Buleleng Regency.

Enacted in Singaraja
on the date of August 20, 2019

REGENT OF BULELENG,

PUTU AGUS SURADNYANA

Promulgated in Singaraja
on the date of August 20, 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BULELENG REGENCY,

DEWA KETUT PUSPAKA

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULELENG REGENCY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 5.

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY, BALI PROVINCE: (5, 33/2019 )

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BULELENG REGENCY

NUMBER 5 OF 2019 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL ELUCIDATION.

The purpose of the establishment of the State is stated in the fourth paragraph of the Preamble to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which states that "The State protects the entire Indonesian nation and all Indonesian territory and to promote general welfare, educate the life of the nation and participate in implementing world order based on independence, eternal peace and social justice". The meaning of protecting here includes protecting every citizen including from all forms of violence. In addition, Article 28 G paragraph 2 of the 1945 Constitution states that every person has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity. Thus the right to receive protection from acts of violence is guaranteed by the constitution.

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights. Women and children who are victims of violence must have their dignity and honor protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Buleleng Regency, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children who are victims of violence in the form of a Regional Regulation.

Protection of women and children who are victims of violence in the Region requires institutional and regulatory support that can guarantee its implementation. The Regional Regulation regulates protection efforts for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services, and empowerment of women and children who are victims of violence in Buleleng Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE ELUCIDATION

Article 1

Sufficiently clear

Article 2

Sufficiently clear

Article 3

Sufficiently clear

Article 4

Sufficiently clear

Article 5

Letter a
What is meant by "physical violence" is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, loss of consciousness and or causes death

Letter b
What is meant by "sexual violence" is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Letter c
What is meant by "economic violence" is an act that restricts a person from working inside or outside the home to earn money and goods, including allowing a working person to be exploited, while someone does not fulfill the economic needs of the family.

Letter d
What is meant by "social violence" is an act by a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life to a person or may cause physical damage or damage to another person's property

Letter e
What is meant by "psychological violence" is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Letter f
What is meant by "Domestic Neglect" is:
a. acts that result in the failure to fulfill the needs of children properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of children as they should be;
c. acts that neglect a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person;
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Letter h
What is meant by "threat of certain acts" is any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, images, symbols, or body movements, whether with or without using means that create fear or restrict a person's fundamental freedom.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear

Article 7

Sufficiently clear

Article 8

Sufficiently clear

Article 9

Sufficiently clear

Article 10

Sufficiently clear

Article 11

Paragraph (1)
Letter a
What is meant by "complaint services" is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children submitted by victims, families or the community.

Letter b
What is meant by "health services" is efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.

Letter c
What is meant by "counseling" is the process of providing objective and complete information, carried out systematically with interpersonal communication guidance, guidance techniques and mastery of clinical knowledge aimed at helping a person recognize their current condition, the problems being faced, and determine solutions or efforts to overcome these problems.

Letter d
What is meant by "spiritual guidance" is a form of activity in which there is a process of spiritual guidance and development for humans so as to provide peace, tranquility and coolness of heart to humans by always providing encouragement and motivation to remain patient, trust in God and continue to carry out their obligations.

Letter e
What is meant by "social rehabilitation services" is services aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.

Letter f
What is meant by "legal aid and assistance services" is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children in a gender-sensitive manner.

Letter g
What is meant by "repatriation and reintegration" is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.

Paragraph (2)
Letter a
Sufficiently clear

Letter b
Sufficiently clear

Letter c
What is meant by "Service Center and Safe House" is what is known as a trauma center, while a safe house is known as a shelter.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (3)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (4)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (5)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (6)
Sufficiently clear

Paragraph (7)
Sufficiently clear

Article 12

Sufficiently clear

Article 13

Paragraph (1)
Letter 0
What is meant by "stigmatization" is the giving of a "mark" or stigma to a person, or group of people with a particular meaning in a particular situation and context openly or covertly to influence the thinking or evaluative power of a person or group of people toward something.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear

Article 15

Sufficiently clear

Article 16

Sufficiently clear

Article 17

Sufficiently clear

Article 18

Sufficiently clear

Article 19

Sufficiently clear

Article 20

Sufficiently clear

Article 21

Sufficiently clear

Article 22

Sufficiently clear

Article 23

Sufficiently clear

Article 24

Sufficiently clear

Article 25

Sufficiently clear

Article 26

Sufficiently clear

Article 27

Sufficiently clear

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BULELENG REGENCY NUMBER 4.
