IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

JAMBI PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY

NUMBER 2 OF 2023

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE REGENT OF SAROLANGUN,

Considering:

a. that women and children are assets of the nation who play a role in the process of continuation and creation of quality generations and need to receive guarantees for the fulfillment of their rights and protection from acts of violence and discrimination in order to build society, nation and state;
b. that with the increasing violence against women and children in Sarolangun Regency, which is an act that degrades human dignity and honor, the role of the Sarolangun Regency government is required so that women and children are protected from violations of rights guaranteed by the Constitution;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Implementation of Women and Children Empowerment and Protection;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 54 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Sarolangun Regency, Tebo Regency, Muaro Jambi Regency and Tanjung Jabung Timur Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 182, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3903); as amended by Law Number 14 of 2000 concerning Amendment to Law Number 54 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Sarolangun Regency, Tebo Regency, Muaro Jambi Regency and Tanjung Jambung Timur Regency (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2000 Number 81, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3969);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235), as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 297, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
6. Law Number 30 of 2014 concerning Government Administration (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 292, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5601);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 13 of 2022 Concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2022 Number 143, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6801);
9. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
10. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette Number 5679);
11. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
12. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4818);
13. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 1 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for Improving the Quality of Life of Women;
14. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection;
15. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 2036) as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 120 of 2018 concerning Amendment to Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Formulation of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2018 Number 157);
16. Regional Regulation of Sarolangun Regency Number 5 of 2016 Concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Sarolangun Regency of 2016 Number 5) as amended several times most recently by Regional Regulation of Sarolangun Regency Number 1 of 2021 concerning the Third Amendment to Regional Regulation of Sarolangun Regency Number 5 of 2016 concerning the Establishment and Composition of Regional Apparatus (Regional Gazette of Sarolangun Regency of 2021 Number 1);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY

and

THE REGENT OF SAROLANGUN

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is Sarolangun Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of governmental affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the principles of autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the widest possible autonomy within the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regent as an element of the Regional Government administrator who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regent is the Regent of Sarolangun.
5. Regional House of Representatives, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD, is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of the Regional Government administrator.
6. Women's Empowerment is every effort to improve physical, mental, spiritual, social capacity, knowledge, and skills so that women are ready to be utilized according to their respective abilities.
7. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in the fulfillment of their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving gender equality.
8. Discrimination Against Women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status, on the basis of equality between men and women. 9. Gender is a concept that refers to the differentiation of roles and responsibilities of men and women that occur as a result of social and cultural conditions of society.
10. Gender Equality is the equality of conditions for men and women to obtain opportunities and their rights as human beings so that they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities, and equality in enjoying the results of development.
11. Gender mainstreaming is a strategy built to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of national development program policies.
12. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child who is still in the womb.
13. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or adoptive mother.
14. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises parental authority as a parent over a child.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
16. Community is individuals, families, communities, religious leaders, community leaders, traditional leaders, business world and corporations, community organizations, social organizations, women's and gender study centers, mass media or similar others.
17. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow and develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence, exploitation, discrimination, and neglect.
18. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse (drugs), child victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, child victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and child victims of maltreatment and neglect.
19. Safe house is a shelter or temporary protection house for victims during the assistance process to ensure the safety and comfort of victims from threats and dangers of perpetrators and is only known to interested parties for reasons of victim safety and security.
20. Child-friendly regency is a regency that has a child rights-based development system through the integration of commitments and resources of government, community, business world, and media that are planned comprehensively and sustainably in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights and special protection for children.

Article 2

The Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children is organized based on the principles of:
a. respect for human rights;
b. gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. justice and legal certainty;
e. benefit;
f. participatory;
g. best interests of the child;
h. accountability; and
i. gender responsive.

Article 3

The regulation regarding the Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of every woman and child to survival, growth and development;
b. improve the quality of life of women, children and family quality;
c. increase the institutional capacity of women's empowerment and child protection in the region, including the development of gender and child data systems; and
d. provide protection of women's rights and fulfillment of children's rights including special protection for children from various forms of violence and other discriminatory treatment.

Article 4

The scope of regulation of the Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children includes:
a. fulfillment of women's rights;
b. women's empowerment;
c. women's protection;
d. child protection;
e. fulfillment of children's rights;
f. safe house;
g. child-friendly regency;
h. guidance and supervision;
i. community participation;
j. awards; and
k. financing.

CHAPTER II

WOMEN'S PROTECTION

Part One

Fulfillment of Women's Rights

Article 5

1. Every woman has the right to:
a. live and maintain life and improve her standard of living;
b. fulfill her basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue offspring;
c. develop her personality, to obtain education, and improve her quality of life to become a faithful, pious, responsible, noble, happy, and prosperous human being in accordance with human rights;
d. obtain justice, security, and freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
e. be involved in every stage of the development process;
f. be free from slavery or enslavement and threats;
g. obtain protection of her person, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
h. obtain welfare and a decent life;
i. participate in politics and obtain equal opportunities in government;
j. perform legal acts; and
k. freely choose a partner in her marriage.
2. In addition to the rights as referred to in paragraph (1), specifically for women with disabilities, they have the right to obtain facilities and special treatment in public services.

Article 6

1. Every wife during the marriage bond has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband over all matters relating to their married life, relationship with their children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
2. After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities with her former husband over all matters relating to children with due regard to the best interests of the child.
3. After the dissolution of marriage, a woman has the same rights as her former husband over all matters relating to joint property without prejudice to the rights of children, in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 7

1. Regional Governments have the obligation and responsibility for the empowerment and protection of women.
2. The efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. determination of policies, programs, and activities for improving the quality of life of women related to the fields of development, education, health, economy, law, Human Rights and politics, environment and socio-culture;
b. provision of services to women especially to victims of violence, female workers, elderly women, and women with disabilities, victims of conflict and victims affected by disasters; and
c. implementation of gender mainstreaming in government institutions, women's study centers, research and development institutions, non-governmental institutions.
3. The efforts for empowerment and protection of women as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
4. The empowerment and protection of women shall be coordinated by the Regional Apparatus that administers regional government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two

Women's Empowerment

Article 8

Women's empowerment is directed to obtain opportunities and rights as human beings in order to be able to play a role and participate in the fields of:
a. economy;
b. socio-culture;
c. politics; and
d. law.

Article 9

Women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 8 letter a shall be implemented through:
a. provision of skills and job training;
b. facilitation of the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitation of strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitation and capital assistance; and
e. facilitation of marketing network development.

Article 10

Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 8 letter b shall be implemented through:
a. improvement of knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. improvement of awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, especially in the field of reproductive health;
c. improvement of awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 11

1. Women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 8 letter c includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. provision of opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.
2. Women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

Article 12

1. Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 8 letter d includes:
a. improvement of awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.
2. Women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

Part Three

Protection of Women

Article 13

1. Protection of women includes:
a. social protection;
b. economic protection; and
c. legal protection.
2. Social protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter a is to ensure the survival of women in the form of social protection in order to ensure the fulfillment of a decent living.
3. Economic protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b is to prevent and address the risk of vulnerability due to shocks and social vulnerability of a person, family, group and/or community for the survival of women.
4. Legal protection as referred to in paragraph (1) letter c shall be implemented in terms of providing protection to women who become witnesses and victims of violence and discrimination.

CHAPTER III

CHILD PROTECTION

Part One

General

Article 14

Every Child has basic rights which include:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, leisure time utilization and cultural activities; and
e. special protection.

Part Two

Civil Rights and Freedoms

Article 15

Every Child has the right to obtain Civil Rights and Freedoms as referred to in Article 14 letter a in the form of:
a. birth certificate;
b. child identity card;
c. expressing opinions in accordance with their age and level of intelligence;
d. obtaining healthy and safe information;
e. freedom to assemble and organize that is appropriate for them;
f. protection of reputation and not being exploited to the public without the permission of the child; and/or
g. participating in development through children's forums at the village/sub-district, sub-district and even Regency levels.

Article 16

In fulfilling the Civil Rights and Freedoms of Children, the Family:
a. arranges the child's birth certificate after the child is born;
b. procures a child identity card;
c. provides space to assemble and organize and listens to the child to express their opinions;
d. supervises the child in accessing various information and provides healthy and safe information; and
e. protects the child's privacy and does not expose without the child's permission.

Article 17

The Government provides facilities for the fulfillment of Civil Rights and Freedoms of Children, by:
a. providing fast and easy services in making birth certificates;
b. involving children through children's forums at the village/sub-district, sub-district and city levels in development planning deliberations or other similar forums;
c. providing a children's call center as a means of interactive communication or complaints relating to the interests of children;
d. providing healthy and safe information facilities by supervising internet service providers;
e. providing child identity cards; and
f. providing reading rooms or reading corners in public spaces.

Part Three

Rights in the Family Environment and Alternative Care

Article 18

Every Child has the right to obtain rights in the family environment and alternative care as referred to in Article 14 letter b in the form of:
a. receiving priority to be raised by their own parents;
b. not being separated from their parents, except when such separation is in the best interests of the child;
c. receiving good, polite and loving parenting;
d. receiving balanced parenting from both parents;
e. receiving welfare support even when parents are unable;
f. receiving alternative care in the event both parents pass away or suffer from an illness that prevents them from caring for the child; and
g. receiving family harmony.

Article 19

In fulfilling rights in the family environment and alternative care, the Family:
a. provides parenting, affection, attention, protection, facilities, maintains family harmony, always considering what is best for the child, according to the conditions and capabilities of the parents;
b. prevents marriage at child age and safeguards the child from falling into promiscuity, permissive culture, and avoids NAPZA, HIV and AIDS as well as being protected from pornography;
c. provides religious education and instills noble values from an early age to the child;
d. provides national insight, heroism and national defense from an early age to the child; and
e. provides welfare support.

Article 20

The Regional Government provides facilities for the fulfillment of children's rights in the family environment and alternative care environment, by:
a. providing or facilitating alternative care for children whose parents have passed away or are ill so that they are unable to care for the child;
b. providing welfare support to all children;
c. fulfilling the rights of child development and protecting children with social welfare problems and children in conflict with the law;
d. protecting children from cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment;
e. conducting training for parents on good parenting or establishing consultation institutions for families;
f. playing an active role in assisting families in carrying out their obligations;
g. preventing marriage at child age; and
h. providing child-friendly infrastructure, child-friendly play spaces and safe school routes.

Part Four

Rights to Basic Health and Welfare

Article 21

Every Child has the right to obtain rights to basic health and welfare, as referred to in Article 14 letter c, in the form of:
a. not to be aborted except when endangering the mother's safety;
b. good nutrition from the womb;
c. breast milk until the age of two Years;
d. complete basic immunization;
e. regular health examinations for toddlers;
f. smoke-free environment;
g. availability of clean water;
h. access to social security; and
i. protection and rehabilitation from NAPZA, HIV and AIDS.

Article 22

In fulfilling children's rights to basic health and welfare, the family:
a. fulfills good nutrition from the womb;
b. provides breast milk until the age of two Years;
c. fulfills complete basic immunization;
d. carries out regular health examinations for toddlers;
e. frees the child from cigarette smoke;
f. fulfills the need for clean water;
g. seeks social security; and
h. prevents the child from NAPZA, HIV and AIDS.

Article 23

The Regional Government provides facilities to fulfill rights to basic health and welfare, by:
a. provision of child-friendly health centers;
b. provision of breastfeeding rooms in Government and private Offices;
c. organizing and facilitating Posyandu facilities and infrastructure in every banjar dinas/neighborhood;
d. provision of clean water;
e. arrangement of green open spaces and a clean, healthy and comfortable environment;
f. provision of smoke-free public spaces; and
g. facilities aimed at reducing maternal mortality and child mortality rates as well as increasing life expectancy, nutritional standards and health standards.

Part Five

Rights to Education, Leisure Time and Cultural Activities

Article 24

Every Child has the right to obtain rights to education, leisure time and cultural activities, as referred to in Article 14 letter d, in the form of:
a. participating in early childhood education;
b. receiving the widest possible opportunity to obtain education;
c. the right to develop talents, interests and creative abilities;
d. recreation; and
e. having leisure time to rest and engage in various arts, cultural and sports activities.

Article 25

In fulfilling rights to education, leisure time and cultural activities, the family:
a. ensures the continuity of the child's education from an early age;
b. provides the widest possible opportunity for the child to obtain education and builds communication related to teaching and learning activities at school with the school;
c. directs and provides opportunities for the child to develop interests, talents and creativity;
d. provides leisure time to rest and engage in various arts, cultural and sports activities; and
e. takes time to recreate with children according to the situation and condition of the parents.

Article 26

The Regional Government provides facilities to fulfill the Rights to Education, Leisure Time and Cultural Activities, by:
a. providing the widest possible opportunity for children to obtain education by ensuring the implementation of a 12 (twelve) year compulsory education program for all children free of charge;
b. providing opportunities and accessibility for children with disabilities to obtain education;
c. organizing inclusive education for children with disabilities;
d. optimizing skills education;
e. providing city parks, playgrounds, art buildings and sports arenas as a forum to hone and develop children's talents, interests and creativity in the fields of arts, culture and sports;
f. realizing child-friendly schools at every level of education;
g. providing scholarships for students from underprivileged families;
h. facilitating school dropouts at Open Schools or Community Learning Activity Centers;
i. giving awards to students who excel in academic, arts, culture and sports fields;
j. issuing policies for education providers not to expel students from educational institutions, by conducting guidance, except when involved in criminal acts;
k. organizing student orientation periods that are educational and without violence; and
l. establishing children's creativity centers.

Part Six

Special Protection

Article 27

1. Regional Government is responsible for realizing Child Protection in the Region in the form of coordinating the implementation of Child Protection in the Region.
2. Coordination of the implementation of Child Protection in the Region as referred to in paragraph (1) is in order to fulfill the Rights of Children who require Special Protection.
3. Children who require Special Protection as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. children in emergency situations;
b. children in conflict with the law;
c. children from minority and isolated groups;
d. children who are exploited economically and/or sexually;
e. children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic, and other addictive substance abuse;
f. children who are victims of pornography;
g. children who are perpetrators of pornography;
h. children with human immunodeficiency virus/ acquired immuno deficiency syndrome;
i. children victims of kidnapping, sale, and/or trafficking;
j. children victims of physical and/or psychological violence;
k. children victims of sexual crimes;
l. children victims of terrorism networks;
m. children perpetrators of terrorism networks:n. children with disabilities;
o. children victims of maltreatment and neglect;
p. children with deviant social behavior; and
q. children who are victims of stigmatization from labeling related to their parents' condition.

Article 28

Every family carries out its function and responsibility in terms of optimal fulfillment of children's rights so that children can avoid special conditions as referred to in Article 27 paragraph (3).

Article 29

Regional Government strives to fulfill the Rights of Special Protection for children by:
a. formulating programs to prevent children from being involved in situations and conditions as referred to in Article 27 paragraph (3);
b. providing access to public services and social security for children with disabilities; and
c. providing 24 (twenty-four) hour complaint service facilities, Shelters, rehabilitation centers and orphanages.

CHAPTER IV

SAFE HOUSE

Article 30

1. Women and children victims of violence who require continuous handling have the right to stay in a safe house.
2. Safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) provides a temporary safe place or shelter for victims of violence until their rights are restored.
3. The organization and management of safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by regional apparatus that performs functions in the field of women empowerment and children.
4. Further provisions regarding the organization of safe house as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER V

CHILD-FRIENDLY REGENCY

Article 31

1. In the framework of implementing the fulfillment of child-friendly rights and various laws and regulations as well as policies related to the fulfillment of children's rights and special protection of children, Regional Government, Private Sector and Community Institutions make efforts to realize a Child-Friendly Regency.
2. To realize a Child-Friendly Regency as referred to in paragraph (1) Regional Government, Private Sector, and Community Institutions pay attention to children's rights related to the right to life, growth and development, protection, and participation.
3. Regional Government, Private Sector, and Community Institutions in realizing a Child-Friendly Regency are incorporated in the Child-Friendly Regency task force. (4) The Child-Friendly Regency task force as referred to in paragraph (3) is responsible for the fulfillment of children's rights related to:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. family environment and alternative care;
c. basic health and welfare;
d. education, use of leisure time, and arts and cultural activities; and
e. special protection of children.
4. Further provisions regarding Child-Friendly Regency as referred to in paragraph (1) are regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 32

1. Regent carries out guidance and supervision of the implementation of women empowerment and child protection in the Region.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by Regional Apparatus in charge of women empowerment and child protection affairs.
3. Regional Apparatus in charge of women empowerment and child protection affairs as referred to in paragraph (2) is the coordinator for the implementation of women empowerment and child protection in the Region.

Article 33

1. Forms of guidance as referred to in Article 32 can be carried out with activities:
a. providing socialization to the community and business world regarding women empowerment and child protection policies;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding women empowerment and child protection, and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitating capacity building of women empowerment and child protection institutions;
d. facilitating women's participation forums and women's and children's organizations;
e. facilitating rehabilitation and reintegration services for women and children victims of discrimination, violence and disasters;
f. coordinating the participation of the business world and other institutions, including international assistance for women empowerment and child protection; and
g. providing awards to the community and business world both individually and institutionally who have made efforts to empower women and protect children.
2. Forms of supervision as referred to in Article 32 can be in the form of monitoring and evaluation activities on the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER VII

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 34

1. Regional Government has an obligation to strengthen community participation in the development of women empowerment and Child Protection.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out in the form of:
a. socialization;
b. advocacy;
c. counseling;
d. guidance;
e. supervision;
f. facilitation;
g. services;
h. studies;
i. training;
j. capital; and
k. provision of infrastructure.
3. Strengthening community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) can be carried out by:
a. strengthening cooperation;
b. strengthening institutional capacity for prevention and services from the community, Islamic boarding schools and business world; and
c. financing support.

Article 35

1. Business world has responsibility in the implementation of women empowerment and child protection.
2. Forms of business world responsibility as referred to in paragraph (4) are carried out in the form of:
a. financial assistance to service institutions;
b. empowerment;
c. capacity building;
d. publication and information media;
e. provision of infrastructure;
f. establishment of special institutions for prevention and violence complaint services; and
g. non-binding social assistance.

CHAPTER VIII

AWARDS

Article 36

Regent may grant awards to educational institutions, religious institutions, health service provider institutions, professional institutions and business world, service institutions, Islamic boarding schools, youth organizations, legal aid organizations, communities, media that have contributed to the implementation of women empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER IX

FINANCING

Article 37

1. Financing for the implementation of women empowerment and child protection is sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget.
2. In addition to being sourced from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget, Financing for the implementation of women empowerment and child protection can be sourced from other legitimate and non-binding financing sources.

CHAPTER X

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 38

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Sarolangun Regency.

Enacted in Sarolangun

on 26 January 2023

Acting REGENT OF SAROLANGUN, signed.

HENRIZAL

Promulgated in Sarolangun

on 26 January 2023

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY,

signed.

ENDANG ABDUL NASER

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY YEAR 2023 NUMBER 2

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY JAMBI PROVINCE: (1 - 2/ 2023) Copy in Accordance with the Original On behalf of Regional Secretary Government Assistant u.b Head

Mulya Malik, SH,.MM Pembina

NIP. 19830316 200903 1 005

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY

NUMBER 2 OF 2023 CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

A. GENERAL ELUCIDATION

Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia have firmly and clearly provided protection for Human Rights, including the rights of women and children. Every person has equal dignity and worth not only guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, but also internationally recognized through the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) of 1948 which explicitly regulates the importance of protection of Human Rights including the protection of women and children.

To guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children, regional governments are obliged and responsible to implement and support national policies in the administration of government affairs in the field of empowerment and protection of women and children in the regions. In addition, regional governments are also given the obligation to supervise the implementation of empowerment and protection of women and children.

The implementation of empowerment and protection of women and children is an effort to realize capable women and an effort to protect women and children from all acts of violence in order to achieve welfare goals. The empowerment and protection of women and children that has been implemented so far has not been optimal and comprehensive in reaching the problems faced by women and children. In addition, public awareness of efforts to empower and protect women and children is still very lacking. To achieve these objectives and to implement the authority of regional governments as outlined in Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government in the sub-affairs of empowerment and protection of women and children, a regulation is needed that can serve as a legal umbrella for regional governments in the administration of government affairs in the field of women's empowerment and child protection in the regions.

In formulating policies related to women's empowerment and child protection, attention must be paid to the principles of good legislation formation as regulated in Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formation of Legislation, including:
a. clarity of purpose;
b. appropriate institution or forming official;
c. conformity between type, hierarchy, and material content;
d. implementability;
e. effectiveness and efficiency;
f. clarity of formulation; and
g. openness.

In addition to the principles of legislation formation, it is also necessary to pay attention to the principles of material content which include:
a. protection;
b. humanity;
c. nationality;
d. kinship;
e. archipelago;
f. unity in diversity;
g. justice;
h. equality of position in law and government;
i. order and legal certainty; and/or j. balance, harmony, and alignment.

The administration of government affairs in the field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection aims to increase efforts to protect women's rights, fulfill children's rights and provide Special Protection for Children and increase the role of Regional Governments and the business world, media and society in efforts to Empower Women and Protect Children. The main material contained in the body of the Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Empowerment and Protection of Women and Children includes:
a. fulfillment of women's rights;
b. empowerment of women;
c. protection of women;
d. protection of children;
e. fulfillment of children's rights;
f. integrated service center;
g. safe house;
h. child-friendly regency;
i. guidance and supervision;
j. community participation;
k. awards; and
l. financing.

B. ELUCIDATION ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently clear.

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

Article 34

Sufficiently clear.

Article 35

Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Sufficiently clear.

Article 37

Sufficiently clear.

Article 38

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SAROLANGUN REGENCY NUMBER 2
