PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CIMAHI CITY

NUMBER 230 YEAR 2018

REGIONAL REGULATION OF CIMAHI CITY

NUMBER 4 YEAR 2018

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF CIMAHI,

Considering:

a. that women and children have the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity;
b. that women and children are vulnerable groups who tend to experience violence, thus need to receive optimal protection;
c. that violence against women and children continues to increase so that protection efforts need to be carried out;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Protection of Women and Children from Acts of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277;
3. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 20 Year 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No.138 Concerning Minimum Age For Admission to Employment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 56, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3835);
5. Law Number 1 Year 2000 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention No.182 Concerning The Prohibition And Immediate Action For The Elimination Of The Worst Forms Of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
6. Law Number 9 Year 2001 concerning Establishment of Cimahi City (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2001 Number 89, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4116);
7. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4279);
8. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
9. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
10. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
12. Law Number 27 Year 2009 concerning People's Consultative Assembly, House of Representatives, Regional Representative Council and Regional House of Representatives (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 123, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5043);
13. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
14. Law Number 11 Year 2012 concerning Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5532);
15. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 concerning Second Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
16. Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 109 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 Year 2014 concerning Amendment to Law Number 23 Year 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 297 Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
17. Law Number 8 Year 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
18. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation for Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
19. Government Regulation Number 9 Year 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of Criminal Acts of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Women's Protection;
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Guidelines for Implementation of Child Protection;
22. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence;
23. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
24. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Handling Child Victims of Violence;
25. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning Guidelines for Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;
26. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 Year 2015 concerning Formulation of Regional Legal Products;
27. Regulation of the Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 6 Year 2015 concerning System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
28. Regulation of the Minister of Social Affairs Number 30 2011/Huk/concerning National Standards for Child Care for Child Social Welfare Institutions;
29. Regional Regulation of West Java Province Number 5 Year 2006 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of West Java Province Year 2006 Number 4 Series E, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Java Province Number 24);
30. Regional Regulation of West Java Province Number 3 Year 2008 concerning Prevention and Handling of Victims of Trafficking in Persons in West Java (Regional Gazette of West Java Province Year 2008 Number 2 Series E, Supplement to the Regional Gazette of West Java Province Number 39);
31. Regional Regulation of Cimahi City Number 18 Year 2012 concerning Child Protection (Regional Gazette of Cimahi City Year 2012 Number 155);

With Joint Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF CIMAHI CITY

and

MAYOR OF CIMAHI

DECIDES:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN FROM ACTS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is the City of Cimahi
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of governmental affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Cimahi.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is a regional people's representative institution that is positioned as an element of the Regional Government administration.
5. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
7. Woman is a human being of female sex who is legally recognized as a woman.
8. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and organizations and/or community organizations.
9. Family is the smallest unit in society that has a marital relationship consisting of husband, wife, or husband wife and their child, or father and their child, or mother and their child, or blood relatives in a direct line upward or downward up to the third degree.
10. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
11. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering of women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
12. Protection is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by law enforcement officers and the community towards women and children.
13. Service is an action carried out by Professional personnel in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing that violence against victims will, is or has occurred.
14. Assistance is a process of providing facilities given by assistants to clients in identifying needs and solving problems as well as encouraging the growth of initiative in the decision-making process, so that the independence of clients on an ongoing basis can be realized.
15. Assistant is a professional social worker who has competence in protection services for women and children.
16. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and community.
17. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community and Regional Government, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
18. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
19. Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment hereinafter referred to as P2TP2A is an integrated service provider institution for victims established by the Regional Government.
20. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence is implemented based on the principles of:
a. non-discrimination;
b. best interests of women and children;
c. justice and gender equality;
d. respect for the opinions of children;
e. respect for the rights of victims;
f. legal certainty; and
g. local wisdom.

Article 3

1. The implementation of Protection of Women and Children from acts of violence aims to:
a. protect and provide a sense of security for women and children;
b. provide services to victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
c. empower women and children who are victims of acts of violence.
2. The objectives of implementing protection of women and children as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. prevention;
b. risk reduction; and
c. handling

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 4

The Scope of this Regional Regulation consists of:
a. protection of women; and
b. protection of children.

Article 5

Protection as referred to in Article 4 includes:
a. prevention of violence against women and children;
b. provision of integrated services and assistance for women and children victims of violence;
c. strengthening and development of institutions providing protection services for women and children.

CHAPTER IV

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 6

Forms of violence include:
a. physical violence;
b. sexual violence;
c. economic violence;
d. social violence;
e. psychological violence;
f. domestic neglect; and
g. exploitation;

Article 7

1. Physical Violence as referred to in Article 6 letter a is an act that results in pain, injury, wounds, or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting, and that causes death.
2. Sexual Violence as referred to in Article 6 letter b is an act caused by:
a. sexual harassment;
b. coercion of unnatural or unwanted sexual relations; and
c. coercion of sexual relations with others for commercial purposes or certain purposes.
3. Economic Violence as referred to in Article 6 letter c is an act that restricts a wife from working inside or outside the home to earn money and goods, including allowing a working wife to be exploited, while the husband does not fulfill the family's economic needs. economic violence may also take the form of:
a. a husband who does not provide maintenance to his wife because his wife has an income;
b. a husband concealing his income;
c. taking the wife's assets;
d. not providing sufficient living expenses or not providing living expenses at all;
e. demanding the wife obtain more income; and f. not allowing the wife to advance her career.
4. Social Violence as referred to in Article 6 letter d is an act by a person or group of people that causes injury or loss of life to a person or may cause physical damage or damage to another person's property;
5. Psychological Violence as referred to in Article 6 letter e is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
6. Household neglect as referred to in Article 6 letter f is caused by:
a. an act that results in the failure to fulfill a child's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual, social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for their care;
b. an act of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or look after a child as appropriate committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. an act of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. an act that results in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting proper work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.
7. Exploitation as referred to in Article 6 letter g is caused by:
a. an act that exploits economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. an act with or without the victim's consent that includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or service, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or.
c. any form of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or indecency.

CHAPTER V

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 8

Every Victim has the right to obtain:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal service;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

Article 9

Child victims of violence in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 8 also obtain special rights as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER VI

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 10

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 11

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement protection efforts for women and children victims of violence through:
a. implementing protection policies for women and children victims of violence applied by the government;
b. establishing policies, programs, and activities for the protection of women and children victims of violence;
c. establishment of P2TP2A;
d. ensuring the implementation of service facilities for victims;
e. seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
f. seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
2. The Regional Government in carrying out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, establishes action programs and activities for the protection of women and children in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) serves as the basis for Regional Apparatus in implementing protection for women and children victims of violence.
4. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2) is part of the RPJMD.
5. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is further regulated in a Mayor Regulation.

Article 12

1. The community has obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 10 letter b which is implemented in the form of community participation.
2. Forms of community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. forming family partners at the sub-district level;
b. forming women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting socialization of women's and children's rights independently;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.

Article 13

The obligations of families and parents have obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in Article 10 letter c and letter d by protecting women and/or children as family members.

CHAPTER VII

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Establishment of P2TP2A

Article 14

1. The Regional Government provides services and protection to women and children from violence by establishing P2TP2A as an integrated service center for women and children victims of violence.
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be established by Mayor's Decree.
3. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (2), consists of elements:
a. Health Office;
b. Education Office;
c. DINSOSP2KBP3A;
d. Office of Trade, Cooperatives, Small and Medium Enterprises, and Industry;
e. Office of Population and Civil Registration;
f. Civil Service Police Unit and Fire Department;
g. Regional General Hospital;
h. City Police Resort;
i. Non-Governmental Organizations; and
j. universities.
4. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (2) shall provide integrated services to victims of violence.
5. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.
6. P2TP2A provides temporary services and protection in the form of safe houses.
7. In the event that P2TP2A does not yet have a safe house, then P2TP2A may refer victims of violence to P2TP2A that has a safe house.
8. P2TP2A has a counseling division consisting of at least:
a. legal field;
b. health field;
c. spiritual field; and
d. social field.
9. Further provisions regarding the organizational structure of P2TP2A shall be regulated in a Mayor's Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention and Services by P2TP2A

Article 15

Forms of prevention of violence against women and children carried out by P2TP2A, may be implemented through:
a. socialization activities of laws and regulations to the community related to the protection of the rights of women and children; and
b. training of P2TP2A members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing violence against women and children.

Article 16

1. P2TP2A in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with Sub-district and Village Task Forces as well as competent parties in making efforts to prevent violence against women and children.
2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be regulated in a Mayor's Regulation.

Article 17

Forms of services to victims organized by P2TP2A include:
a. medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. medicolegal services constitute a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. psychosocial services constitute services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation against victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence, in resolving their problems;
d. legal services to assist victims in undergoing legal processes; and
e. economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

Article 18

1. P2TP2A in performing service duties to women and children victims of violence must coordinate with Sub-district and Village Task Forces.
2. The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures which are further regulated in a Mayor's Regulation.

Part Three

Prevention by Regional Apparatus

Article 19

1. The Regional Government prevents violence against women and children, carries out empowerment and awareness to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government also makes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women and children from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children; and
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women and children from violence.

Article 20

1. The Regional Government prevents violence against women and children as referred to in Article 19 paragraph (1) implemented by Regional Apparatus that has duties and functions in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. peace and order.
2. Prevention of violence by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and sustainable manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Part Four

Assistance Mechanism by Persons and/or Institutions Cooperating with P2TP2A

Article 21

1. Assistance is carried out by persons and/or institutions cooperating with P2TP2A.
2. The assistance mechanism as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated in a Mayor's Regulation.

Part Five

Principles of Services and Assistance

Article 22

The provision of services and assistance to victims, shall be carried out with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Part Six

Services

Article 23

1. Forms of services provided to women and children victims of violence shall be implemented as follows:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the Regional Government and implemented by regional apparatus that has duties and functions in the fields of:
a. social;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and child protection; and d. mental and spiritual.
3. In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government cooperates with Government agencies, Provincial Government, other Regency/City Governments, community, families and parents.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures for services, and handling of women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2) and paragraph (3) shall be regulated in a Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 24

1. The Regional Government conducts guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation.
3. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be carried out with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 25

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 24 paragraph (2) and paragraph (3), shall be carried out in order to realize the objectives of providing protection to women and children victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards established by laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX

REPORTING

Article 26

1. P2TP2A shall report the implementation of protection provision to women and children victims of violence to the Mayor.
(2) Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
2. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2), shall be carried out at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER X

FUNDING

Article 27

Funds for the provision of protection to women and children victims of violence, shall be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
b. other lawful and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 28

1. The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that carry out protection of women and children victims of violence.
2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations in the field of regional finance.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 29

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be stipulated no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 30

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Cimahi City.

Enacted in Cimahi

on 16 July 2018

MAYOR OF CIMAHI,

AJAY MUHAMMAD PRIATNA.

Promulgated in Cimahi

on 16 July 2018

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF CIMAHI CITY,

MUHAMAD YANI

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF CIMAHI CITY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 230 REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF CIMAHI CITY, WEST JAVA PROVINCE (4/87/2018)
