IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY

NUMBER 4 OF 2016

CONCERNING

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

GOVERNMENT OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY

YEAR 2016

REGENT OF BENGKAYANG

PROVINCE OF WEST KALIMANTAN

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF BENGKAYANG,

Considering:

a. that in every human being there are inherent human rights that must be respected, upheld and protected by the state, law, Regional Government and every person for the sake of honor and protection of human dignity and worth;
b. that in reality the number of children in Bengkayang Regency exceeds one third of the population, so that the Regional Government is obliged to provide protection to children from all forms of violence, discrimination and exploitation, in order to ensure a decent and dignified life and livelihood for children of Bengkayang Regency;
c. that child issues must be handled comprehensively, in an integrated, directed and sustainable manner, so that institutional support is needed through legislation to support Bengkayang as a Child-Friendly Regency;
d. that based on Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection and Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence, the Regional Government together with the community is obliged to make efforts to prevent, protect, and restore victims of violence;
e. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, letter c, and letter d, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of:

l. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning the ratification of the Convention on The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
3. Law Number 5 of 1998 concerning the Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
5. Law Number 1 of 2000 concerning the Ratification of ILO Convention No. 182 Concerning The Prohibition and Immediate of The Worst Forms of Child Labour (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2000 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3941);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 36 of 2009 concerning Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 44, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5063);
8. Law Number 12 of 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
9. Law Number 10 of 2012 concerning the Ratification of the Optional Protocol to The Convention on The Rights of The Child on The Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 149, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5330);
10. Law Number 11 of 2012 concerning the Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 153, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332);
11. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
12. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation of Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY

and

REGENT OF BENGKAYANG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:

1. Region is Bengkayang Regency.
2. Regional Government is Bengkayang Regency as an element of regional government administration that leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regent is the Regent of Bengkayang Regency.
4. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the regional people's representative institution of Bengkayang Regency as an element of Regional Government administration.
5. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
6. Child's Rights are part of human rights that must be guaranteed, protected and fulfilled by parents, family, community, government and regional government.
7. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years including a child still in the womb.
8. Child with Special Needs is a child with special characteristics different from children in general without always indicating mental, emotional or physical disability, which includes among others: blind, deaf, mentally disabled, physically disabled, emotionally disturbed, learning difficulties, behavioral disorders, gifted children, children with health disorders and disabled children.
9. Child Protection is all forms of activities to guarantee and protect children so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with dignity and humanity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
10. Special protection is protection given to children in emergency situations, children in conflict with the law, children from minority and isolated groups, children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, children who are trafficked, children who are victims of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic and other addictive substances (drugs) abuse, children victims of kidnapping, sale, trafficking, children victims of violence both physical and/or mental, children with disabilities, and children victims of maltreatment and neglect.
11. Child Victim of Violence is a child who receives harsh treatment either physically, psychologically, economically, socially, sexually, and other losses resulting from state policies, acts of violence and or threats of violence within the scope of the household and community.
12. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and or distress either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security and fulfilling the rights of victims carried out by family, integrated services, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court decisions.
14. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutors, courts, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
15. Protection of children is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Implementation of protection is a series of activities aimed at: preventing the occurrence of violence, providing protection and recovery services and social reintegration, conducting coordination and cooperation, and increasing community participation carried out by the Integrated Service Center.
17. Violence is any act that results in or causes suffering and distress whether physical, sexual, psychological including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or in private life.
18. Violence against women is any act based on gender differences that results in or may result in suffering or distress to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
19. Violence against Children is any act against a child that results in suffering or distress physically, mentally, sexually, psychologically, economic exploitation, socially including neglect and maltreatment that threatens bodily integrity and degrades the dignity of the child.
20. Domestic violence is any act against a person, especially women, that results in suffering or distress physically, sexually, psychologically and/or household neglect including threats to commit acts of coercion or unlawful deprivation of freedom within the scope of the household.
21. Prevention is direct efforts made by the Regional Government to prevent acts of violence against women and children.
22. Complaint is a notification either in writing or orally by an interested party to an authorized institution, in which the person concerned suffers loss due to the actions of others.
23. Service is immediate activities and actions carried out by Professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the empowerment and recovery of victims of violence.
24. Integrated Service is a series of activities to provide protection for women and children victims of violence carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unit of implementation, prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
25. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as Protection of Women and Children P2TP2A is an institution providing services to victims of violence, carried out jointly by relevant agencies or institutions as one unit of implementation of prevention efforts, health services, psychosocial rehabilitation, repatriation, social reintegration, and legal assistance for victims of gender-based violence and children.
26. Health Service is an effort that includes promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
27. Spiritual guidance is assistance in the form of services for spiritual strengthening so that sick people can rise to be closer to God so that a sense of calm, security arises, and mental health is achieved.
28. Legal assistance is legal services provided by legal assistants or advocates to conduct the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children.
29. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
30. Victim Recovery is all efforts to empower victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to be more empowered, whether physically, psychologically, socially, economically or sexually.
31. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for self-empowerment of victims of gender-based violence and violence against children to resolve the problems they face.
32. Social Reintegration is the process of preparing the community and victims that supports the reunification of victims into the family environment, family substitutes who can provide protection and fulfill the needs of victims.
33. Safe House (shelter) is a temporary residence used to provide protection to victims in accordance with established operational standards.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Protection of women victims of violence shall be conducted based on the principles of:
a. respect for the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. protection of victims;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. non-discrimination.

Article 3

Protection of women and children victims of violence aims to:
a. prevent all forms of violence against women and children, occurring within the household and/or community;
b. protect and provide security for women and children;
c. provide legal assistance;
d. provide services to women and children victims of violence, reporters and witnesses;
e. pursue recovery and social reintegration; and
f. increase community participation.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 4

The scope of protection for women and children victims of violence includes the rights of victims, obligations and authority of the Regional Government, implementation of protection, reporting, control, guidance and supervision, community participation and financing.

CHAPTER IV

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 5

1. Every woman and child victim of violence has the right to:
a. obtain protection for personal, family and property security, and be free from threats related to information that will be, is being, or has been provided;
b. participate in the process of selecting and determining the form of protection and security support;
c. be free from ensnaring questions;
d. obtain information regarding case developments and court decisions;
e. receive services that are fast, appropriate, comfortable, and according to needs;
f. receive recovery, social reintegration, continuous handling up to rehabilitation and empowerment;
g. receive assistance at every level of examination and during the judicial process and out-of-court processes;
h. receive psychological assistance, spiritual guidance, economic, social and interpreter services;
2. The rights of victims as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Article 6

In addition to the rights as referred to in Article 5, every victim must:
a. provide truthful information to interested parties;
b. become a witness if it does not endanger oneself and if there is a security guarantee for the victim.

CHAPTER V

OBLIGATIONS AND AUTHORITY OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT

Article 7

1. The Regional Government is obliged to:
a. prevent the occurrence of violence;
b. provide protection for victims of violence;
c. provide recovery services and social reintegration;
d. encourage and increase community participation;
e. cooperate with service providers in efforts to prevent, protect and recover victims of violence.
f. facilitate the establishment of P2TP2A based on Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Trauma Center Shelters, and other supporting institutions; and
g. supervise the implementation of services for victims, with service standards involving the community.
2. To carry out the obligations as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government has the authority to:
a. formulate policies and programs on the elimination of violence against women and children;
b. establish P2TP2A;
c. facilitate the implementation of P2TP2A activities;
d. provide facilities and infrastructure;
e. increase the capacity of service provider institutions;
f. coordinate and cooperate in the implementation of protection for victims of violence against women and children;
g. encourage community participation; and
h. conduct monitoring and evaluation.
3. The Regional Government in carrying out obligations as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) must consider the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands, wives or other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.

CHAPTER VI

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Institutional

Article 8

In implementing protection for women and children victims of violence, the Regional Government is assisted by P2TP2A.

Article 9

1. P2TP2A as referred to in Article 8 shall be established by the Regional Government in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.
2. P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) consists of elements of the Regional Government, non-governmental organizations, health service institutions, law enforcement officials, professional personnel, volunteer assistants, social workers, religious leaders, shelters, and social rehabilitation centers.
3. The membership of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be determined by Regent's Decree.

Article 10

1. The implementation of P2TP2A shall be coordinated by the SKPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection.
2. Further provisions regarding procedures, requirements, and establishment of P2TP2A as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent's Regulation.

Article 11

P2TP2A as referred to in Article 8 has the duty to:
a. pursue prevention;
b. pursue recovery and social reintegration;
c. provide legal protection;
d. conduct coordination;
e. pursue increased community participation, and
f. monitoring and reporting.

Paragraph 1

Prevention Efforts

Article 12

1. Prevention efforts as referred to in Article 11 letter a include:
a. forming a network for prevention and handling of violence through coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
b. forming a violence prevention system, mapping locations or areas prone to violence;
c. conducting communication, information, and education about violence against women and children; and
d. socialization of laws and regulations related to violence against women and children.
2. Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out in an integrated manner coordinated by the SKPD having duties and functions in the field of women's empowerment.

Article 13

In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 12, prevention efforts must also be carried out by:
a. family and closest relatives;
b. community and business sector; and
c. educational institutions.

Paragraph 2

Recovery and Social Reintegration Efforts

Article 14

Recovery and social reintegration efforts as referred to in Article 11 letter b include:
a. providing physical recovery at health service institutions;
b. providing medicolegal services;
c. assisting the return of victims;
d. providing temporary protection in shelters;
e. providing psychosocial recovery and assistance;
f. providing spiritual guidance services; and
g. preparing families and communities, economic empowerment, and return to school and/or other educational institutions.

Paragraph 3

Legal Protection

Article 15

Legal protection as referred to in Article 11 letter c includes:
a. providing protection in shelters;
b. providing assistance in legal processes; and
c. providing special legal protection for child victims of violence which may be carried out by appointing guardianship in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

Paragraph 4

Coordination

Article 16

Coordination as referred to in Article 11 letter d includes:
a. coordinating the handling of violence cases with provincial integrated services;
b. coordinating with integrated services in other regions;
c. coordinating with service provider institutions for women and children victims of violence; and
d. coordinating and consulting with the Regional Government.

Paragraph 5

Efforts to Increase Community Participation

Article 17

Increasing community participation as referred to in Article 11 letter e, is carried out by:
a. fostering community awareness of cases of violence against women and children;
b. encouraging the community to actively participate in providing information and reporting violence against women and children;
c. fostering local wisdom in handling women and child victims of violence;
d. organizing strengthening of community groups in handling women and child victims of violence; and
e. disseminating information about laws and regulations related to violence against women and children.

Paragraph 6

Monitoring and Reporting

Article 18

Monitoring and reporting as referred to in Article 11 letter f, includes monitoring, documentation, and reporting of cases of violence against women and children.

Part Two

Cooperation

Article 19

1. In organizing protection for victims of violence against women and children, the Regional Government may cooperate with the Government, Provincial Government, other regional governments and other institutions.
2. Cooperation between the Regional Government and the Government includes consultation, coordination, and reporting.
3. Cooperation with other regional governments and other institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) includes coordination, advocacy, referral, repatriation, social reintegration, and development of integrated service systems.

Article 20

In the case of Cooperation as referred to in Article 19 it is stipulated by Regent's Decree.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 21

1. P2TP2A reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and child victims of violence to the SKPD in charge of women's empowerment.
2. The Head of SKPD in charge of women's empowerment reports prevention, handling and protection activities for women and child victims of violence to the Regent.
3. The Regent reports protection of women and child victims of violence to the Governor.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures and mechanisms for reporting as referred to in paragraph (1), paragraph (2), and paragraph (3) are regulated by Regent's Regulation.

CHAPTER VIII

CONTROL, GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 22

1. The Regent carries out control, guidance, and supervision of the implementation of protection for victims of violence against women and children.
2. Control, guidance, and supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) are carried out by the SKPD in charge of women's empowerment and child protection.

CHAPTER IX

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 23

1. The community can participate in assisting prevention and handling efforts for victims of violence against women and children.  (2) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (l) is realized by:
a. providing information and or reporting any violence that comes to their knowledge;
b. providing protection for victims;
c. providing emergency assistance;
d. providing advocacy to victims and or the community regarding handling cases of violence against women and children;
e. assisting in the process of submitting applications for protection orders; and
f. assisting in the repatriation and social reintegration process.

CHAPTER X

FINANCING

Article 24

Financing of activities related to the implementation of protection for women and child victims of violence may be sourced from:
a. State Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
b. Provincial Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget;
c. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and/or
d. other legal and non-binding sources.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 25

This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of promulgation.  So that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bengkayang Regency.

Enacted in Bengkayang

on 19 September 2016

REGENT OF BENGKAYANG,

SURYADMAN GIDOT

Promulgated in Bengkayang

on 21 September 2016

Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY,

SILVERIUS SINOOR

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER: 4 REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY WEST KALIMANTAN PROVINCE: 4/2016 Copy in accordance with the original

HEAD OF LEGAL DIVISION
Ero KAYA G

NIP. 19710416 200003 2 005

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY

NUMBER 4 OF 2016 CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILD VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

As we all know that protection of children and women victims of violence nowadays needs serious attention, particularly Bengkayang Regency in implementing the Women's Empowerment and Child Protection program, this is as stated in the Medium-Term Development Plan of Bengkayang Regency.

This is to provide understanding that every Citizen has the right to obtain a sense of security and freedom from all forms of violence, especially in the Household and those who potentially become victims are generally women, as well as acts of violence and exploitation against children. Therefore it is expected that especially women can know and understand various aspects of domestic violence.

As mandated in Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence, it has been stated that all forms of violence, especially violence against Women and Children constitute violations of human rights and crimes against human dignity as well as forms of Discrimination that must be eliminated, so they must receive protection from the State and or society in order to avoid and be free from violence, threats of torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and worth.

Statistically, cases of violence against women and children in Bengkayang Regency are very high averaging per semester reaching 17 (seventeen) cases, this shows that Women's Empowerment in Bengkayang Regency in handling cases / acts of violence against women and children must receive very serious attention and handling.

In connection with this, the Government of Bengkayang Regency needs to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Implementation of Protection for Women and Child Victims of Violence that regulates clearly, firmly, and comprehensively to better understand and know various forms of acts of violence against women and children and how to seek protection.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2 letter a

What is meant by "respect for victims' rights" is a series of actions to respect, appreciate and guarantee the fulfillment of victims' rights.

letter b

What is meant by "justice and gender equality" is a process to be fair to men and women in obtaining opportunities and their rights as human beings so they are able to play a role and participate in political, economic, social, cultural, defense and security activities as well as equality in enjoying development results.

letter c
What is meant by "victim protection" is providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court order.

letter d
What is meant by "best interests of victims" is all actions concerning victims carried out by government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, must be the primary consideration.

letter e

What is meant by "non-discrimination" means not making distinctions for any reason and in any way, whether concerning religion and beliefs, ethnicity, race, gender, skin color, language, and politics.

This excerpt sits under: CHAPTER V > Paragraph 2 > Paragraph 5

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently clear.

Article 14

Letter a

Sufficiently clear.

Letter b
What is meant by "medicolegal" is the effort to collect evidence for the purpose of proof in the judicial process.

Letter c
Sufficiently clear.

Letter d
Sufficiently clear.

Letter e
Sufficiently clear.

Letter f
Sufficiently clear.

Letter g
Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BENGKAYANG REGENCY YEAR 2016  NUMBER:4
