COOPERATION IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

GOVERNMENT OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY

REGIONAL REGULATION OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY

NUMBER 15 OF 2011

CONCERNING

COOPERATION IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

THE REGENT OF WEST BANGKA,

Considering:

a. that acts of violence against women and children constitute crimes against humanity which are violations of Human Rights;
b. that acts of violence against women and children in West Bangka Regency still frequently occur while services and protection for women and children in West Bangka Regency have not been implemented optimally;
c. that in the framework of implementing regional autonomy, the regulation and service to the community, particularly for women and children victims of violence, constitute the main duties and functions of the Regency government;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b, and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation concerning Cooperation in the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence;

In View of:

1. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
2. Law Number 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1997 Number 3, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3668);
3. Law Number 5 of 1998 Concerning Ratification of the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1998 Number 164, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3783);
4. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235);
5. Law Number 10 of 2004 concerning Formation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 53, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4389);
6. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
7. Law Number 32 of 2004 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 125, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4437) as has been amended several times most recently by Law Number 12 of 2008 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 59, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4844);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning Implementation and Cooperation in the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
9. Government Regulation Number 38 of 2007 concerning Division of Government Affairs Between the Government, Provincial Regional Government and Regency/City Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 82, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4737);
10. Regional Regulation of West Bangka Regency Number 2 of 2008 concerning Authority of West Bangka Regency (Regional Gazette of West Bangka Regency of 2008 Number 1 Series D);

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY

and

THE REGENT OF WEST BANGKA

HAS DECIDED:

To Enact:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING COOPERATION IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Regional Government is the Government of West Bangka Regency.
2. Regent is the Regent of West Bangka.
3. Regency Regional Apparatus is the supporting element of the Regional Head in the implementation of regional government consisting of the Regional Secretariat, DPRD Secretariat, Regional Agencies and Regional Technical Institutions.
4. Cooperation is a systematic and integrated method among protection implementers in providing services for victims of domestic violence.
5. Implementation of Protection is all actions that include services and assistance for victims of domestic violence.
6. Child is a person who has not yet reached 18 years of age, including those in the womb.
7. Violence is any act that results in or may result in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, economic, social, psychological to the victim.
8. Violence against women is any action based on gender differences that results in or may result in misery or suffering to women physically, sexually, economically, socially, psychologically, including threats of certain actions, coercion or deprivation of freedom, whether occurring in public or private life.
9. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or causes death.
10. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner, forced sexual intercourse with others for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
11. Economic violence is any act that neglects family members in the form of not providing livelihood, care or maintenance in a proper manner.
12. Psychological violence is any act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.
13. Victim is a woman and child who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
14. Protection of women is all activities aimed at providing a sense of security carried out by the police, prosecutor's office, court, social institutions, or other parties who know or hear that violence against women will or has occurred.
15. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
16. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is an institution providing services for victims of violence, based in hospitals, managed jointly in the form of medical care (including medico-legal), psycho-social and legal services.
17. Community Social Institution is a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) and/or other Community Organizations.
18. Population is Indonesian citizens and foreigners who enter legally and reside in the territory of Indonesia.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

Cooperation in the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is carried out based on respect and recognition of equal human rights and dignity, non-discrimination, gender equality and justice as well as protection of the human rights of women and children and the best interests of victims.

Article 3

The Cooperation in the Implementation of Protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence aims to provide protection and services to women from gender-based violence and the best interests of children that occur in the household or public.

CHAPTER III

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

1. The Regent through regional apparatus establishes a public service work unit that functions as an Integrated Service Center (PPT).
2. The Integrated Service Center (PPT) as referred to in paragraph (1) is coordinated by the Regional Apparatus in charge of women's empowerment.
3. The Regional Apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1) in implementing the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence may coordinate with other Regional Apparatus.

CHAPTER IV

HANDLING AND MECHANISM

Article 5

The Implementation of Protection for victims of violence is carried out by government agencies, regional governments and social institutions in accordance with their respective duties and functions, including providing the facilities necessary to implement protection.

Article 6

Facilities as referred to in article (5) include:
a. special service rooms within the police force;
b. expert and professional personnel;
c. service centers and safe houses; and
d. other facilities and infrastructure necessary for victim recovery.

Article 7

1. The implementation of protection for victims must take into account religious norms as well as the rights and obligations of parents, guardians, husbands/other persons who are legally responsible for the victim.
2. The mechanism for handling protection and services is stipulated by Regent Regulation.

Article 8

Services as referred to in Article 7 paragraph (2) include:
a. health services;
b. victim assistance;
c. counseling;
d. spiritual guidance; and
e. resocialization.

Article 9

1. Health services are provided by health personnel at health facilities owned by the government, regional government, and the community, including the private sector by providing treatment services and health recovery for victims.
2. Victim assistance is provided by health personnel, social workers, volunteer assistants, and/or spiritual counselors by providing counseling, therapy, spiritual guidance and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims.
3. Counseling is provided by social workers, volunteer assistants, by listening empathetically and exploring problems for the psychological strengthening of victims.
4. Spiritual guidance is provided by spiritual counselors by providing explanations regarding their rights and obligations, as well as strengthening faith and piety in accordance with the religion and beliefs they adhere to.
5. Resocialization of victims is carried out by social agencies and social institutions so that victims can resume their social functions in society.

Article 10

In certain cases, health personnel, social workers, volunteer assistants and/or spiritual counselors may establish cooperation with:
a. the police, to report and process perpetrators of criminal acts of domestic violence;
b. advocates, to assist victims in the judicial process;
c. other law enforcers, to assist victims in the court proceedings;
d. the National Commission on Violence Against Women;
e. the Indonesian Child Protection Commission (KPAI); and
f. certain parties desired for the benefit of the victim.

CHAPTER V

FORMS OF VIOLENCE AND PROTECTION

Article 11

1. Forms of violence against Women and Children include physical, sexual, economic and psychological.
2. Physical violence is any act that results in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and or causing death.
3. Sexual violence is sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, forced unnatural or unwanted sexual intercourse, with others for commercial purposes and or/certain purposes.
4. Economic violence is the neglect of family members in the form of not providing a decent living, care or maintenance.
5. Psychological violence is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and or severe psychological suffering in a person.

Article 12

1. Every woman and child who becomes a victim of violence must receive protection in accordance with applicable provisions.
2. Protection for women and children victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) is provided to residents of West Bangka Regency whether committed in West Bangka or outside West Bangka.
3. Protection for women and children victims of violence in addition to being provided to residents of West Bangka as referred to in paragraph (2), also applies to non-residents of West Bangka committed within the territory of West Bangka Regency.

Article 13

1. Forms of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence include medical, legal, medicolegal (forensic medicine), economic and psychological protection.
2. Medical protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics.
3. Legal protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is in the form of services and assistance to help victims undergo legal and judicial processes.
4. Medicolegal protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is in the form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field.
5. Psychological protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is in the form of assistance in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide psychological support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence in problem solving.
6. Economic protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence is in the form of services for skills and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

CHAPTER VI

COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 14

1. The Government of West Bangka Regency in implementing the protection of Women and Children Victims of violence, may involve community participation.
2. Community participation may be carried out by individuals, groups or community organizations and/or Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) that are already legally incorporated.

Article 15

1. Social community organizations that participate in the implementation of protection for Women and Children Victims of Violence as referred to in Article 14 paragraph (2), are provided guidance by the Government of West Bangka Regency through Regional Apparatus in accordance with their main duties and functions.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1), may be in the form of social guidance, skills guidance and operational technical guidance.

CHAPTER VII

FUNDING SOURCES

Article 16

1. Funding sources for the implementation of protection for women and children victims of violence carried out by the regional apparatus of West Bangka Regency as referred to in article 4 paragraph (1) come from the Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of West Bangka Regency and/or may come from other lawful sources.
2. Other lawful sources as referred to in paragraph (1) are subject to supervision in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER VIII

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Article 17

Other matters not yet regulated in this Regional Regulation shall be further regulated in a Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER X

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 18

This Regional Regulation shall come into force as of the date of enactment.

In order that everyone may know, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of West Bangka Regency.

Enacted in Muntok

on 6 June 2011

REGENT OF WEST BANGKA,

seal/signed Ust.H.ZUHRI M.SYAZALI Promulgated in Muntok on 6 June 2011

REGIONAL SECRETARY

OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY,

seal/signed

RAMLI NGAD JUM

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF WEST BANGKA REGENCY YEAR 2011 NUMBER 2 SERIES E
