PROTECTION OF WOMEN

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG

LAMPUNG PROVINCE

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY

NUMBER 03 OF 2019

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN

BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG,

Considering:

a. that in order to fulfill the constitutional rights of women, every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity, has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence and to improve the quality of life of women which is one of the responsibilities of the Regional Government;
b. that in the effort to fulfill women's rights, efforts need to be made by families, communities, and the Regional Government, as referred to in letter a, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 28 of 1959 concerning the Stipulation of Emergency Law Number 4 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1956 Number 55, Emergency Law Number 5 of 1956 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1956 Number 57) concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Including Municipal Cities Within the Level I Region of South Sumatra as Law (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1959 Number 73, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1821);
3. Law Number 7 of 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 19 of 1999 concerning Ratification of ILO Convention Number 105 Concerning The Abolition Of Forced Labour [ILO Convention on the Abolition of Forced Labour] (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 55, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3834);
5. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
6. Law Number 13 of 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4279);
7. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
8. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635);
9. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
10. Law Number 11 of 2008 concerning Information and Electronic Transactions (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4843);
11. Law Number 11 of 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4967);
12. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
13. Government Regulation Number 3 of 1982 concerning Amendment to the Territorial Boundaries of the Level II Municipality of Tanjungkarang-Telukbetung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1982 Number 6, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3213);
14. Government Regulation Number 24 of 1983 concerning the Change of Name of the Level II Municipality of Tanjungkarang-Telukbetung to the Level II Municipality of Bandar Lampung (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1983 Number 30, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3254);
15. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence, (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
16. Government Regulation Number 09 of 2008 Concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses/Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (TPPO) (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
17. Government Regulation Number 39 of 2012 concerning the Implementation of Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2012 Number 68, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5294);
18. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 of 2008 concerning Guidelines for the Implementation of Women's Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2008 Number 2 of 2008;
19. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 15 of 2008 concerning General Guidelines for the Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions, as amended by Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 67 of 2011 (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 67 of 2011);
20. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 01 of 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) in the Field of Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 01 of 2010);
21. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 of 2011 concerning Guidelines for the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 19 of 2011);
22. Regulation of the Minister of Health of the Republic of Indonesia Number 61 of 2014 concerning Reproductive Health (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 169);
23. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 8 of 2016 concerning the Results of Mapping of Government Affairs in the Field of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Number 8 of 2016);
24. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 04 of 2018 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment of Regional Technical Implementation Units for the Protection of Women and Children (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2018 Number 532).

With Joint Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY

and

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG

HAS DECIDED:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:
1. Region is the City of Bandar Lampung.
2. Regional Government is the Mayor as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional House of Representatives of Bandar Lampung City.
4. Mayor is the Mayor of Bandar Lampung.
5. Protection is all preventive actions, services and empowerment to protect and guarantee the rights of women from acts of violence.
6. Woman is a human being of female sex and a person recognized by law as a woman.
7. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering either physically, sexually, psychologically, and/or domestic neglect including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of a person's freedom.
8. Trafficking in Persons is the act of recruitment, transportation, harboring, sending, transfer, or receipt of a person by threat of violence, use of violence, abduction, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or position of vulnerability, debt bondage or giving payment or benefits to obtain consent from a person who has control over that other person, whether carried out within the country or between countries for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in the person being exploited.
9. Victim is a person who experiences misery and/or threat of violence resulting in suffering either physically and/or psychologically either directly or indirectly.
10. Prevention is the effort of regional government and society in creating conditions that prevent the occurrence of violence, mistreatment, exploitation and neglect and trafficking of women.
11. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to victims when seeing, hearing and knowing of the impending, ongoing or occurred violence against victims.
12. Empowerment is an effort to strengthen women to be able to work and operate independently.
13. Regional Technical Implementation Unit for the Protection of Women and Children hereinafter abbreviated as UPTD PPA is a Regional Technical Implementation Unit established by the Regional Government in providing services for Women and Children who experience violence, discrimination, special protection and other problems.
14. Safe House is a temporary residence, used to provide protection to victims.

CHAPTER II

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES

Article 2

1. Protection of women is based on the principles of:
a. respect and protection of Human Rights;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of women;
e. right to life, survival, and development;
f. empowerment;
g. legal certainty; and
h. participation.
2. Protection of women aims to guarantee the fulfillment of rights to be able to live, grow, develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and to receive protection from violence, discrimination, exploitation and trafficking in persons for the realization of quality and prosperous women.

CHAPTER III

SCOPE

Article 3

The Scope of Protection of Women includes:
a. Prevention;
b. Service; and
c. Empowerment.

Part One

Prevention

Article 4

Every Woman has the right:
a. to live and maintain her life and livelihood;
b. to obtain education and benefit from science and technology, arts and culture;
c. to obtain health services;
d. to form a family in a legal marriage bond;
e. to develop herself;
f. to recognition, guarantee, protection and fair legal certainty as well as equal treatment before the law;
g. to work and receive fair remuneration and treatment in employment relations;
h. to associate, assemble and express opinions;
i. to live peacefully, safely, peacefully, happily, prosperously, physically and spiritually;
j. to obtain social security;
k. to embrace and worship according to their respective religion and beliefs;
l. to special protection in emergency conditions/situations.

Article 5

1. Prevention in the context of protection includes the fields of education, infrastructure, public services and spatial planning, governance and institutional management, economy, employment, social and culture;
2. Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented through:
a. improving quality of life;
b. establishing and developing protection strategies and policies; and
c. establishing and developing institutional capacity related to the protection of women.

Article 6

Improving the quality of life of women as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter a can be done through:
a. providing access for women to education, health and other strategic services;
b. encouraging the involvement of women in various development activities;
c. providing knowledge, skills and character values, morals and family resilience;
d. encouraging programs that can increase women's independence in various fields, both legal, political, social, economic, employment, cultural and other strategic fields.

Article 7

In establishing and developing strategies and policies for the protection of women, as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter b can be done through:
a. presenting communication, information and education materials on the protection of women;
b. conducting socialization, advocacy and social campaigns in the context of protecting women both to the community and to every element responsible for the protection of women;
c. conducting sustainable cooperation with the community in the protection of women;
d. strengthening and developing gender data systems;
e. increasing and involving the role and active participation of the community in the protection of women;

Article 8

1. In order to establish and develop institutional capacity related to the protection of women, as referred to in Article 5 paragraph (2) letter c can be done through:
a. strengthening coordination mechanisms and networking of women's protection units;
b. Regional Government establishes a task force consisting of representatives from regional government, law enforcement, community organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, and researchers/academics;
c. improving the capacity of management resources through education and training for law enforcement officials, medical personnel, psychologists, psychiatrists, and victim companions;
d. strengthening the institutional capacity of Gender Mainstreaming;
e. optimizing technical service units;
f. providing adequate facilities and infrastructure in the context of protecting women.
2. To implement the provisions as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Two

Service

Paragraph One

Forms of Violence

Article 9

Forms of violence against women comprise:
a. physical violence caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, unconsciousness and/or cause death;
b. psychological violence caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person;
c. sexual violence caused by:
1\. sexual harassment;
2\. sexual exploitation;
3\. forced contraception;
4\. forced abortion;
5\. rape;
6\. forced marriage;
7\. forced prostitution;
8\. sexual slavery;
9\. sexual torture;
10\. neglect.
d. Neglect caused by:
1\. acts that result in the unfulfillment of women's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social;
2\. acts that neglect a person within their household scope, whereas according to the law applicable to them or due to an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
3\. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting women from working properly inside or outside the home.
e. Exploitation caused by:
1\. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
2\. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully removing or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and/or
3\. all forms of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, and/or not limited to all activities of prostitution and indecency

Part Two

Rights of Victims

Article 10

Every victim has the right to receive:
a. protection from family, police, prosecution, courts, advocates, social institutions, or other parties either temporarily or based on a protection order from the court;
b. health services in accordance with medical needs;
c. special handling related to victim confidentiality;
d. accompaniment by social workers and legal assistance at every level of the examination process in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations; and
e. spiritual guidance services.

Part Three

Forms of Services

Article 11

1. Complaint handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women submitted by victims, families or the community.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. conducting interviews and observation of the victim's condition;
b. making recommendations for follow-up services;
c. conducting coordination and referral to follow-up services and related parties;
d. conducting administration of the complaint process.

Article 12

1. Health services are efforts that include promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. conducting examinations;
b. treatment;
c. follow-up care for victims;
d. conducting coordination of health rehabilitation implementation and reproductive health services;
e. conducting medico-legal examinations including collection of evidence from victims and preparation of visum et repertum.
f. conducting supporting examinations and laboratory tests on evidence.
g. conducting consultations with specialist doctors or making referrals.
h. preparing case reports.

Article 13

1. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of a person experiencing social dysfunction so that they can perform their social functions properly.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. providing accompaniment during the case handling process;
b. conducting counseling.

Article 14

1. Legal assistance is legal services provided by legal companions and advocates to carry out the process of accompanying witnesses and/or victims of violence against women.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. Accompanying and/or defending in every legal handling process;
b. preparing reports on legal handling progress.

Article 15

1. Repatriation is an effort to return women victims of violence from the city area to their area of origin.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. conducting coordination with relevant agencies for victim repatriation.
b. preparing progress reports on the victim repatriation accompaniment process;
c. conducting monitoring for at least three months after the victim is returned to their family.

Article 16

1. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of needs for victims.
2. Services as referred to in paragraph (1) comprise:
a. Economic and social empowerment;
b. Education; and
c. Monitoring and/or follow-up guidance.

Part Three

Empowerment

Article 17

1. In order to improve the position, role, and quality of women, as well as efforts to realize gender equality and justice in family, community, national, and state life, women must be empowered.
2. Women's empowerment as referred to in paragraph (1) is directed to obtain their opportunities and rights as human beings, so that they are able to play a role and participate in economic, socio-cultural, political, and legal activities.

Article 18

Implementation of women's empowerment in the economic field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) is carried out by:
a. providing knowledge, skills and job training;
b. facilitating the formation of productive economic business groups;
c. facilitating the strengthening and development of productive economic business groups;
d. facilitating and providing capital assistance; and
e. facilitating the development of marketing networks.

Article 19

Women's empowerment in the socio-cultural field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) is implemented through:
a. increasing knowledge, attitudes and skills to encourage the fulfillment of tiered education in accordance with potential to improve social status;
b. increasing awareness, willingness and ability to overcome health problems through quality promotive, preventive, curative, and rehabilitative efforts, especially in the field of reproductive health.
c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning including access to consultation services and marriage registration; and
d. facilitation and efforts to preserve customs and develop science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women.

Article 20

Implementation of women's empowerment in the political field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) includes:
a. involvement of women in decision-making at various levels;
b. providing opportunities for women to hold public office;
c. participation in general elections; and
d. self-development through organizations to associate, assemble and express opinions.

Article 21

Implementation of women's empowerment in the legal field as referred to in Article 17 paragraph (2) includes:
a. increasing awareness and knowledge in the legal field through communication, information and education services; and
b. facilitation of access and legal consultation services.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ORGANIZERS

Part One

Regional Government

Article 22

1. The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. make policies that take into account the interests of women, especially in terms of fulfillment and protection of their rights;
b. facilitate efforts to organize services for the fulfillment of rights and provide support for facilities and infrastructure in organizing the protection of women;
c. guarantee the protection, maintenance, and welfare of women by taking into account the rights and obligations of women;
d. supervise the organization of women's protection;
e. coordinate across government institutions as well as with the community and the Business Sector;
f. conduct data collection and inventory of women's data;
g. provide safe houses.
2. The Regional Government has the authority to:
a. prepare operational guidelines for minimum service standards for efforts to fulfill rights and protection for women;
b. implement services for the fulfillment of rights and protection of women;
c. supervise efforts to fulfill women's rights and women's protection services; and
d. develop cooperation networks between government institutions as well as with Universities, the community and the Business Sector.

Part Two

Community

Article 23

1. The community is responsible for carrying out prevention, risk reduction and handling of cases of women victims of violence, exploitation, and trafficking in persons.
2. The community's responsibility as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. preventing acts of violence against women;
b. providing information and/or reporting if acts of violence occur to law enforcement or authorized parties;
c. protecting victims; and
d. providing emergency assistance.

Part Three

Business Sector

Article 24

The business sector has the obligation and responsibility to:
a. provide contributions and guarantees in the implementation of organizing women's protection;
b. provide facilities and infrastructure to enhance efforts to fulfill rights and protect women; and
c. be responsible for carrying out prevention, risk reduction and handling of cases of women victims of violence, exploitation, and trafficking in persons.

CHAPTER V

WOMEN'S PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Part One

Guidance, Coordination, Implementation and Supervision of Women's Protection

Article 25

1. The Mayor conducts guidance, coordination of implementation and supervision of women's protection.
2. The Mayor may delegate guidance, coordination of implementation and supervision, as referred to in paragraph (1), to the Regional Apparatus Organization that carries out the main duties and functions in the field of women's protection.
3. The procedures and mechanisms for guidance, coordination, implementation and supervision shall be further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

Part Two

Service Delivery

Article 26

1. The delivery of women's protection services is carried out in an integrated manner by the UPTD PPA and coordinates with OPD and relevant Agencies or institutions in accordance with the field of Women's services.
2. The implementation of service delivery as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be further regulated by Mayor's Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

EVALUATION, REPORTING

AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Article 27

1. OPD provides prevention services, risk reduction services and case handling services for women who are victims.
2. OPD that implements the organization of women's protection is obliged to carry out evaluation and make accountability reports to the Mayor.

CHAPTER VII

FINANCING

Funding for women's protection may be sourced from the State Revenue and Expenditure Budget, Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget of both the Province and City and/or other lawful sources that are non-binding in accordance with statutory provisions.

CHAPTER VIII

CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 28

Any person or body/institution/organization that deliberately fails to fulfill the rights and protection of women may be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with applicable regulations and laws.

CHAPTER IX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 29

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

So that everyone may know of it, orders the promulgation of this Regional Regulation by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bandar Lampung City.

Enacted in Bandar Lampung, on 17 June 2019

MAYOR OF BANDAR LAMPUNG,

Seal/Signature

HERMAN HN.

Promulgated in Bandar Lampung on 17 June 2019

REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY,

Seal/Signature

BADRI TAMAM

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY YEAR 2019 NUMBER 03

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BANDAR LAMPUNG CITY LAMPUNG PROVINCE: 03/857/BL/2019
