PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BIMA CITY

NUMBER: 203 YEAR 2018 SERIES:

REGIONAL REGULATION OF BIMA CITY

NUMBER 6 YEAR 2018

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

MAYOR OF BIMA,

Considering:

a. that every citizen has the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and has the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence;
b. that all forms of violence against women constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a and letter b, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women Victims of Violence;

In View of:

1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 69 Year 1958 concerning the Establishment of Level II Regions Within the Level I Regions of Bali, West Nusa Tenggara and East Nusa Tenggara (State Gazette Year 1958 Number 122, Supplement to State Gazette Number 1655);
3. Law Number 7 Year 1984 concerning Ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1984 Number 29, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3277);
4. Law Number 39 Year 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 3886);
5. Law Number 13 Year 2002 concerning the Establishment of Bima City in West Nusa Tenggara Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Number 26, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4188);
6. Law Number 13 Year 2003 concerning Manpower (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2003 Number 39, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4279);
7. Law Number 23 Year 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 95, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 4419);
8. Law Number 39 Year 2004 concerning the Placement and Protection of Indonesian Migrant Workers Abroad (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2004 Number 137, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4447);
9. Law Number 13 Year 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 64, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4636);
10. Law Number 21 Year 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2007 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
11. Law Number 11 Year 2009 concerning Social Welfare (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2009 Number 12, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4976);
12. Law Number 12 Year 2011 concerning the Formulation of Legislation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 Number 82, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5234);
13. Law Number 23 Year 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2014 Number 244, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 Year 2015 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2015 Number 58, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5659);
14. Government Regulation Number 4 Year 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation for the Recovery of Victims of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2006 Number 15, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia number 64);
15. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 2 Year 2008 concerning the Implementation of Women's Protection;
16. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 01 Year 2010 concerning Minimum Service Standards (SPM) for Integrated Services for Women and Children Victims of Violence (State News of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2010 Number 56);
17. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 5 Year 2010 concerning Guidelines for the Establishment and Development of Integrated Service Centers;
18. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 19 Year 2011 concerning the Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence;

With Mutual Approval.

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF BIMA CITY

and

MAYOR OF BIMA

DECIDES:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

In this Regional Regulation, what is meant by:

1. Region is the City of Bima.
2. Regional Government is the regional head as an element of the Regional Government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs that are the authority of the autonomous region.
3. Mayor is the Mayor of Bima.
4. Regional Apparatus is an auxiliary element of the regional head and DPRD in the administration of Government Affairs that are the authority of the Region.
5. Woman is an adult human being of female sex and a person who is legally recognized as a woman.
6. Prevention is an activity carried out to prevent the occurrence of acts of violence against women.
7. Protection is all efforts aimed at providing a sense of security to victims carried out by family, advocates, social institutions, police, prosecutors, courts, or other parties either temporarily or based on court determination.
8. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering physically, psychologically, sexually, and/or neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion, or unlawful deprivation of liberty.
9. Physical violence is any act that causes pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage or fainting and/or causes death.
10. Psychological violence is an act that causes fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, distrust or severe psychological suffering to a person.
11. Sexual violence is any act in the form of sexual harassment, forced sexual intercourse, whether unnatural or unwanted with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.
12. Victim is a woman who experiences misery and/or suffering either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
13. Community is individuals, families, groups, social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Family is a person who has a blood relationship in a straight line upward or downward and collateral line up to the third degree, or who has a marital relationship, or a person who is a dependent of a woman.
15. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
16. Service is an immediate activity and action carried out by professional personnel in accordance with their respective professions in the form of counseling, therapy and advocacy for the strengthening and recovery of victims of violence.
17. Assistance is all actions in the form of counseling, psychological therapy, advocacy, and spiritual guidance, for the self-empowerment of victims of violence to resolve the problems they face.
18. Repatriation is an effort to return female victims of violence to the family, substitute family, or community that can provide protection and fulfillment of their needs.
19. Rehabilitation is the recovery of victims from psychosocial disorders and the restoration of normal social functioning, both in the family and in the community.
20. Social Reintegration is an effort to reunite victims with family, community, institutions, or other social environments that can provide protection.
21. Institution is an agency/service/body/office within the scope of regional government and/or non-governmental organizations that provide assistance.
22. Integrated Service Center hereinafter referred to as PPT is a general term that can be used by various institutions that provide services for victims of violence.
23. Regional Action Plan is a foundation and guideline for relevant agencies, vertical agencies, and the community, in order to carry out activities for the prevention and protection of female victims of violence.
24. Safe House is a temporary residence, provided to provide protection to victims in accordance with predetermined standards.

Article 2

The implementation of protection for female victims of violence is carried out based on the principles of:  a. justice;
b. gender equality; and
c. non-discrimination.

Article 3

1. The purpose of implementing protection for female victims of violence is to:
a. prevent violence against women including trafficking in persons;
b. eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation against women;
c. protect and provide a sense of security for women;
d. provide services to female victims of violence, reporters, witnesses; and
e. facilitate and mediate household disputes to realize the integrity of a harmonious and prosperous household.
2. The purpose of implementing protection for female victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1), includes aspects of:
a. prevention;
b. service and assistance;
c. reunification; and
d. empowerment.

CHAPTER II

FORMS OF VIOLENCE

Article 4

Forms of violence against women may include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. neglect; and
e. exploitation.

Article 5

Physical violence as referred to in Article 4 letter a is caused by acts that result in pain, injury, wounds or disability to a person's body, miscarriage, fainting and/or cause death.

Article 6

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 4 letter b is caused by acts that result in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 7

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 4 letter c is caused by:
a. acts in the form of sexual harassment;
b. forced sexual intercourse;
c. forced sexual intercourse in an unnatural or unwanted manner; and/or
d. forced sexual intercourse with another person for commercial purposes and or certain purposes.

Article 8

Neglect as referred to in Article 4 letter d is caused by:
a. acts that result in the unfulfillment of women's needs properly, whether physical, mental, spiritual or social, committed by parents, guardians, or other parties responsible for care;
b. acts of deliberately neglecting to maintain, care for, or take care of women as they should, committed by parents, guardians or any other party responsible for their care;
c. acts of neglecting a person in their household environment, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract they are obliged to provide livelihood, care, or maintenance to that person; and/or
d. acts that result in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 9

Exploitation as referred to in Article 4 letter e is caused by:
a. acts that exploit economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. acts with or without the victim's consent which include but are not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, exploitation of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or exploiting the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain material or immaterial benefits; and/or
c. all forms of exploitation of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including and not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

CHAPTER III

RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 10

Every victim has the right to receive:
a. protection;
b. information;
c. optimal services;
d. continuous handling up to the rehabilitation stage;
e. confidential handling;
f. psychological and legal assistance; and
g. guarantee of rights related to status as a family member and community member.

Article 11

Female victims of violence, in addition to receiving the rights as referred to in Article 10, also receive special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect and full use for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER IV

OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 12

Obligations and responsibilities in the implementation of protection for female victims of violence are the joint responsibility of:
a. Regional Government;
b. community;
c. family; and
d. parents.

Article 13

1. The Regional Government implements protection efforts for female victims of violence through:
a. policies, programs, and activities for the protection of female victims of violence;
b. establishment of PPT;
c. ease of service to victims;
d. seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process; and
e. cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.
2. In order to carry out the obligations and responsibilities as referred to in paragraph (1) letter b, the regional government establishes programs and activities for the protection of women in 1 (one) Regional Action Plan as a basis for regional apparatus in implementing protection for female victims of violence.
3. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is part of the Regional Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMD).
4. The Regional Action Plan as referred to in paragraph (2), is further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 14

1. The obligations and responsibilities of the community as referred to in Article 12 letter b, are implemented in the form of community participation.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1), includes:
a. formation of family partners at the kelurahan level;
b. formation of women's protection units within community organizations;
c. independent implementation of socialization of women's rights;
d. provision of first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authority if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, private sector, and mass media.

Article 15

The obligations of family and/or parents as referred to in Article 12 letters c and d, legally have full responsibility to prevent all forms of violence and protect women as family members.

CHAPTER V

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTECTION

Part One

Establishment of PPT

Article 16

1. In order to provide services and protection to women from violence, the Regional Government establishes PPT as an integrated service center for female victims of violence.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1), consists of elements of the Health Office, Education and Culture Office, Social Office, Cooperatives Industry and Trade Office, Population and Civil Registration Office, Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Office, Civil Service Police Unit, Regional General Hospital, City Police Resort, Non-Governmental Organizations, and Higher Education Institutions.
3. The elements of PPT as referred to in paragraph (2), are determined by Mayor Decree.
4. The implementation of services to victims is carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
5. PPT as referred to in paragraph (4) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.
6. PPT provides services and temporary protection in the form of safe houses.
7. In the event that PPT does not yet have a safe house, then victims of violence are referred to PPT that has a safe house.
8. PPT consists of several counseling fields.
9. The counseling fields as referred to in paragraph (8) consist of:
a. legal field;
b. health field;
c. spiritual field; and
d. psychology field.
10. Further provisions regarding the organizational structure of PPT are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Two

Forms and Mechanisms of Prevention and Services by PPT

Article 17

Forms of prevention of violence against women carried out by PPT, can be implemented through:
a. Socialization activities of Laws and Regulations to the community related to the protection of women's rights; and
b. Training of PPT members related to the implementation of their duties in preventing violence against women.

Article 18

1. PPT in carrying out its duties and functions may coordinate with Sub-district PPT, and competent parties in making efforts to prevent violence against women.
2. Further provisions regarding the mechanism for implementing prevention duties as referred to in paragraph (1), are regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Article 19

Forms of services to victims organized by PPT include:
a. Medical services, in the form of treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical personnel and paramedics;
b. Medicolegal services are a form of medical services for evidentiary purposes in the legal field;
c. Psychosocial services are services provided in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength and independence, in resolving their problems;
d. Legal services to assist victims in undergoing legal processes; and
e. Economic independence services in the form of skills training and providing economic access so that victims can be independent.

Article 20

1. In carrying out the task of providing services to female victims of violence, city PPT coordinates with Sub-district PPT.
2. The mechanism for implementing duties as referred to in paragraph (1), is organized according to Standard Operating Procedures which are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Three

Prevention by Regional Apparatus

Article 21

1. To prevent violence against women, the government carries out empowerment and awareness to families, parents and the community by providing information, guidance and/or counseling.
2. In addition to empowerment and awareness as referred to in paragraph (1), the government makes efforts as follows:
a. increasing the quantity and quality of education both formal and non-formal and informal;
b. opening accessibility to obtain education, training, funding, income enhancement and social services;
c. opening employment opportunities for women;
d. building community participation and concern to implement prevention and protection of women from violence;
e. building and providing a complete and easily accessible information system;
f. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement apparatus, government apparatus, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women; and.
g. opening complaint posts for the protection of women from violence.

Article 22

1. Prevention of violence against women as referred to in Article 21, shall be implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. education;
d. manpower;
e. women's empowerment and child protection;
f. mental and spiritual; and
g. public order and security.
2. Prevention of violence by regional apparatus as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be implemented in an integrated and continuous manner based on the Regional Action Plan.

Part Four

Mechanism of Assistance by Persons and/or Institutions Cooperating with PPT

Article 23

1. Assistance shall be implemented by persons and/or institutions cooperating with PPT.
2. The mechanism of assistance as referred to in paragraph (1), shall be organized according to Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which are further regulated by Mayor Regulation.

Part Five

Principles of Service and Assistance

Article 24

The implementation of services and assistance to victims shall be conducted with the principles of:
a. fast, safe, and empathetic;
b. guarantee of confidentiality;
c. easily accessible; and
d. free of charge.

Part Six

Services

Article 25

1. Forms of services provided to women victims of violence include:
a. complaint services;
b. health services;
c. legal aid;
d. repatriation;
e. rehabilitation, social reintegration, and medicolegal;
f. identification services; and
g. psychological services.
2. Forms of services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be implemented in accordance with minimum service standards established by the government and implemented by regional apparatus whose duties and functions are in the fields of:
a. social affairs;
b. health;
c. women's empowerment and protection; and
d. mental and spiritual.
3. In carrying out duties and functions as referred to in paragraph (2), the Regional Government cooperates with government agencies, provincial government, other district/city governments and the community.
4. Further provisions regarding procedures for services and handling of women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Mayor Regulation.

CHAPTER VI

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 26

1. The Regional Government shall conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of protection for women victims of violence.
2. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. guidelines and fulfillment standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; and
e. evaluation
3. Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be conducted with the principles of:
a. professional;
b. transparent; and
c. accountable.

Article 27

Guidance and supervision as referred to in Article 26 shall be conducted in order to realize the objectives of implementing protection for women victims of violence in accordance with minimum service standards established by Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER VII

REPORTING

Article 28

1. PPT shall report the implementation of protection for women victims of violence to the Mayor.
2. Reporting as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be submitted in writing, covering:
a. administration;
b. finance;
c. services; and
d. performance.
3. Submission of written reports as referred to in paragraph (2) shall be implemented at least once every 3 (three) months.

CHAPTER VIII

FINANCING

Article 29

Financing for the implementation of protection for women victims of violence shall be sourced from:
a. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget; and
b. other lawful sources in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.

Article 30

1. The Regional Government may provide financial assistance to community organizations, social organizations, or non-governmental organizations and universities that implement protection for women victims of violence.
2. Financial assistance as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in accordance with regional financial capacity and implemented in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations in the field of finance.

CHAPTER IX

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 31

Implementing regulations of this Regional Regulation shall be established no later than 1 (one) year from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.

Article 32

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Bima City.

Enacted in Bima City

on 5 March 2018

MAYOR OF BIMA,

M. QURAIS H. ABIDIN

Promulgated in Bima City

on 5 March 2018 Acting REGIONAL SECRETARY OF BIMA CITY,

SYAMSUDDIN

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BIMA CITY YEAR 2018 NUMBER 203

REGISTRATION NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BIMA CITY, WEST NUSA TENGGARA PROVINCE: (12/2018)

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF BIMA CITY

NUMBER 6 OF 2018 CONCERNING PROTECTION OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Violence against women constitutes a violation of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. The fate of women victims of violence must be given attention by the regional government. The high number of cases of violence against women is often caused by factors developing in society, for example low economic level, education, environment in the industrial sector. Therefore, victims of violence such as this need to receive protection in accordance with the principles of justice, truth, legal certainty, equality and upholding human rights.

For the empowerment of victims of violence, the regional government establishes an Integrated Service Center (PPT) which is a generic term that can be used by various institutions providing services for victims of violence such as Integrated Service Center for Women's Empowerment (P2TP), Safe House, Social Protection House (RPS), Trauma Center Protection House (RPTC), Women's Social Protection House (RPSW), Shelter House, etc. Which specifically have the main duties and functions for empowerment of women and children victims of violence.

The Regional Government has the obligation and responsibility to implement efforts to protect women victims of violence through: implementing policies for protection of women victims of violence applied by the government, establishing policies, programs, and activities for protection of women victims of violence, establishment of PPT, ensuring the implementation of ease of service to victims, seeking effectiveness and efficiency for the victim recovery process, and seeking the creation of cooperation and coordination in victim recovery efforts.

ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 2

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 3

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 5

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 12

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 13

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 14

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 20

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 21

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 22

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 23

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 31

Sufficiently Clear.

Article 32

Sufficiently Clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO REGIONAL GAZETTE OF BIMA CITY NUMBER 94
