PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

REGENT OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA PROVINCE OF NORTH SULAWESI

REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY

NUMBER 8 OF 2016

CONCERNING

PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

BY THE GRACE OF GOD ALMIGHTY

REGENT OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA,

Considering:

a. that the State guarantees every person including women and children the right to be free from torture or treatment that degrades human dignity and the right to obtain security and freedom from all forms of violence and discrimination as guaranteed by the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
b. that all forms of acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights so that their dignity and honor need to be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination;
c. that violence against women and children in the Region continues to increase, so that protection efforts are needed for women and children victims of violence through institutional support and Regional Regulations that guarantee protection for women and children victims of violence;
d. that based on the considerations as referred to in letter a, letter b and letter c, it is necessary to establish a Regional Regulation on the Protection of Women and Children Victims of Violence.

In View of:

1. Article 18 Paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended several times, most recently by Government Regulation in Lieu of Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 1 of 2016 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 99, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5882);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2004 Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4419);
5. Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2006 Number 64, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4635) as amended by Law Number 31 of 2014 concerning the Amendment to Law Number 13 of 2006 concerning the Protection of Witnesses and Victims (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 293, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5602);
6. Law Number 9 of 2007 concerning the Establishment of Southeast Minahasa Regency in North Sulawesi Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 11, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4685);
7. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning the Eradication of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2007 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4720);
8. Law Number 16 of 2011 concerning Legal Aid (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2011 Number 104, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5248);
9. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587), as amended several times most recently by Law Number 9 of 2015 concerning the Second Amendment to Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5679);
10. Law Number 8 of 2016 concerning Persons with Disabilities (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2016 Number 69, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5871);
11. Government Regulation Number 9 of 2008 concerning Procedures and Mechanisms for Integrated Services for Witnesses and/or Victims of the Criminal Act of Trafficking in Persons (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2008 Number 22, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4818);
12. Regulation of the State Minister for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6 of 2015 concerning the System for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
13. Regulation of the Minister of Home Affairs Number 80 of 2015 concerning the Establishment of Regional Legal Products (State News of the Republic of Indonesia of 2015 Number 2036).

With Mutual Approval

REGIONAL HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY

and

REGENT OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA

DECIDES:

To Establish:

REGIONAL REGULATION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE.

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

In this Regional Regulation, the following terms shall mean:
1. Region is Southeast Minahasa Regency.
2. Regional Government is the administration of Government affairs by the Regional Government and the Regional House of Representatives according to the Principles of Autonomy and assistance tasks with the principle of the broadest possible Autonomy in the system and principles of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia.
3. Regional Government is the Regional Head as an element of regional government administration who leads the implementation of government affairs which are the authority of the autonomous region.
4. Regent is the Regent of Southeast Minahasa.
5. Provincial Government is the Provincial Government of North Sulawesi.
6. Regional House of Representatives hereinafter abbreviated as DPRD is the Regional People's Representative Institution of Southeast Minahasa Regency as an element of Regional Government administration.
7. Regional Government Work Unit hereinafter abbreviated as SKPD is a Regional Government Work Unit related to the implementation of child protection.
8. Regional Revenue and Expenditure Budget hereinafter abbreviated as APBD is the Regional financial plan which is discussed and jointly approved by the Regional Government and DPRD and stipulated by Regional Regulation.
9. Victim is a woman and child who experiences suffering and/or hardship either directly or indirectly as a result of violence.
10. Child is a person who has not reached the age of 18 (eighteen) years, including a child still in the womb.
11. Child Protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow and develop and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and receive protection from violence, exploitation, discrimination, and neglect.
12. Special protection is a form of protection received by Children in certain situations and conditions to obtain a guarantee of security against threats that endanger themselves and their lives in their growth and development.
13. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or stepfather and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
14. Guardian is a person or body who in fact exercises parental authority as a parent towards a child.
15. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband, wife and their children, or father and his children, or mother and her children, or blood relatives in a direct line upwards or downwards up to the third degree.
16. Community is family, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
17. Social Organization hereinafter referred to as Orsos is an institution/foundation/social association formed by the community either legal entity or non-legal entity which functions as a means of community participation in implementing Social Welfare Efforts (UKS).
18. Child Protection Social House hereinafter abbreviated as RSPA is a child protection service unit for child victims of violence and child trafficking as a continuation of temporary shelter which functions to provide protection, recovery, rehabilitation, advocacy and referral.
19. Social Services for Children are physical, mental and social services aimed at helping children to grow and develop properly.
20. Social Services for Neglected Children are social services for children whose parents do not have the ability to meet the needs of children to grow and develop properly.
21. Child-friendly school is an educational institution that recognizes and respects children's rights to obtain education, health, opportunities to play and have fun, protection from violence and abuse, can express views freely, and participate in making decisions according to their capacity.
22. Social Work Profession is a profession based on a framework of science, values and technical skills and can be used as a vehicle in the implementation of social welfare efforts.
23. Integrated Service Center hereinafter abbreviated as PPT is a unified unit that organizes integrated services for witnesses and/or victims of criminal acts of trafficking in persons as well as women and children victims of violence.
24. Forum for Protection of Victims of Violence hereinafter abbreviated as FPKK is a coordination forum for prevention, handling and empowerment of victims of violence against women and children whose implementation is networked and formed at the Regency, District and Village levels.

Article 2

The principles of protection of Victims are:
a. respect and fulfillment of the rights of victims;
b. justice and gender equality;
c. non-discrimination;
d. best interests of victims; and
e. empowerment.

Article 3

The objectives of Protection of Victims are:
a. to prevent violence against women and children;
b. to provide services to Victims; and
c. to empower women victims of violence.

Article 4

The scope of protection for victims includes prevention, service, empowerment and handling efforts for victims of violence in the Region.

CHAPTER II

VIOLENCE

Article 5

Forms of violence against women and children include:
a. physical violence;
b. psychological violence;
c. sexual violence;
d. domestic neglect;
e. exploitation; and
f. other violence.

Article 6

Physical violence as referred to in Article 5 letter a is that which results in pain, illness or serious injury.

Article 7

Psychological violence as referred to in Article 5 letter b is an act that results in fear, loss of self-confidence, loss of ability to act, feelings of helplessness and/or severe psychological suffering to a person.

Article 8

Sexual violence as referred to in Article 5 letter c includes:
a. forced sexual intercourse committed against a person residing within the scope of that household and/or outside the scope of that household; and
b. forced sexual intercourse against a person within the scope of their household with another person for commercial purposes and/or certain purposes.

Article 9

Domestic neglect as referred to in Article 5 letter d is:
a. an act of neglecting a person within the scope of the household whereas according to the law applicable to the person concerned or because of an agreement or contract he/she is obliged to provide life, care or maintenance to that person.
b. an act of neglecting a person within the scope of their household, whereas according to the law applicable to them or because of an agreement or contract he/she is obliged to provide life, care, or maintenance to that person; and
c. an act that results in economic dependence by restricting and/or prohibiting decent work inside or outside the home so that the victim is under the control of that person.

Article 10

Exploitation as referred to in Article 5 letter e is caused by:
a. an act that exploits economically or sexually with the intention of benefiting oneself or others;
b. an act with or without the consent of the victim which includes but is not limited to prostitution, forced labor or services, slavery or similar practices, oppression, extortion, utilization of physical, sexual, reproductive organs, or unlawfully transferring or transplanting organs and/or body tissues or utilizing the labor or ability of a person by another party to obtain benefits both material and immaterial; and
c. any form of utilization of sexual organs or other body organs of the victim to obtain benefits, including but not limited to all activities of prostitution or sexual abuse.

Article 11

Other violence as referred to in Article 5 letter f is caused by:
a. threat of violence includes: any unlawful act in the form of speech, writing, image, symbol, or body movement, whether or not using means that creates fear or restricts a person's fundamental freedom; and
b. coercion, includes: a situation where a person/victim is ordered to do something in such a way that the person does something contrary to their own will.

CHAPTER III RIGHTS OF VICTIMS

Article 12

Every Victim obtains the following rights:
a. the right to have their dignity respected as a human being;
b. the right to health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by the victim;
c. the right to determine their own decisions;
d. the right to obtain information;
e. the right to confidentiality of identity;
f. the right to compensation;
g. the right to social rehabilitation;
h. the right to complaint handling;
i. the right to obtain facilitation in the judicial process; and
j. the right to assistance.

Article 13

Child victims of violence in addition to obtaining the rights as referred to in Article 13, also obtain special rights, as follows:
a. the right to respect for survival, growth and development;
b. the right to basic services;
c. the right to equal protection;
d. the right to be free from various stigma; and
e. the right to obtain freedom.

CHAPTER IV OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Part One Regional Government

Article 14

1. The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to protect victims of violence, in the form of:a. establishing PPT;
b. establishing FPKK;
c. determining policies;
d. preparing program and activity planning;
e. providing facilities and infrastructure support; and
f. allocating budget.
2. In the implementation of the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in paragraph (1), the Regional Government prepares a Regional Action Plan for the protection of victims of violence.

Article 15

The Regional Government provides services for victims of violence in the form of:
a. facilitating the establishment of PPT;
b. facilitating PPT facilities and infrastructure according to regional financial capacity; and
c. facilitating FPKK as a network forum for handling victims of violence.

Article 16

The Regional Government is obligated and responsible to:
a. supervise the implementation of services for victims of violence, with minimum service standards; and
b. provide funds for the protection of victims through the APBD and/or other lawful regional financial sources.

Article 17

In implementing the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 14, Article 15 and Article 16, the Regent grants authority to the agency that has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Part Two

Community

Article 18

In addition to the obligations and responsibilities of the Regional Government as referred to in Article 14, Article 15 and Article 16, the community has the following obligations and responsibilities:
a. preventing the occurrence of violence against women and children;
b. reporting when violence occurs;
c. protecting victims; and
d. providing emergency assistance;

Part Three

Family

Article 19

The family is obligated and responsible to implement efforts to prevent and protect victims in the form of:
a. providing understanding about the prevention of domestic violence;
b. supervising every family member;
c. parents are prohibited from employing underage children in fulfilling the family economy; and
d. parents must provide opportunities for school-age children to obtain adequate education.

CHAPTER V PROTECTION OF VICTIMS

Article 20

1. Efforts to prevent violence against women and children are carried out in an integrated manner by the Regional Government coordinated by the agency that has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.
2. Prevention efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) are implemented by:
a. forming a network in efforts to prevent violence;
b. conducting coordination, integration, synchronization of violence prevention based on partnership patterns;
c. establishing a violence prevention system; and
d. conducting socialization about laws and regulations related to the protection of women and children victims of violence.

Article 21

In addition to prevention efforts carried out by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 20, prevention efforts must also be carried out by:
a. family and/or closest relatives;
b. community;
c. educational institutions; and
d. other community institutions.

CHAPTER VI

INTEGRATED SERVICE CENTER

Article 22

1. PPT is established by the Regional Government in the form of a Technical Implementation Unit (UPT).
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is a functional work unit that has the duties, main tasks, and functions of providing protection to women and children from acts of violence.
3. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is tasked with providing services and temporary protection in the form of a safe house for victims of violence.
4. In the event that PPT does not have a safe house (shelter) as referred to in paragraph (3), then victims of violence are referred to PPT that has a safe house.
5. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) is established by Regional Regulation.

Article 23

1. The organizational structure of PPT established by the Regional Government as referred to in Article 22 paragraph (1) consists of:a. General Chairperson:b. Secretary:c. Treasurer; and
d. Executive Chairperson who oversees fields.
2. The fields as referred to in paragraph (1) letter d, at a minimum include:
a. complaint service field:b. health service field:c. social rehabilitation service field;
d. repatriation and social reintegration field; and
e. legal aid service field.
3. In carrying out duties, PPT is responsible to the Regent through the Head of the agency that has the main duties and functions of coordination in the field of women's empowerment and child protection.

Article 24

The complaint service field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a has the duties:
a. conducting interviews and observation of the victim's condition;
b. making recommendations for follow-up services;
c. conducting coordination and referral to follow-up services and related parties; and
d. conducting administration of the complaint process.

Article 25

The health service field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b has the duties:
a. conducting examination, treatment, and follow-up care for victims;
b.conducting coordination of health rehabilitation implementation and medico-legal;
c. conducting supporting examinations and laboratory tests on evidence;
d. conducting consultation with specialist doctors or making referrals; and
e. making case reports.

Article 26

The social rehabilitation service field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c has the duties:
a. providing assistance during the case handling process; and
b. conducting counseling.

Article 27

The repatriation and social reintegration field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter d has the duties:
a. conducting coordination with relevant agencies for victim repatriation;
b. making progress reports on the repatriation assistance and social rehabilitation process; and
c. conducting monitoring for at least three months after the victim is returned to their family.

Article 28

The legal aid service field as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter e has the duties:
a. accompanying and defending every legal service process; and
b. making progress reports on legal handling.

Article 29

1. PPT established by the Regional Government shall have at least three counselors.
2. Counselors as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. counselor in the field of law;
b. counselor in the field of health; and
c. counselor in the field of psychology.

Article 30

Further provisions regarding the development, mechanism and networked working relationship of PPT shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

Part One

Services

Article 31

1. The provision of services to victims shall be carried out in an integrated manner by PPT.
2. PPT as referred to in paragraph (1) may receive and send case referrals from or to other service units in a networked manner.

Article 32

The provision of services to victims shall be implemented with:
a. speed;
b. safety and comfort;
c. sense of empathy;
d. non-discrimination;
e. easy accessibility;
f. no charges; and
g. guaranteed confidentiality.

Article 33

Forms of services to victims include:
a. complaint, consultation, and counseling services;
b. assistance services;
c. health services;
d. social rehabilitation services;
e. legal services; and
f. repatriation and social reintegration services.

Article 34

Complaint, consultation, and counseling services as referred to in Article 33 letter a include:
a. initial identification or recording of victims; and
b. informed consent.

Article 35

Assistance services as referred to in Article 33 letter b include:
a. accompanying victims during the examination and health recovery process;
b. accompanying victims during the medico-legal process;
c. accompanying victims during the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and court;
d. monitoring the interests and rights of victims in the examination process at the Police, Prosecutor's Office and Court;
e. protecting the privacy and confidentiality of victims from all parties who have no interest, including coverage by mass media;
f. coordinating with other assistants; and
g. providing continuous treatment up to the rehabilitation stage.

Article 36

Health services as referred to in Article 33 letter c include:
a. first aid to victims;
b. treatment and recovery of physical injuries aimed at restoring the physical condition of victims carried out by medical and paramedical personnel; and
c. referral to health services.

Article 37

Social rehabilitation services as referred to in Article 33 letter d constitute services provided by assistants in order to restore the traumatic condition of victims, including the provision of safe houses to protect victims from various threats and intimidation for victims and provide social support so that victims have self-confidence, strength, and independence in resolving their problems, by:
a. providing spiritual guidance to victims; and
b. psychological recovery of victims.

Article 38

Legal services as referred to in Article 33 letter e to assist victims in undergoing the judicial process by:
a. providing legal consultation that includes information regarding the rights of victims and the judicial process;
b. accompanying victims at the investigation, prosecution, and examination levels in court hearings and helping victims to fully describe the violence they experienced;
c. coordinating with fellow law enforcers, volunteer assistants, and social workers so that the judicial process proceeds as it should.

Article 39

1. Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in Article 33 letter f aim to return victims to their families and social environment.
2. Repatriation and social reintegration services as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by the Regional Government in coordination with:
a. Regency/City Government within one Provincial area; and
b. related agencies and institutions both government and non-government.

Part Two Empowerment

Paragraph 1 Empowerment of Women Victims of Violence

Article 40

Forms of empowerment of women victims of violence include:
a. job training;
b. productive economic enterprises and joint business groups; and
c. capital assistance.

Article 41

Job training as referred to in Article 40 letter a includes:
a. skills training;
b. field work practice; and
c. apprenticeship.

Article 42

Productive economic enterprises and joint business groups as referred to in Article 40 letter b include:
a. entrepreneurial skills training;
b. facilitation of joint business group formation; and
c. business implementation assistance.

Article 43

Capital assistance as referred to in Article 40 letter c includes:
a. work facilities and infrastructure assistance; and
b. facilitation of working capital assistance.

Paragraph 2 Fulfillment of Rights of Child Victims of Violence

Article 44

1. The Regional Government, PPT, and the community are obligated to fulfill the rights of child victims of violence.
2. Forms of fulfillment of the rights of child victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) include the fulfillment of children's basic rights according to their needs.

Part Three

Coordination of Victim Protection

Article 45

1. In an effort to provide and organize service delivery for victims, the Regional Government shall establish FPKK.
2. FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) aims to:
a. coordinate and synchronize PPT service delivery;
b. maintain and develop networks and referral systems; and
c. collect, compile and present violence reports.
4. The management and membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be stipulated by Regent Decree.
5. The membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (3) shall be grouped in the following roles:
a. health role;
b. psychology role;
c. legal role;
d. social role; and
e. economic role.
5. Further provisions regarding the establishment, main duties, and functions as well as membership of FPKK as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be regulated by Regent Regulation.

CHAPTER VII

GUIDANCE AND SUPERVISION

Article 46

1. The Regional Government shall conduct guidance and supervision of the implementation of minimum service standards of every PPT in the Region.
2. Guidance and Supervision as referred to in paragraph (1) include:
a. coordination;
b. guidance;
c. education and training; and
d. Monitoring and evaluation.
3. Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2) letter a covers aspects related to planning and implementation.
4. Guidance as referred to in paragraph (2) letter b covers aspects related to planning, implementation, procedures, funding, quality, control and supervision.
5. Education and training as referred to in paragraph (2) letter c shall be conducted in accordance with laws and regulations.
6. Monitoring and evaluation as referred to in paragraph (2) letter d shall be conducted periodically every 6 months.

CHAPTER VIII FUNDING

Article 47

Funding for victim protection activities carried out by the Regional Government shall be charged to the APBD and/or other legitimate and non-binding sources in accordance with the provisions of laws and regulations.

CHAPTER IX COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

Article 48

1. The community participates in the implementation of protection for Victims.
2. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be in the form of:
a. establishing family partners at the sub-district/village level by the community;
b. establishing women and children protection units within community organizations;
c. conducting independent socialization of women's and children's rights;
d. providing first aid to victims; and
e. reporting to the competent authorities if violence against victims occurs in their environment.
3. Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) shall be carried out by individuals, social community institutions, non-governmental organizations, educational institutions, religious institutions, the private sector, and mass media.

CHAPTER X

SANCTIONS

Article 49

1. Any person who commits any form of violence as referred to in Article 5 shall be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with the provisions of Laws and Regulations.
2. Regional Work Units that do not implement the provisions of Article 14, Article 15 and Article 16 shall be subject to administrative sanctions.
3. Any person who directly witnesses violence as referred to in Article 5 and does not report it to the competent authorities shall be subject to criminal sanctions in accordance with the provisions of applicable Laws and Regulations.

CHAPTER XI

CLOSING PROVISIONS

Article 50

This Regional Regulation shall come into force on the date of promulgation.

In order that everyone may know of it, the promulgation of this Regional Regulation is ordered by its placement in the Regional Gazette of Southeast Minahasa Regency.

Enacted in Ratahan | On the date of 3| OCTOBER 2016

REGENT OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA,

JAMES SUMENDAP

Promulgated in Ratahan On the date of 1 November 2016

REGIONAL SECRETARY

REGENCY OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA,

FARRY FREYKE LIWE

REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY YEAR 2016

REGISTER NUMBER OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY NORTH SULAWESI PROVINCE

ELUCIDATION OF REGIONAL REGULATION OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY

NUMBER YEAR 2016  CONCERNING  PROTECTION OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

I. GENERAL

Acts of violence against women and children constitute violations of human rights and therefore their dignity and honor must be protected and their right to life guaranteed in accordance with their nature and destiny without discrimination. In order to prevent and overcome violence against women and children in Southeast Minahasa Regency so that they are protected from violence, threats of violence, torture or treatment that degrades their degree and human dignity, it is necessary to provide protection for women and children victims of violence in the form of regional regulations.

Thus far, laws and regulations governing the protection of women and children victims of violence have not regulated protection measures at the Regional level, so institutional support and regulations are needed to ensure their implementation.

This Regional Regulation regulates protection measures for victims, particularly in terms of prevention, services and empowerment for women and children victims of violence in Southeast Minahasa Regency.

II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE

Article 1

Sufficiently clear.

Article 2

Paragraph a What is meant by "respect for and fulfillment of victims' rights" is the guarantee of the fulfillment of victims' basic rights.

Paragraph b What is meant by "justice" is a state where every person, both men and women, is treated equally and obtains equal opportunities to gain access and welfare;

What is meant by "gender equality" is equality of rights, opportunities, benefits and decision-making between women and men, including in entering employment opportunities both in the formal and informal sectors.

Paragraph c What is meant by "non-discrimination" is an attitude and treatment toward victims without making distinctions based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, religion and between groups.

Paragraph d What is meant by "the best interests of the victim" is that all best actions concerning victims carried out by the Government, society, legislative bodies and judicial bodies, the best interests of the victim must be the primary consideration.

Paragraph e What is meant by "empowerment" is the strengthening of victims of violence to be able to work and earn a living independently after they have been rehabilitated and provided with health and social rehabilitation services.

Article 3

Sufficiently clear.

Article 4

Sufficiently clear

Article 5

Sufficiently clear.

Article 6

Sufficiently clear.

Article 7

Sufficiently clear.

Article 8

Sufficiently clear.

Article 9

Sufficiently clear.

Article 10

Sufficiently clear.

Article 11

Sufficiently clear.

Article 12

Paragraph a What is meant by "the right to have one's dignity and honor as a human being respected" is upholding human rights.

Paragraph b Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph c Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph d What is meant by "the right to obtain information" is the right to obtain information, statements, ideas, and signs containing value, meaning, and messages, whether data, facts or explanations that can be seen, heard, and read, presented in various packages and formats in accordance with the development of information and communication technology, either electronically or non-electronically, related to acts of violence.

Paragraph e Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph f What is meant by "the right to compensation" includes: economic empowerment, repatriation costs, health insurance, and education or skills training.

Paragraph g What is meant by "the right to social rehabilitation" includes: access to medical services for physical and psychological recovery, legal assistance to restore civil rights, restoration of good name, and citizenship.

Paragraph h What is meant by "the right to complaint handling" is the availability of a special integrated service unit by officers.

Paragraph i Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph j What is meant by "the right to assistance" includes, among others: psychologists, psychiatrists, health experts, religious leaders, advocates, and family members.

Article 13

Paragraph a Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph b What is meant by "the right to basic services" includes, among others: the right to education, health and access to parents during the handling process.

Paragraph c What is meant by "the right to equal protection" relates to status, citizenship, race, skin color, gender, language, belief, religion, politics, ethnicity or social life, ownership, disability, birth or other status.

Paragraph d Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph e What is meant by "the right to obtain freedom" is freedom to express one's views on all matters, including those related to legal processes, care and temporary protection as well as identification and implementation of subsequent solutions.

Article 14

Sufficiently clear.

Article 15

Sufficiently clear.

Article 16

Sufficiently clear.

Article 17

Sufficiently clear.

Article 18

Sufficiently clear.

Article 19

Sufficiently clear.

Article 20 Paragraph (1)

Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Paragraph a What is meant by "network" includes: family partners, dasawisma, family groups existing in the Region.

Paragraph b What is meant by "coordination" includes: planning, implementation and monitoring of violence prevention programs.

Paragraph c What is meant by "violence prevention system" includes: mapping of locations or areas prone to violence and carrying out promotive and preventive measures to the community.

Paragraph d Socialization can be carried out through mass media, electronic media, and direct outreach to the community.

Article 21

Point a Prevention efforts within the family and/or closest relatives can be carried out by strengthening resilience within the household such as: practicing religious values, managing household time, and communication among family members.

Point b Prevention efforts within the community include: fostering environmental awareness of acts of violence occurring in their environment.

Point c Educational institutions can participate in efforts to provide educational punishment, endeavoring to eliminate provisions that do not side with victims of violence.

Point d What is meant by "community institutions" are institutions formed by members of the community of Citizens of the Republic of Indonesia voluntarily on the basis of shared vision, mission, profession, function and activities to participate in development in order to achieve national goals within the framework of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila, consisting of religious organizations, non-governmental organizations, professional organizations, private organizations, social organizations, political organizations, mass media, and other forms of organizations.

Article 22

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (3) What is meant by "safe house" is a temporary shelter intended to provide protection and a sense of security to victims of violence. Temporary protection is provided for a period of up to 14 (fourteen) days and may be extended according to the victim's condition. For integrated service centers that do not have shelters, they may network with integrated service centers that have shelters.

Paragraph (4) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (5) Sufficiently clear.

Article23 Sufficiently clear.

Article 24

Sufficiently clear.

Article 25

Sufficiently clear.

Article 26

Sufficiently clear.

Article 27

Sufficiently clear.

Article 28

Sufficiently clear.

Article 29

Sufficiently clear.

Article 30

Sufficiently clear.

Article 31

Paragraph (1) Sufficiently clear.

Paragraph (2) What is meant by "other service units" is a unified unit that carries out integrated service functions for women and children victims of violence. This service unit may be located at Integrated Service Centers (PPT) and Integrated Crisis Centers (PKT) based in Hospitals, Community Health Centers, Integrated Service Centers for Women and Child Empowerment (P2TP2A), Women and Child Service Units (UPPA), Trauma Center Shelters (RPTC), Child Social Shelters (RPSA), BP4, and other security institutions, prosecutors' offices, courts, Women Crisis Centers (WCC), and other similar institutions. This service may take the form of one-stop (one stop crisis center) or network form, depending on the needs in each region.

Article 32

Sufficiently clear.

Article 33

Sufficiently clear.

Article 34

Point a Sufficiently clear.

Pointb What is meant by "informed consent" is medical action consent given by the victim or their closest family after receiving complete explanation regarding the medical action to be performed on the victim.

Article 35

Point a Sufficiently clear.

Point b What is meant by "medico-legal" is medical service to provide optimal professional assistance in utilizing medical science for the purposes of law enforcement and justice. Medico-legal services include among others: visum et repertum and visum et psikiatrikum.

What is meant by "visum et repertum" is a written statement made by a doctor in forensic medical science at the request of the authorized investigator regarding the results of medical examination of the victim based on their scientific knowledge and under oath, for the purposes of judicial proceedings.

What is meant by "visum et psikiatrikum" is a statement given by a Psychiatrist regarding the mental health condition of the victim required to clarify a case and for the purposes of judicial proceedings.

Pointc Sufficiently clear.

Point d Sufficiently clear.

Pointe Sufficiently clear.

Pointf Sufficiently clear.

Point g  Sufficiently clear.

Article 36

Sufficiently clear.

Article 37

Sufficiently clear.

Article 38

Sufficiently clear.

Article 39

Sufficiently clear.

Article 40

Sufficiently clear.

Article 41

Sufficiently clear.

Article 42

Sufficiently clear.

Article 43

Sufficiently clear.

Article 44

Sufficiently clear.

Article 45

Sufficiently clear.

Article 46

Sufficiently clear.

Article 47

Sufficiently clear.

Article 48

Sufficiently clear.

Article 49

Sufficiently clear.

Article 50

Sufficiently clear.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE REGIONAL GAZETTE OF SOUTHEAST MINAHASA REGENCY YEAR 2016 NUMBER
