ACEH PROVINCE
BIREUEN DISTRICT QANUN
NUMBER 2 OF 2022
ABOUT
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
BISMILLAHIRRAHMANIRRAHIM
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MOST MERCIFUL AND THE MOST MERCIFUL BY THE MERCY OF ALLAH THE ALMIGHTY,
REGENT OF BIREUEN,
Considering: a. that women as noble and dignified creatures need to be empowered and their abilities
entitled to protection in accordance with Shari'at
Islam;
b. that based on Article 231 of Law Number
11 of 2006 concerning Aceh Government,
stated that the Regency Government was obliged
advance and protect women's rights and
children and make efforts to empower them
dignified;
c. that based on considerations as follows
referred to in letter a and letter b, necessary
forming Qanun on Protection of Women;
Bearing in mind: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia
1999 Number 165, Supplement to the State Gazette
Republic of Indonesia Number 3886);
3. Law Number 48 of 1999 concerning the Establishment of Bireuen Regency and Regency
Simeulue (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year
1999 Number 176, Supplement to the State Gazette
Republic of Indonesia Number 3897) as stated
amended by Law Number 8 of 2000
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 75,
Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
3963);
4. Law Number 23 of 2004 concerning the Elimination of Domestic Violence
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 2004
Number 95, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia Number 4419);

5. Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning Aceh Government (State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia Year 2006 Number 62, Additional Gazette
Republic of Indonesia Number 4633);
6. Law Number 21 of 2007 concerning Eradication of the Crime of Human Trafficking
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 2007
Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia Number 4720);
7. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia 2014 Number 244, Supplement
State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5587)
as amended by Law
Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (Sheet
Republic of Indonesia 2020 Number 245,
Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number
6573);
8. Government Regulation Number 4 of 2006 concerning the Implementation and Cooperation of Victim Recovery
Domestic Violence (State Gazette
Republic of Indonesia 2006 Number 15, Supplement
State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4604);
9. Supreme Court Regulation Number 3 of 2017 concerning Guidelines for Trying Women's Cases
Facing the Law;
10. Regulation of the Minister of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 4 of 2018 concerning
Guidelines for Establishing Regional Technical Implementation Units
Protection of Women and Children;
ll. Aceh Qanun Number 6 of 2009 concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection (Gazette
Aceh Region 2009 Number 06, Supplement
Aceh Regional Gazette Number 28);
12. Aceh Qanun Number 9 of 2019 concerning Implementation of Handling Violence Against
Women and Children (2019 Aceh Gazette
Number 17, Supplement to Aceh Gazette Number 119);
With Mutual Consent
BIREUEN DISTRICT REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL
And
REGENT OF BIREUEN
DECIDE:
Establishing : WOMEN'S PROTECTION LAW.

CHAPTER I
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
article 1
In this Qanun, what is meant by:
1. The region is Bireuen Regency.
2. Regency is Bireuen Regency which is part of the Aceh province led by a Regent.
3. Regency Government is the Bireuen Regency Government as the administration of affairs carried out by the regency government and the Bireuen Regency People's Representative Council in accordance with their respective functions and authorities.
4. Regency Government is an element of Regency Government administration consisting of the Regent and regency apparatus.
5. The Regent is the Head of the Bireuen Regency Government who is elected through a democratic process carried out based on the principles of direct, general, free, confidential, honest and fair in accordance with statutory regulations.
6. The Regency People's Representative Council, hereinafter abbreviated as DPRK, is an element of the governance of Bireuen Regency whose members are elected through general elections in accordance with statutory regulations.
7. Women are people (humans) aged 15 years who menstruate, become pregnant, give birth and breastfeed.
8. Women's Protection is all efforts aimed at protecting women and providing a sense of security in fulfilling their rights by providing consistent and systematic attention aimed at achieving just and equal relations with men.
9. Victims are women who experience threats of violence and/or violence inside and/or outside the household and/or become objects of trafficking/exploitation, and/or discrimination in all its forms and aspects.
10. Threats of violence are any acts of non-physical abuse by using or not using means against the law that can cause danger to the body, life, independence and human rights of women.
11. Violence is any act against someone, especially women, which results in physical, psychological, sexual misery or suffering and/or domestic neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or unlawful deprivation of liberty, both within and outside the household.
12. Discrimination against women is any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of gender which has the effect or aim of reducing or eliminating the recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and basic freedoms in the political, economic, socio-cultural, civil or any other field by women, regardless of their marital status on the basis of equality between men and women.

13. Women's Rights are all rights that every woman has which are part of human rights.
14. Special Protection is protection given to women and children in emergency situations, women and children who are in conflict with the law, women and children from minority and isolated groups, women and children who are exploited economically and/or sexually, women and children who are trafficked, women and children who are victims of kidnapping, sales, trafficking, women and children who are victims of physical and/or mental violence.
15. Communities are individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
16. The family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife, or husband and wife and their children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood family in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
17. Labor is every person who is able to carry out work to produce goods and/or services either to meet their own needs or for the community.
18. Worker/Labourer is every person who works and receives wages or other forms of compensation.
19. Persons with Disabilities are any person who experiences physical, intellectual, mental and/or sensory limitations for a long period of time who, in interacting with the environment, may experience obstacles and difficulties in participating fully and effectively with other citizens based on equal rights.
20. Service is an action taken as soon as possible to the victim when they see, hear and know that violence is occurring, is occurring or has occurred against the victim.
2 1. Rehabilitation is a series of actions carried out by authorities in their field to restore women's physical, mental and psychosocial conditions to their previous condition.
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES
Article 2
The protection of women is implemented on the basis of:
a. respect for the values ​​of Islamic law and Acehnese customs that are responsive to women;
b. legal certainty;
c. public interest;
d. respect for human rights;
e. gender justice and equality;
f. non-discrimination;
g. professionalism, accountability and transparency; And
h. protection and fulfillment of victims' rights.

Article 3
Women's protection aims to:
a. strengthening regional policy and budget support in order to optimize the implementation of women's protection;
b. strengthening the commitment of policy makers at the district, sub-district and gampong levels in the framework of increasing efforts and guaranteeing protection for women;
c. improve coordination, integration, synchronization and synergy between SKPK and all stakeholders including religious organizations, professional organizations, academics, the private sector and the wider community in an effort to improve the quality of women's protection;
d. building public knowledge and awareness to support efforts to protect women;
e. increasing institutional capacity and human resources of UPTD PPA;
f. provide guarantees to women to be able to fulfill their rights as human beings in all aspects of life;
g. giving women a sense of security in all aspects of life; and
h. reduce the rate of violence against women.
BAB III
SCOPE
Article 4
The scope of regulations in this Qanun includes:
a. basis and purpose;
b. women's rights;
c. protection of women;
d. Regency Government obligations and responsibilities;
e. village government support;
f. strategies and mechanisms for implementing women's protection; g. community participation; And
h. appreciation
CHAPTER IV
WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General
Article 5
(1) Every woman has the right to:
a. live and defend his life, as well as improve the level of well-being in his life;
b. implement religious teachings in accordance with Islamic law;
c. obtain justice, a sense of peace, and the freedom to express opinions without discrimination;
d. obtain personal protection, family, honor, dignity and property rights;
e. fulfill basic needs to grow and develop properly, have a family and continue offspring;
I

f. obtain fair and equal treatment in order to carry out their roles and functions in family and community life and participate fully in every process of making, determining and implementing development policies;
g. obtain education and teaching at all types, levels and pathways of education, without any obstacles or pressure in order to improve their skills and quality of life;
h. obtain complete information and knowledge about health, especially reproductive health, for women; and i. obtain special protection in carrying out their work or profession against things that threaten their safety and/or health regarding reproductive function.
(2) Every woman in her capacity as a wife, as long as she is married, has the same rights and responsibilities as her husband for all matters relating to her married life, relationship with her children, and ownership and management of joint property in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Apart from the rights as intended in paragraph (2), women as wives have the right to receive physical and spiritual support from their husbands.
(4) After the termination of the marriage, a woman has rights and responsibilities from her ex-husband on all relevant matters concerning the child, taking into account the best interests of the child.
Part Two
Rights of Women with Disabilities
Article 6
Every woman with a disability has the right to: a. education in all units, pathways, types and levels of education; b. decent work and living according to the type and degree of disability, education and abilities;
c. equal treatment to play a role in development and enjoy the results;
d. accessibility in the context of independence;
e. rehabilitation, social assistance, and maintenance of social welfare levels; f. equal rights to develop their talents, abilities and social life; And
g. other rights as regulated in statutory regulations.
Part Three
Rights of Women Victims of Violence
Article 7
Every woman who is a victim of violence has the right to receive:
a. respect for human dignity; b. health and psychological recovery from the suffering experienced by victims; c. determine their own decisions in handling cases of violence they experience;
d. get information;
e. obtain a guarantee of confidentiality;
f. social rehabilitation;
g. handling complaints;

h. obtain convenience in the judicial process;
i. mentoring; And
j. get empowerment after the case has been handled.
Part Four
Special Treatment
Article 8
(1) Every woman who is disabled, elderly, and/or pregnant, has the right to receive special facilities and treatment regarding access to public services.
(2) Every elderly woman, person with physical disabilities and/or mental disabilities, has the right to receive special care, education, training and assistance at the expense of the Regency Government to ensure a decent life in accordance with human dignity.
(3) Every woman who is involved in drugs, whether as a perpetrator or victim, has the right to receive fair treatment both in the law enforcement process and in the rehabilitation process.
BAB V
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
Implementation of Women's Protection
Article 9
The implementation of women's protection is given to:
a. women as housewives;
b. female head of family;
c. female domestic workers;
d. women workers/laborers;
e. women with disabilities;
f. homeless women;
g. female former prison inmates;
h. women victims of violence;
i. Women victims of conflict; And
j. elderly woman.
Paragraph 1
Women as Housewives
Article 10
Implementation of protection for women as housewives as intended in Article 9 letter a, in the following cases: a. inner and outer livelihood;
b. the head of the family provides special protection to the housewife during pregnancy; And
c. Housewives who have given birth must receive protection from the head of the family to reduce the burden as a housewife.
*

Article 11
Housewives who do work outside the home must receive protection from the head of the family in the form of giving permission and being able to provide domestic workers.
Paragraph 2
Female Head of Family
Article 12
(1) The female head of the family as referred to in Article 9 letter b, is a widow whose husband died and as a result of divorce is obliged to receive protection.
(2) Implementation of protection for women heads of families as intended in paragraph (1) in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, negative stigma and economic empowerment for women heads of families.
(3) Women as heads of families as intended in paragraph (2) have the right to protection for:
a. acts of discrimination and efforts to weaken women's function as economic support for the family;
b. strengthening abilities and recognition as head of the family in the community; And
c. accessibility to economic and financial institutions.
(4) The implementation of the protection of a woman as the head of a family whose husband died as referred to in paragraph (1) covers: a. the woman as the head of the family gets 1/8 (one eighth) of the total remaining property of her husband when she has children; and b. the woman as the head of the family gets 1/4 (one fourth) of the total remaining property of her husband when she has no children.
(5) Implementation of protection for women as heads of families due to divorce as intended in paragraph (1) during the iddah period, the ex-husband is responsible for providing shelter and living.
Paragraph 3
Female Domestic Workers
Article 13
(1) Implementation of protection for female domestic workers as intended in Article 9 letter c, in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, cruel, inhumane, degrading human dignity and exploitation in work relations.
(2) Female domestic workers as referred to in paragraph (1) are required to receive protection from their employers in the form of:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security; And
c. guarantee of non-discrimination, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity and exploitation.
A
Paragraph 4
Female Worker/Labor
Article 14
(1) Implementation of protection for women workers/laborers as intended in Article 9 letter d, to provide protection from acts of economic exploitation and cruel, inhumane treatment and to ensure proper reward for work.
(2) Women workers/laborers as intended in paragraph (1) are required to receive protection from their employers in the form of:
a. recognition of rights, wages and decent working conditions;
b. health and social security; And
c. guarantee of non-discrimination, inhumane treatment, degrading human dignity and exploitation.
Paragraph 5
Women with Disabilities
Article 15
(1) Implementation of protection for women with disabilities as intended in Article 9 letter e, in the context of providing protection and prevention against forms of discrimination, including freedom from cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment and freedom from exploitation.
(2) Women with disabilities as intended in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. guarantee of personal continuity and development; b. accessibility of information, legal assistance, mobility, social services; and c. Early treatment efforts include treatment and rehabilitation to increase function and capacity.
Paragraph 6
Homeless Women
Article 16
(1) Implementation of protection for homeless women as intended in Article 9 letter f, in order to provide protection and prevention against forms of violence caused by the lack of shelter or permanent residence.
(2) Homeless women as referred to in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. adequate housing;
b. health and social security;
c. population administration records;
d. opportunities to obtain education and skills to improve economic status; And
e. access to information and legal consultation services.
Paragraph 7
Women Former Inmates
Correctional Institution
Article 17
(1) Implementation of protection for women who are former residents of correctional institutions as intended in Article 9 letter g, in order to provide protection from obstacles to adapting to community life, so that they can carry out normal lives.
(2) Women who are former residents of Correctional Institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) receive protection for:
a. social rehabilitation and reintegration; And
b. the opportunity to acquire knowledge and skills to improve economic status.
Paragraph 8
Women Victims of Violence
Article 18
(1) Implementation of protection for women victims of violence as intended in Article 9 letter h, in order to provide legal protection and/or health restoration.
(2) Protection for women victims of violence as referred to in paragraph (1) includes:
a. legal aid;
b. assistance after an act of violence occurs;
c. social rehabilitation and reintegration; And
d. health services.
Article 19
(1) Every victim as intended in Article 18 has the right to receive protection, information, integrated services, ongoing treatment up to the rehabilitation stage and confidential treatment from individuals, groups or institutions, both the Regency Government and the community.
(2) In the event of violence, every victim has the right to receive health services and assistance, both psychologically and legally and to receive guarantees for their rights relating to their status as a woman.
Paragraph 9
Women victims of conflict
Article 20
Implementation of protection for women victims of conflict as intended in Article 9 letter i, through:
a. provide a sense of security;
b. fulfilling the basic needs of women victims of conflict; c. relieve trauma; And
d. provide necessary services to victims.
Paragraph 10
Elderly Women
Article 2 1
(1) Implementation of protection for elderly women as intended in Article 9 letter j, in order to carry out their social functions and play a reasonable active role in their social life.
(2) The protection of elderly women as intended in paragraph (1) prioritizes the protection of their children and heirs.
(3) If elderly women do not receive services from their children and heirs and/or do not have children and other heirs as intended in paragraph (2), then the protection of elderly women is the responsibility of the Regency Government.
(4) Elderly women as intended in paragraph (1) have the right to protection for:
a. basic health services to maintain and improve health status including gerontological/geriatric services,
b. use of facilities and accessibility of public facilities and infrastructure; and c. government administration services.
BAB VII
OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
DISTRICT GOVERNMENT
Part one
General
Article 22
(1) The Regency Government is obliged and responsible for the protection of women.
(2) Efforts to protect women as intended in paragraph (1) include:
a. determining policies, programs and activities;
b. determination of implementation guidelines;
c. service delivery; And
d. coordination of policies, programs and activities.
(3) Women's protection as intended in paragraph (2) is carried out in an integrated manner in accordance with statutory regulations.
Article 23
(1) In implementing policies, programs and activities for women's protection and empowerment for women victims, the District Government can collaborate with the community/community institutions.
(2) The cooperation as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of statutory regulations.
k
Article 24
The Regent in implementing policies, programs and activities to protect women by making efforts:
a. coordinating the implementation of women's protection policies, programs and activities between district officials;
b. cooperation with Regencies/Cities in one Province, and collaboration between Regencies/Cities in other Provinces in implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women in accordance with statutory provisions;
d. strengthening institutional capacity for implementing program policies and activities for the protection of women;
e. facilitation of women's protection services;
f. provision of women's protection services;
g. implementation of affirmative action to protect women; And
h. compilation of the women's protection data system.
Article 25
(1) The Regency Government is obliged and responsible to carry out efforts to prevent violence against women in the form of:
a. collect data and information about victims of violence and laws and regulations;
b. providing education about the values ​​of anti-violence against women;
c. carry out socialization of legal regulations relating to the implementation of protection for victims of violence;
d. foster support from religious and traditional leaders to build public awareness of the importance of protecting women;
e. carry out monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of protection for victims of violence; And
f. prepare reports on the implementation of protection
women victims of violence.
(2) To anticipate the occurrence of acts of violence against women, the District Government is obliged to provide and organize services for victims in the form of:
a. establishing institutions and facilitating the implementation of integrated services for victims by involving elements of society; and b. encourage public awareness of the importance of protecting victims.
(3) To prevent acts of violence against women, the Regency Government makes the following efforts:
a. carry out outreach regarding regulations and policies relating to violence against women for village officials, traditional leaders and religious leaders;
b. provide education to immediately report to local authorities if violence against women occurs;
c. forming a working network in efforts to prevent violence; and d. other efforts that are considered strategic to prevent violence against women.
I
Article 26
(1) The district government is obliged to provide social assistance for women experiencing social problems and disaster victims. (2) The district government is obliged to provide the right to social security for poor women and women with limited means
Second part
Women's Protection Institute
Article 27
(1) The Regency Government establishes a women's protection institution.
(2) women's protection institutions as referred to in paragraph (1) also handle the protection of children.
(3) The women's protection institution as intended in paragraph (2) is implemented by establishing a UPTD PPA.
(4) The Regency Government must guarantee the availability of adequate facilities and infrastructure, human resources and budget to realize the operations of the UPTD PPA.
(5) Further provisions regarding UPTD PPA are regulated by Regent's Regulations.
CHAPTER VIII
GAMPONG GOVERNMENT SUPPORT
Article 28
(1) The Gampong Government supports efforts to protect women by:
a. issue village-level regulations regarding women's protection;
b. socialize regulations related to women's empowerment and protection to the community;
c. encourage the creation of a village environment that is friendly to women;
d. building community awareness, including traditional and religious leaders at the village level, to care about the issue of violence against women;
e. allocate budget to support women's empowerment and protection programs; And
f. building a system for handling violence against women at the village level.
(2) Efforts as referred to in paragraph (1) letter e, above can be developed in accordance with the gampong's financial capabilities, problems and women's needs.
k
BAB IX
WOMEN'S PROTECTION STRATEGIES AND MECHANISMS
Part One
General
Article 29
(1) The Regent integrates women's protection policies, programs and activities into district development planning.
(2) The integration of women's protection policies, programs and activities must be included in planning and budget documents which include the Regional Long Term Development Plan (RPJPD), Regional Medium Term Development Plan (RPJMD), District Work Unit Strategic Plan (Renstra-SKPK), Regency Government Work Plan (RKPK), and Regency Work Unit Work Plan and Budget (RKA-SKPK).
(3) Regency Apparatus Work Units whose duties and functions handle women's empowerment matters facilitate the integration of women's protection policies, programs and activities into

preparation of planning documents; in paragraph (2).
(4) In carrying out tasks and paragraph (3), the winning work unit*
n and the budget as stated in its functions as referred to in
coordinate with the Agency (BAPPEDA).
ani empowering women in the Regional Development Planning area

Bagiap
Second
Sti Pas
ategi at 30

(1) Protection of women
bring it together by integrating
Gender Mainstreaming (PUG) and integrated violence data are valid invitations.
n disaggregated database, gender data and based on legal regulations

(2) The Regency Apparatus Work Unit in charge of women's empowerment and protection coordinates with other Regional Apparatus organizations in order to realize the implementation of integrated women's protection.
(3) Coordination as referred to in paragraph (2), is carried out within the framework of strengthening synergy in policy formulation, program and activity support, as well as monitoring and evaluation.
Part Three
Mechanism
Article 3 1
The mechanism for implementing women's protection is carried out through stages:
a. formulating program and activity planning policies;
b. program and activity budgeting;
c. implementation of programs and activities; And
d. monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
>
Article 32
(1) The formulation of program and activity planning policies as intended in Article 31 letter a, is implemented through:
a. mapping, collecting, processing and presenting disaggregated data;
b. coordination and synchronization of program and activity planning preparation with the relevant SKPK; And
c. determining programs and activities in planning documents.
(2) The formulation of program and activity planning policies is further regulated in service standards and standard operational procedures.
(3) Budgeting for programs and activities as intended in Article 31 letter b, is implemented through general budget policies as outlined in the APBK.
(4) Implementation of programs and activities as intended in Article 31 letter c, is carried out through:
a. implementation of programs and activities contained in the SKPK budget document; And
b. coordination and synchronization of program and activity implementation with related SKPK.
(5) Implementation of monitoring, evaluation and reporting as intended in Article 31 letter d, is carried out through:
a. regular monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of programs and activities that have been implemented; And
b. make periodic reports every year which are submitted to the Regent.
BABVIII
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Article 33
(1) The community can participate in the protection of women.
(2) Community participation as intended in paragraph (1) can be carried out by individuals and/or organizations.
(3) Participation as intended in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) can be carried out by:
a. provide input and suggestions to the District Government regarding policies, programs and activities for women's protection;
b. monitor District Government policies regarding policies related to women's protection;
c. initiate or propose new policies that need to be established by the District Government in an effort to optimize women's protection;
d. assist gampong officials in implementing efforts to protect women as regulated in this Qanun;
e. carry out outreach about the elimination of violence against women;
f. provide information and/or report violence against women to law enforcement institutions or authorities; And
g. monitor the performance of law enforcement officers in handling cases of violence against women.
h
Article 34
To ensure the best service for women victims of violence, the community, whether individuals, groups of people or institutions, can coordinate with UPTD PPA.
Article 35
(1) The Regency Government encourages the business world to participate in protecting women from acts of violence.
(2) This participation is carried out both internally and externally.
(3) Internal participation as intended in paragraph (2) can take the form of: a. outreach to employees within the company regarding the dangers of violence against women;
b. building an internal women's system to deal with issues of violence against women; And
c. providing social assistance as a form of corporate social responsibility.
(4) External participation as intended in paragraph (2) can take the form of: a. providing special opportunities for women victims of violence to work in companies;
b. create special education and training for women victims of violence;
c. educational assistance for women victims of violence who are deprived of education; And
d. foster and increase the economic independence of women victims of violence.
BAB IX
AWARD
Article 36
(1) The Regency Government gives awards to State Apparatus who are deemed to have commitment and are successful in carrying out their duties of protecting women.
(2) The District Government gives awards to Community, Private Organizations and Individuals who are deemed to have innovated and succeeded in supporting efforts to protect women.
(3) Awards are also given to the Gampong Government which is considered to have commitment and success in supporting efforts to protect women.
(4) Further regulations regarding the giving of awards as intended in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated by Regent's Regulations.
CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 37
All costs for implementing program planning policies and activities related to women's protection are sourced from:
a. District Revenue and Expenditure Budget; And
b. Other sources that are valid and non-binding.
v

BAB XI
COACHING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Article 38
(1) The Regent, through the Regional Apparatus in charge of women's empowerment, provides guidance and supervision over the protection of women.
(2) The form of guidance as intended in paragraph (1) is as follows:
a. provide outreach to the community and business world regarding women's protection policies;
b. providing books, leaflets, brochures regarding women's protection and other related issues and disseminating them to the community;
c. facilitating capacity building of institutions administering women's protection;
d. facilitation of women's participation forums, women's organizations and organizations of people with disabilities;
e. facilitating rehabilitation and reintegration services for women who are victims of disasters and victims of violence;
f. coordinating the participation of the business world and other institutions, including international assistance for the protection of women; and g. give appreciation to society and the good business world
individually and institutionally who have made efforts to protect women.
Article 39
(1) To ensure synergy, continuity and effectiveness of integrated steps in implementing women's protection policies, programs and activities, the District Government carries out monitoring.
(2) Monitoring as referred to in paragraph (1) is intended to determine developments and obstacles in the implementation of policies, programs and activities for the protection of women.
(3) Monitoring is carried out periodically through direct coordination and monitoring of regional apparatus implementing policies, programs and activities for the protection of women.
(4) Monitoring is carried out starting from planning to implementing policies, programs and activities.
Article 40
(1) Evaluation of the implementation of policies, programs and activities for women's protection is carried out at the end of each fiscal year.
(2) The results of the evaluation of the implementation of women's protection policies, programs and activities are used as input for the preparation of women's protection policies, programs and activities for the following year.
(3) The evaluation as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out in accordance with the provisions of statutory regulations.
A

CHAPTER XII.
CLOSING
Article 4 1
The implementing regulations for this Qanun in the form of a Regent's Regulation shall be stipulated no later than six (6) months after this Qanun is promulgated.
Article 42
This Qanun comes into force on the date of promulgation.
So that everyone knows, this Qanun is ordered to be promulgated by placing it in the Bireuen Regency Gazette.
Set in Bireuen
on the 24th loit
BIREUEN
k SOFYAN HALL
Promulgated in Bireuen
on TA date AjufW lozi
REGIONAL SECRETARY
BIREUEN DISTRICT
IBRAHIM
BIREUEN DISTRICT GAZETTE OF 2022 NUMBER W
BIREUEN DISTRICT QANUN REGISTER NUMBER, ACEH PROVINCE: (3/47/2022)

EXPLANATION
UP
BIREUEN DISTRICT QANUN
NUMBER 3 OF 2022
ABOUT
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
I. GENERAL
1. That Islamic Sharia gives women a high and noble position. Women have the same position as men as servants of Allah and dignified creatures. In the Al-Qur'an and the Hadith of the Prophet Muhammad, teachings and activities that lead to discrimination and exploitation of women are never found. In fact, one of the missions of Rasulullah SAW in this world is to raise the dignity and dignity of women from a very low and despicable situation.
2. Whereas Law Number 44 of 1999 concerning the Implementation of Aceh's Specialties and Law Number 11 of 2006 concerning the Government of Aceh have provided a foundation for the empowerment and protection of women which is an important activity because the condition of women has been quite worrying in terms of education, economics, health, labor, law and even the threat of violence, exploitation, discrimination, pornography and pornographic action which is often the target of women.
3. Obligations of the Bireuen Regency Government feel it is necessary to have a Bireuen Regency Qanun concerning Women's Empowerment and Protection. It is hoped that every woman can be empowered and receive protection without discrimination. Also, the Integrated Service Center for Empowerment of Women and Children (P2TP2A) which already exists in Bireuen Regency has a Juridical Foundation as one of the organizers of women's empowerment and protection in Bireuen Regency.
II. ARTICLE BY ARTICLE
article 1
Quite clear
Article 2
Quite clear
Article 3
Quite clear
Article 4
Quite clear
Article 5
Quite clear
A
Pasal6
Quite clear
With reconciliation
Quite clear
Chapter 8
Quite clear
Chapter 9
Quite clear
Article 10
Quite clear
Article 11
Quite clear
Article 12
Quite clear
Article 13
Quite clear
Article 14
Quite clear
Article 15
Quite clear
Article 16
Quite clear
Article 17
Quite clear
Article 18
Quite clear
Article 19
Quite clear
Article 20
Quite clear
Pasal21
Quite clear
Article 22
Quite clear
Article 23
Quite clear
Article 24
Quite clear
ÿ

Article 25
Quite clear
Article 26
Quite clear
Article 27
Quite clear
Article 28
Quite clear
Article 29
Quite clear
Article 30
Quite clear
Article 31
Quite clear
Article 32
Quite clear
Article 33
Quite clear
Article 34
Quite clear
Article 35
Quite clear
Article 36
Quite clear
Article 37
Quite clear
Article 38
Quite clear
Article 39
Quite clear
Article 40
Quite clear
Article 4 1
Quite clear
Article 42
Quite clear
BIREUEN DISTRICT GAZETTE ADDITION NUMBER 127 >
