
REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN
WEST SUMATRA PROVINCE
PADANG PARIAMAN DISTRICT REGIONAL REGULATIONS
NUMBER 6 OF 2017
ABOUT
WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION
BY THE GRACE OF ALMIGHTY GOD
REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN,
Considering: a. that to guarantee Women's Empowerment and Child Protection in accordance with dignity and dignity
humanity and receive protection from violence,
discrimination and other violations require a
legal certainty;
b. that to provide legal certainty in the implementation of Women's Empowerment and
Child Protection as well as carrying out mandatory business
regional government, there needs to be internal regulation
form of Regional regulations;
c. that based on the considerations as intended in letters a and b, it is necessary to establish regulations
Areas on Women's Empowerment and
Child Protection;
Bearing in mind: 1. Article 18 paragraph (6) of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia;
2. Law Number 12 of 1956 concerning the Establishment of Regency Autonomous Regions within the Regional Environment of Central Sumatra Province (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1956 Number 25));
3. Law Number 39 of 1999 concerning Human Rights (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1999 Number 165, Supplement to State Gazette Number 3886);
4. Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2002 Number 109, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 4235) as amended by Law Number 35 of 2014 concerning Amendments to Law Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection (State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia Year 2014 Number 397, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5606);
5. Law.......
5. Law Number 23 of 2014 concerning Regional Government (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia
2014 Number 244, Supplement to the State Gazette
Republic of Indonesia Number 5587) as amended
several times, most recently with Law Number 9
2015 ((State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year
2015 Number 58, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic
Indonesia Number 5679);
6. Regulation of the Minister of State for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 1 of 2010 concerning Standards
Minimum Services for Integrated Services for
Women and Children Victims of Violence;
7. Regulation of the Minister of State for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection Number 11 of 2011 concerning
Child Friendly Regency Development Policy;
With Mutual Consent
REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF PADANG PARIAMAN DISTRICT and
REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN
DECIDE:
Establish: REGIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT AND CHILD PROTECTION.
CHAPTER I
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
article 1
In this Regional Regulation what is meant by:
1. Region is Padang Pariaman Regency.
2. Regional Government is the Government of Padang Pariaman Regency.  3. The Regent is the Regent of Padang Pariaman Regency.
4. Regional Work Units, hereinafter abbreviated to SKPD, are Regional Work Units within the Padang Pariaman Regency Government.
5. Women's Empowerment is an effort to protect, strengthen human rights, improve the quality of life, and increase women's participation in development.
6. Child protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights so that they can live, grow, develop and participate, optimally in accordance with human dignity, and receive protection from violence and discrimination.
7. A child is someone who is not yet 18 (eighteen) years old, including children who are still in the womb and unmarried.  8. Prevention is a direct effort carried out by the Regional Government, the community and parents and/or families to prevent violations of the rights of women and children.
9. Violence is any act that results in misery or suffering whether physical, sexual, psychological and/or domestic neglect, including threats to commit acts, coercion or unlawful deprivation of someone's freedom.
10. The Children's Forum is a forum for children's participation which was formed with the aim of facilitating children's involvement in the decision-making process and enjoying changes relating to their lives both directly and indirectly, which is carried out with the consent and will of all children based on awareness and understanding, according to their age and level of thinking maturity.
11. Child Friendly Regency, hereinafter abbreviated as KLA, is a Regency that has a development system based on children's rights through integrating the commitment and resources of government, society and the business world in a comprehensive and sustainable manner in policies, programs and activities to ensure the fulfillment of children's rights.
12. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy developed to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of national development program policies.
13. Communities are individuals, families, groups and social organizations and/or community organizations.
14. Women Victims of Violence are women who experience actions that result in physical, sexual or psychological misery or suffering, including threats of certain actions, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in the public sphere or in private life.
15. Child victims of violence are children who experience actions that result in physical, mental, sexual, psychological misery or suffering or neglect that threatens life, body and demeans human dignity.
16. Trafficking in persons is the act of recruiting, transporting, harboring, sending, transferring or receiving a person with the threat of violence, use of violence, kidnapping, confinement, forgery, fraud, abuse of power or a vulnerable position, debt bondage or providing payments or benefits, so as to obtain the consent of the person who has control over the other person, whether carried out within countries or between countries, for the purpose of exploitation or resulting in people being exploited.
17. Complaint handling is a series of actions carried out by integrated service providers to follow up on reports of acts of violence against women and children, submitted by victims, families or the community.
18. Social rehabilitation is a service aimed at restoring and developing the ability of someone who experiences social dysfunction so that they can carry out their social functions properly.
19. Law enforcement is the action of officials authorized by the state to implement statutory regulations.  20. Legal aid is legal services provided by legal assistants and advocates to carry out gender sensitive assistance processes for witnesses and/or victims of violence against women and children.  21. Repatriation is an effort to return women and children victims of violence from abroad to the debarkation point/entry point, or from the receiving area to the area of ​​origin.
22. Social reintegration is an effort to reunite the victim with the family, surrogate family, or community who can provide protection and fulfill the victim's needs.
23. A safe house is a temporary shelter which aims to provide protection and a sense of security to victims of violence.  24. A halfway house is a place for child welfare development and services
streets that carry out social assistance/guidance activities, maintenance, care, education and health, skills guidance to ensure that children do not carry out activities on the streets so that they can grow and develop naturally.
25. Spiritual Guidance is an effort to restore mental health through strengthening the religion adhered to by the victim.
26. Gender Mainstreaming is a strategy developed to integrate gender into an integral dimension of planning, preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development policies, programs and activities in the Region.
27. Gender responsiveness is consistent and systematic attention to the differences between women and men in society accompanied by efforts to eliminate structural and cultural obstacles in achieving gender equality.
28. Gender Sensitivity or Gender Awareness is the ability to recognize gaps in power relations between women and men in the family and in the community, the impact of the gender-based division of labor on women and men, and the different experiences, problems, needs, interests and aspirations of women and men.
29. Public service providers are every state administration institution, corporation, independent institution formed based on the law for public service activities, and other legal entities formed solely for public service activities.
30. Community Organizations are organizations that are founded and formed by the community voluntarily based on shared aspirations, desires, needs, interests, activities and goals to participate in development for the achievement of the goals of the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia based on Pancasila.
31. Parents are biological father and/or mother, or father and/or stepmother, or adoptive father and/or mother.
32. Family is the smallest unit in society consisting of husband and wife or husband, wife and children, or father and children, or mother and children, or blood family in a straight line up or down to the third degree.
33. Customs are eternal codes of conduct that are passed down from one generation to another as a legacy, so that they are strongly integrated with community behavior patterns.
Article 2
Implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection based on the principles of:
a. the best interests of women and children;
b. gender justice and gender equality;
c. local wisdom;
d. legal enforcement and certainty.
e. non-discrimination;
f. the right to life, survival and development;  g. respect for children's opinions; And
h. legal enforcement and certainty.
Article 3
This Regional Regulation aims to:
a. guarantee the fulfillment of the rights of women and children in the Region b. as a guide for Regions in planning, policies and strategies for Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
c. protect and prevent women and children from actions, decisions and policies that violate the rights of women and children;
d. increasing the role and value of local wisdom and the role of custom in Women's Empowerment and Child Protection;
Article 4
The scope of regulations on Women's Empowerment and Child Protection includes:
a. improving women's quality of life;
b. Protection of women;
c. gender and child data system;
d. fulfillment of children's rights;
e. Child Protection;
f. community participation; And
g. construction and supervision.
CHAPTER II
IMPROVING WOMEN'S QUALITY OF LIFE
Part One
General
Article 5
(1) In order to improve the quality of life of women, regional governments are responsible for:
a. respect and guarantee women's rights without discrimination in accordance with human dignity;
b. implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions;
c. forming a Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group;
d. increasing women's empowerment in their roles, qualities and abilities in the field;
1. politics;
2. law;
3. social; And
4. economics.
e. strengthening and developing institutions providing women's empowerment services in the regions;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve the quality of life of women as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out by the SKPD in accordance with its duties and functions.
Part Two
Implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions
Article 6
(1) The Regent is responsible for the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in the Region.
(2) The Regent's responsibilities as intended in paragraph (1) can be delegated to the Deputy Regent.
Article 7
In implementing Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions as intended in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter b, the Regent determines the SKPD in charge of Women's Empowerment tasks as the coordinator of the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming.
Part Three
Establishment of Working Groups on Gender Mainstreaming in the Regions
Article 8
(1) In an effort to accelerate the institutionalization of Gender Mainstreaming in all Regional SKPDs, a Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group was formed.  (2) Members of the Gender Mainstreaming working group are all SKPD heads/leaders.
(3) The Regent appoints the head of Bappeda as head of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group and the head of the SKPD in charge of Women's Empowerment duties as head of the Regional Gender Mainstreaming working group secretariat.
(4) The formation of Regional Gender Mainstreaming working groups is determined by the Regent's decision.
Article 9
The Regional Gender Mainstreaming Working Group as intended in Article 14 has the following tasks:
a. promote and facilitate Gender Mainstreaming for each SKPD;
b. carry out outreach and advocacy on Gender Mainstreaming to sub-district heads and nagari mayors;
c. compile a work program every year;
d. encourage the realization of gender responsive planning and budgeting;
e. prepare a work plan for the Gender Mainstreaming working group every year;  f. responsible to the Regent through the Deputy Regent;
g. formulate policy recommendations to the Regent;
h. compiling a Regional Gender Profile;
i. monitor the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming in each agency;
j. appoint a technical team to conduct analysis of the Regional budget;  k. prepare regional action plans for Regional Gender Mainstreaming; and l. encourage the implementation of the selection and determination of focal points in each SKPD.
Article 10
(1) The Technical Team as intended in Article 9 letter j consists of officials who understand gender responsive budget analysis.
(2) The regional action plan for Regional Gender Mainstreaming as intended in Article 9 letter k contains:
a. Gender Mainstreaming in Regional Legislation;
b. Gender Mainstreaming in the development cycle in the Region;  c. strengthening Gender Mainstreaming institutions in the Regions; and d. strengthening community participation in the Region.
Article 11
(1) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point in each SKPD consists of officials and/or staff in charge of planning and/or program tasks.  (2) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as intended in paragraph (1), has the task of:
a. promoting Gender Mainstreaming in work units;  b. facilitate the preparation of gender responsive SKPD work plans and budgeting;
c. carry out training, outreach and advocacy on Gender Mainstreaming to all officials and staff within the SKPD;
d. report the implementation of Gender Mainstreaming to the SKPD leadership;  e. encourage the implementation of gender analysis of policies, programs and activities in work units; And
f. facilitate the preparation of gender data for each SKPD;  (3) The Gender Mainstreaming Focal Point as intended in paragraph (1), is selected and determined by the SKPD leadership.
Part Four
Increasing the Role, Qualities and Abilities of Women
Political Field
Article 12
Efforts to increase the role, quality and abilities of women in the political field as intended in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 1 include: a. carry out outreach to increase women's political participation in general elections;
b. implementing programs that increase the level of women's involvement in the political process and public office;
c. facilitating women's self-development in organizations, associations and gatherings;
d. involving women in decision-making regarding women's interests;
Part Five
Increasing the Role, Qualities and Abilities of Women
Legal Sector
Article 13
Efforts to increase the role, quality and abilities of women in the legal field as intended in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 2 include: a. carry out outreach to increase women's legal knowledge and awareness;
b. mapping and reviewing gender bias policies;
c. involving women's organizations in the process of drafting and discussing regional legal products relating to women's participation;
Part Six
Increasing the Role, Qualities and Abilities of Women
Social Sector
Article 14
Efforts to increase the role, quality and abilities of women in the social sector as intended in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 3 include: a. increasing knowledge and skills to encourage the fulfillment of education in accordance with one's potential;
b. improving and fulfilling the quality of health for women;  c. increasing awareness and knowledge about independent, healthy and prosperous family planning, including access to consultation services and marriage registration;
d. increasing women's awareness of the impact of early marriage;  e. facilitate and strive for the preservation of customs and the development of science, technology, arts and culture for the advancement of women;  f. increasing women's awareness and knowledge regarding independent, healthy and prosperous family planning;
g. carry out programs to reduce maternal mortality;  h. encouraging the formation of women's organizations in the Region;
Part Seven
Increasing the Role, Qualities and Abilities of Women
Economics
Article 15
Efforts to increase the role, quality and abilities of women in the economic sector as intended in Article 5 paragraph (1) letter d number 4 include: a. carry out programs, activities, training to improve skills
and women's membership in order to create an increase in women's well-being;
b. facilitation of strengthening business capital for women who have a weak economy;
c. marketing products produced by women who have weak economies;  d. women's capacity development training through economic empowerment of underprivileged families;
e. comprehensive entrepreneurship training for women.
BAB III
PROTECTION OF WOMEN
Part One
General
Article 16
(1) The Regional Government in its efforts to protect women is responsible for: a. determine and implement policies, programs and activities for women's protection;
b. make efforts to prevent acts of violence against women, including criminal acts of human trafficking;
c. increasing the effectiveness of services for women victims of violence;
d. increasing efforts to protect female workers;  e. strengthening and developing institutions providing women's protection services;
f. collaborate with the Government, other Regional Governments, the private sector, the business world and/or NGOs in efforts to prevent acts of violence against women;
g. involving the active role of the family, ninik mamak, bundo kanduang, traditional leaders, religious leaders, the community and institutions in the field of women's protection;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to protect women as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out by the SKPD in accordance with its duties and functions and can coordinate with related agencies.
Part Two
Prevention of Violence Against Women
Article 17
In order to prevent acts of violence against women, the Regional Government:
a. organize outreach regarding the prevention of violence against women by optimizing the role of traditional, cultural, religious institutions and community organizations;
b. building networks and cooperation with law enforcement officials, government officials, universities and various non-governmental organizations that work and/or care about women and children victims of violence;
c. providing comfortable and safe public facilities for women;
Part Three
Effectiveness of Services for Women Victims of Violence
Paragraph 1
General
Article 18
(1) Protection of women victims of violence is carried out through integrated services.
(2) Providing integrated services to women victims of violence as intended in paragraph (1) uses the principles:
a. gender responsive;
b. non-discrimination;
c. equal and respectful relationships;
d. maintain confidentiality;
e. provide a sense of security and comfort;
f. appreciate individual differences;
g. non-judgmental;
h. respect the choice and decision of the victim;
i. be sensitive to the victim's background and condition and use language that is appropriate and understandable to the victim;
j. fast and simple;
k. empathy; And
l. fulfillment of women's rights.
Article 19
Forms of integrated services for women victims of violence include: a. handling complaints;
b. health rehabilitation;
c. social rehabilitation;
d. legal enforcement and assistance; And
e. repatriation and social reintegration.
Paragraph 2
Complaint Handling
Article 20
Integrated complaint handling services as intended in Article 19 letter a are implemented by:
a. hospital;
b. health center;
c. women and children service units;
d. Shelter home trauma center;
e. women crisis centre;
f. advisory body for the development and preservation of marriage;
g. police;
h. prosecutor;
i. court;
j. religious ministry; and/or
k. legal aid institutions;
Article 21
(1) Complaints about acts of violence against women can be made by a reporter consisting of:
the. age,
b. family,
c. public; and/or
d. community organizations in the field of women's and children's protection, such as: P2TP2A, Safe House, etc.)
(2) The reporter as intended in paragraph (1) can make a complaint: a. directly;
b. by telephone; and/or
c. by letter.
(3) In addition to handling complaints submitted by the reporter, officers at service institutions as intended in Article 20, also have the authority to handle victims of acts of violence against women obtained through other information.
(4) Further provisions regarding procedures for complaint handling services as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) are regulated by a Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph 3
Health Rehabilitation
Article 22
(1) Health rehabilitation as intended in Article 19 letter b is an effort that includes aspects:
a. promotional;
b. preventive;
c. curative; And
d. rehabilitative.
(2) Health rehabilitation as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out comprehensively, can be accessed 24 (twenty four) hours, is of high quality and is carried out in accordance with health service standards.
(3) Women who are victims of violence have the right to free health services, including:
a. medical services;
b. medicolegal services;
c. psychosocial counseling; And
d. view
(4) Further provisions regarding the procedures for implementing health services as intended in paragraph (3) are regulated by a Regent's Regulation.
Paragraph 4
Social Rehabilitation
Article 23
(1) Social rehabilitation as referred to in Article 19 letter c is aimed at restoring and developing the abilities of women victims of violence who experience social dysfunction to be able to carry out their social functions in society properly.
(2) Social rehabilitation as referred to in paragraph (1) includes services: a. counseling;
b. provision of safe houses; And
c. spiritual guidance.
(3) The provision of services as intended in paragraph (2) is carried out by:
a. SKPD that has tasks and functions in the social field;
b. SKPD which is in charge of Women's Empowerment, and can collaborate with integrated service centers, women crisis centers or existing social sector community organizations; or
c. Ministry of Religion.

Article 24
(1) Counseling services as intended in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter a aim to:
a. help women victims of violence to recognize their problems and find effective ways to overcome them themselves;
b. empowering women victims of violence to determine their future;
c. provide moral support to women victims of violence in facing the process they are undergoing; And
d. make women victims of violence feel accepted in society.
(2) Counseling services are carried out by gender responsive social rehabilitation officers, consisting of:
a. counselor;
b. psychologist; And
c. psychiatrist.
(3) Counseling services are carried out in a place that guarantees a sense of security, comfort and confidentiality of information for women victims of violence.  (4) Stages of counseling services include:
a. initial counseling;
b. follow-up counseling;
c. case discussion; And
d. site visit.
Article 25
(1) Regional Governments can provide safe houses for women victims of violence.
(2) The service for providing safe houses as intended in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter b aims to protect women victims of violence from intimidation by perpetrators or other parties.
(3) The location of the safe house as intended in paragraph (1) must be kept secret.  (4) Criteria for women victims of violence who need a safe house include:
a. life threatened;
b. getting rejection from family or society;
c. requires intensive services but the residence is relatively far away;  and/or
d. abandoned if not placed in a safe house.
(5) The provision of safe house services is carried out by social rehabilitation officers who have gender sensitivity or gender awareness, consisting of: a. social worker/volunteer;
b. security officer; and/or
c. public figure.
(6) Further provisions regarding the implementation of safe house services are regulated by Regent's Regulations.
Article 26
(1) Spiritual guidance as referred to in Article 23 paragraph (2) letter c aims at psychological rehabilitation.
(2) Spiritual guidance as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out based on the principles:
a. does not impose any religion or belief; And
b. leaving the final decision in the hands of the victim (self-determination).
(3) Spiritual guidance is carried out by spiritual guidance officers.  (4) Spiritual guidance officers as referred to in paragraph (3) consist of consultants from the Marriage Advisory, Development and Preservation Agency (BP4), Religious Affairs Office Officers, Ustad/Ulama, Pastors, Pastors and other religious leaders who have gender sensitivity or gender awareness.
Paragraph 5
Enforcement and Legal Aid
Article 27
(1) Enforcement services and legal aid as intended in Article 19 letter d are actions by law enforcement officials to implement statutory regulations in the context of handling cases of violence against women, especially to provide sanctions against perpetrators and provide protection for witnesses and/or victims.
(2) Enforcement services and legal aid as intended in paragraph (1) are carried out by prioritizing the best interests of the victim.
Article 28
(1) Enforcement and legal aid services are aimed at providing assistance and protection to women victims of violence and witnesses using a gender responsive approach so that victims receive justice and legal certainty.
(2) Types of legal aid services include:
a. legal assistance in the process of reporting and making inspection reports;
b. legal assistance in the prosecution process at the prosecutor's office;
c. legal assistance in the court examination process;
d. legal assistance in the court decision process until a permanent legal decision is made; And
e. legal assistance in the mediation process.
(3) The Regional Government provides legal assistance to women victims of violence based on the provisions of statutory regulations.  (4) In providing legal assistance as intended in paragraph (3)
Regional governments can collaborate with legal aid institutions, women's crisis centers, advocates and/or other gender-sensitive legal assistants.
Paragraph 6
Return and Social Reintegration
Article 29
(1) Repatriation is intended to return women victims of violence to their areas of origin.
(2) Repatriation of women victims of violence accompanied by social reintegration efforts.
Article 30
(1) Social reintegration is carried out in the context of reuniting women victims of violence with their families, substitute families, or the community who can provide protection and fulfill the needs of the victims.
(2) Social reintegration is aimed at:
a. women victims of violence can resume their social life; And
b. women victims of violence can have a decent life.  (3) Social reintegration as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out after the victim receives social rehabilitation services.
Article 31
The Regional Government carries out the repatriation and social reintegration of women victims of violence in accordance with statutory regulations.
Part Four
Employment Protection
Article 32
(1) Entrepreneurs who employ women are obliged to maintain decency, safety and security while at work.
(2) Employers are obliged to place female workers in a place that is safe for women's reproductive health.
(3) Employers are obliged to fulfill the rights of female workers to receive wages in accordance with the provisions of statutory regulations.  (4) Employers are obliged to provide special breastfeeding facilities in their companies.
Article 33
(1) Female workers/laborers aged less than 18 (eighteen) years are prohibited from being employed between 23.00 WIB and 07.00 WIB.
(2) Employers are prohibited from employing pregnant women workers/laborers who, according to a doctor's statement, are dangerous to the health and safety of their womb.
(3) Entrepreneurs who employ female workers/laborers between 23.00 WIB and 07.00 WIB are obliged to:
a. provide nutritious food and drinks; And
b. maintain decency and safety while at work.
(4) Employers are obliged to provide pick-up and drop-off transportation for female workers/laborers who go to and from work between 23.00 WIB and 05.00 WIB.
BAB V
IMPROVING FAMILY QUALITY
Article 34
(1) In order to improve the quality of families, the Regional Government is responsible for:
a. make efforts to improve the quality of families to realize gender equality and children's rights;
b. providing services for families in realizing gender equality and children's rights.
c. strengthening and developing institutions providing family quality improvement services in the Region; And
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to improve the quality of families as referred to in paragraph (1) is carried out by the SKPD in accordance with its duties and functions.
Article 35
The Regional Government makes efforts to improve the quality of families as intended in Article 34 paragraph (1) letter a including:
a. construction;
b. guidance;
c. supervision;
d. facilitating the implementation of family development;
e. improve the quality of health of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers;
Article 36
Guidance as intended in Article 35 letter a, includes: a. growth and development of children under five;
b. Protection of adolescent reproductive health;
c. Marriage age maturity;
d. Birth control; And
e. Population management.
Article 37
Guidance as intended in Article 35 letter b includes:
a. conducting outreach to improve women's quality of life;  b. conducting premarital counseling;
Article 38.
Supervision as intended in Article 35 letter c includes: a. Evaluating growth and development data for toddlers;
b. Evaluating post-marriage data;
Article 39
Provision of services for families as intended in Article 34 paragraph (1) letter b includes:
a. communication, information and education;
b. contraceptive devices and drugs;
c. recording and reporting family planning services;
d. adequate health service facilities and infrastructure;  e. breast milk corner room in every public facility.
Article 40
Communication, information and education as referred to in Article 39 letter a are communication activities to increase knowledge and improve attitudes and behavior of families and communities in population and family planning programs.
Article 41
(1) Apart from the Regional Government, private parties (private parties include PTs that provide public services) are obliged to provide breast milk corner rooms.  (2) The ASI corner room as intended in paragraph (1) is a suitable and adequate room.
(3) Private parties who do not provide breast milk corner rooms as intended in paragraph (2) are subject to administrative sanctions in the form of:
a. written warning;
b. restrictions on business activities;
c. freezing of business activities;
d. administrative fines; and/or
e. license revocation.
BAB VI
FULFILLMENT OF CHILDREN'S RIGHTS
Part One
General
Article 42
(1) The Regional Government in its efforts to fulfill Children's rights is responsible for: a. determine and implement policies and programs/activities to fulfill children's rights;
b. respect and guarantee the human rights of every child without distinguishing between ethnicity, religion, race, class, gender, ethnicity, culture and language, legal status of the child, birth order of the child, and physical and/or mental condition;
c. strengthen and develop institutions providing services to improve family quality in realizing children's rights;
d. guarantee the protection, maintenance and welfare of children by taking into account the rights and obligations of parents, guardians or other people who are legally responsible for children;
e. provide facilities and infrastructure in implementing the fulfillment of children's rights;
f. guarantee the child's right to express opinions in accordance with the child's age and intelligence level;
g. carry out supervision and guidance in the context of implementing the fulfillment of children's rights;
h. cooperate with private parties and/or NGOs in the maintenance of Child Protection;
(2) The responsibility of the Regional Government in efforts to protect children as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out by the SKPD in accordance with its duties and functions.
Part Two
Birth Registration
Article 43
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to carry out registration of children's births by issuing birth certificates.
(2) The birth certificate as intended in paragraph (1) is held free of charge.
Part Three
Education
Article 44
The Regional Government guarantees the implementation of the 9 (nine) year compulsory education program for children aged 7 (seven) to 15 (fifteen) years.
Article 45
(1) Every educational unit administrator is obliged to provide opportunities for children to obtain educational services without discrimination.  (2) Every educational unit administrator is prohibited from expelling a child from an educational institution unless there is a guarantee for the continuity of the child's education.
(3) In the event that children who are victims of acts of violence drop out of school, educational unit administrators are obliged to coordinate with the relevant agencies.
Article 46
(1) Every child has the right to receive education and teaching in the context of his personal development and level of intelligence in accordance with his interests and talents.
(2) Every child has the right to receive protection in an educational unit from sexual crimes and violence committed by educators, educational staff, fellow students, and/or other parties.
Article 47
(1) Children with disabilities and children with special needs are given equal opportunities to obtain formal, non-formal and informal education services, including inclusive education programs.
(2) The regional government provides teaching staff for inclusive education in each educational unit.
Part Four
Health and Social
Article 48
(1) Regional Governments are obliged to provide comprehensive health services for Children, so that every Child obtains an optimal level of health from the time they are in the womb.
(2) Comprehensive health services as intended in paragraph (1) include:
a. promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative efforts for basic health services;
b. exemption from financial burdens for malnourished children, children with disabilities, children with special needs, children infected with HIV/AIDS, child workers, children victims of abuse of narcotics, alcohol, psychotropic substances and other addictive substances, children who are victims of violence, and children who are victims of human trafficking; And
(3) The Regional Government, community, family and parents are obliged to ensure that children born are protected from diseases that threaten survival and/or cause disability.
Article 49
(1) Promotive efforts for basic health services as intended in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at improving health status more optimally.
(2) Promotional efforts as intended in paragraph (1) are carried out by providing outreach or counseling to the public regarding healthy lifestyles which include:
a. the importance of exclusive breastfeeding for babies;
b. the importance of immunization for toddlers;
c. clean lifestyle;
d. the importance of nutritious food;
e. the dangers of drugs and smoking; And
(3) Apart from the promotional efforts as intended in paragraph (2), the Regional Government can carry out other activities in the context of providing health.
Article 50
(1) Preventive efforts for basic health services as intended in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing the occurrence of disease or health problems.
(2) Efforts as intended in paragraph (1) are carried out by: a. requires mothers to exclusively breastfeed babies up to 6 (six) months of age;
b. providing free immunizations and vitamins to babies and toddlers;  c. providing nutritious food to toddlers from underprivileged families;  d. optimizing the role of posyandu for health services for mothers and toddlers;
e. carry out regular health checks; And
f. provide sanitation facilities and clean water in every school.
Article 51
(1) Curative efforts for basic health services as intended in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at preventing disease from becoming more severe through treatment.
(2) Treatment as intended in paragraph (1) is carried out free of charge for children who come from underprivileged families.
Article 52
(1) Rehabilitation efforts for basic health services as intended in Article 46 paragraph (2) letter a are aimed at maintaining and restoring conditions after illness.
(2) Rehabilitation efforts as intended in paragraph (1) are carried out through regular health checks.
Article 53
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to provide Social Welfare for: a. Children in conflict with the law;
b. Children victims of violence who are economically and sexually exploited, abandoned children, children victims of kidnapping and children victims of human trafficking;
c. A child who has no parents and is cared for by a party or family that cannot afford it;
d. Children who are victims of natural disasters or social disasters; And
e. Children with disabilities;
(2) Social welfare as intended in paragraph (1) can take the form of providing services:
a. health;
b. education;
c. legal aid;
d. mentoring;
e. social, mental and spiritual guidance;
f. social rehabilitation; and/or
g. reintegration.
Part Five
Employment
Article 54
The Regional Government carries out regular supervision of every person/entity that employs children in an effort to protect child workers.
Article 55
Every person/entity that employs children must pay attention to the following requirements:
a. at least 15 (fifteen) years of age;
b. obtain written consent from the child worker's parent/guardian;  c. have a written work agreement between the employer and the child worker's parents/guardians and have it approved by the authorized agency;  d. do not employ children at night;
e. maximum working time of 3 (three) hours a day;
Article 56
In the event that children are employed together with adult workers, the child's workplace must be separated from the adult worker's workplace.
Article 57
(1) Every person/entity is prohibited from employing and involving children in the worst jobs.
(2) The worst work referred to in paragraph (1) includes: a. any work in the form of slavery or similar;  b. any work that utilizes, provides, or offers
Children for prostitution, pornographic production, pornographic performances, or gambling;
c. any work that utilizes, provides, or involves children for the production and trade of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, psychotropic substances and other addictive substances; and/or
d. all work that endangers the health, safety or morals of Children.
Part Six
Facilitation of the Juvenile Justice System
Article 58
(1) Facilitation of the juvenile justice system includes criminal and civil justice.  (2) Facilitation of the criminal justice system as intended in paragraph (1) includes:
a. providing child companions or volunteers during examination by investigators;
b. provision of legal aid and psychologist services;
c. involving local police officers/investigators in efforts to prevent criminal acts committed by children and children as victims;
d. realizing a restorative justice process for children in conflict with the law; And
e. rehabilitation and social reintegration services;
(3) Fulfillment of children's rights in the civil justice system as referred to in paragraph (1) includes the provision and provision of consultation services and legal aid during the judicial process.
(4) In facilitating the juvenile justice system as intended in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), the SKPD with authority is the SKPD in charge of the protection of women and children.
Part Seven
Children's Forum
Article 59
(1) In implementing the fulfillment of Children's rights to express opinions and participate, the Regional Government facilitates the formation of a Children's Forum.
(2) The Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) is a representation of Children in the Region, both representing the Children's geographical domicile, the components of the Children's socio-cultural group and the Children's educational background.
(3) In every policy formulation related to children, the Regional Government is obliged to pay attention to and accommodate children's opinions expressed through the Children's Participation Forum.
(4) Further provisions regarding the formation of the Children's Forum as referred to in paragraph (1) to paragraph (3) are stipulated in a Regent's Decree.
Part Eight
Child Friendly District
Article 60
(1) In order to fulfill children's rights in an integrated, systematic and sustainable manner, the Regional Government establishes a KLA Development policy.  (2) The KLA Development Policy contains:
a. the KLA concept concerns the objectives, strategies and roles of the relevant parties;
b. Children's rights; and
c. KLA development approach.
Article 61
(1) The KLA development policy is directed at fulfilling children's rights which are divided into 5 (five) groups, including:
a. civil rights and freedoms;
b. alternative family and care environments;
c. basic health and wellbeing;
d. education, use of free time, and cultural activities; and e. Special protection.
(2) Further provisions regarding the KLA development policy as intended in paragraph (1) are regulated by a Regent's Regulation.
Article 62
(1) In order to effectively implement KLA policies in the Regions, a KLA Task Force is formed.
(2) The formation and composition of the KLA Task Force membership is determined by a Regent's Decree.
(3) The KLA Task Force is located at the Office of Women's Empowerment and Family Planning.
(4) The KLA Task Force as referred to in paragraph (1), has the following main duties:
a. coordinating policy implementation and KLA development;  b. carry out outreach, advocacy and communication of KLA policy information and education;
c. collect basic data on KLA development;
d. carry out needs analysis sourced from basic data;  e. carry out basic data dissemination;
f. determine program focus and priorities in realizing KLA, which are adapted to regional potential;
g. prepare a 5 (five) year Child Friendly City regional action plan and work mechanism; And
h. carry out monitoring, evaluation and reporting at least once a year.
Article 63
In carrying out its duties, the KLA Task Force can coordinate and collaborate with PPT institutions and other institutions that provide Child Protection services.
BAB VII
CHILD PROTECTION
Article 64
Regional Government, in order to provide protection for children: a. implement and support national policies in the implementation of Child Protection in the Regions;
b. guarantee that children can exercise their rights to express opinions in accordance with the child's age and level of intelligence;
c. ]prevent violence against children by optimizing the role of traditional institutions;
d. conducting outreach, seminars and counseling regarding child protection and rights;
e. developing a child-friendly school model;
f. provide public facilities that are friendly and safe for children g. encourage public awareness of the importance of child protection;
Article 65
Service efforts carried out by the Regional Government for children who are victims of acts of violence as referred to in Articles 42 to Article 64 apply mutatis mutandis to service efforts for children who are victims of acts of violence.
CHAPTER VIII
PARTICIPATION OF THE COMMUNITY, AND PARENTS AND/OR FAMILY
Part One
Public
Article 66
(1) Community participation in efforts to protect women and children:
a. participate in prevention and provide support for the development of programs to prevent violations of women's and children's rights;
b. provide information and/or report violations of women's and children's rights to the competent authorities; And
c. supervise the law enforcement process in cases of violations of women's and children's rights.
(2) Ninik mamak, alim ulama and cadiak intelligent as well as bundo kanduang are responsible for protecting and preventing violations of the rights of women and children.
(3) Community participation as referred to in paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) is based on statutory regulations and local wisdom values ​​of the local community.
Article 67
(1) In order to prevent violations of women's rights, the community:
a. monitor various conditions that occur in their environment which could lead to violations of women's rights;
b. increase awareness of violations of women's rights;  c. strengthening the role of community, religious and family organizations;
d. supervising the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection carried out by the Regional Government with a mechanism for conveying aspirations to the Regent or Regional People's Representative Council;
(2) In order to prevent violations of children's rights, the community:
a. monitor various conditions that occur in their environment which cause violations of children's rights;
b. increase awareness of violations of children's rights;
c. strengthening the role of community, religious and family organizations; And
prevent marriage at an early age.
Part Two
Parents and/or Family
Article 68
The family in efforts to protect women's rights plays a role: a. protect women from conflict and domestic violence that degrades women's dignity;
b. provide equal opportunities for women to develop themselves in the educational, social, economic, political and cultural fields; And
c. prevent violations of women's rights in the household.
Article 69
(1) Parents in efforts to protect children's rights play the role of: a. nurturing, nurturing, educating and protecting children;
b. develop children according to their abilities, talents and interests;
c. provide formal and non-formal education;
d. provide character education and instill moral values ​​in children;
e. guiding children to behave in accordance with religion, ethics and morals and customs; And
f. prevent marriage at an early age.
(2) In the event that parents are absent, or their whereabouts are unknown, or for some reason, are unable to carry out their obligations and responsibilities, then the obligations and responsibilities as intended in paragraph (1) can be transferred to the family.
BAB IX
CONSTRUCTION AND SUPERVISION
Article 70
(1) The Regional Government is obliged to provide guidance and supervision of the implementation of the Protection of women and children victims of Violence.  (2) Guidance as intended in paragraph (1), includes: a. compliance guidelines and standards;
b. technical guidance and training;
c. provision of facilities;
d. monitoring; And
e. evaluation.
(3) Guidance as intended in paragraph (2) is in order to realize the aim of protecting women and children victims of violence according to minimum service standards.
Article 71
(1) Supervision of the implementation of Child Protection as regulated in this Regional Regulation is carried out by the Regional Government Supervision Agency of Padang Pariaman Regency and P2TP2A;
(2) In carrying out supervision, P2TP2A has the authority to recommend cases to legal authorities, government agencies and other community institutions as regulated in the Law.
(3) Recommendations submitted by P2TP2A must be followed up by legal officials, government agencies, community institutions and other related individuals.
CHAPTER X
FINANCING
Article 72
Funding for the implementation of Women's Empowerment and Child Protection programs and activities comes from:
a. regional income and expenditure budget; And
b. other legitimate sources in accordance with the provisions of statutory regulations.
BAB XI
CLOSING
Article 73
The implementing regulations for this Regional Regulation are stipulated no later than 6 (six) months from the promulgation of this Regional Regulation.
Article 74
This Regional Regulation comes into force on the date of its promulgation, so that everyone knows it, it is ordered that this Regional Regulation be promulgated by placing it in the Regional Gazette of Padang Pariaman Regency.
Set in Parit Malintang
on March 30, 2017
REGENT OF PADANG PARIAMAN,
dto
ALI MUKHNI
Promulgated in Parit Malintang
on March 31, 2017
REGIONAL SECRETARY
PADANG PARIAMAN DISTRICT,
dto
JONPRIADI
PADANG PARIAMAN REGIONAL GAZETTE OF 2017 NUMBER 6
