Sixty-fifth Year SPECIAL No. 21 December 13, 2024

Sixty-fifth Year	SPECIAL No. 21	December 13, 2024

OFFICIAL GAZETTE

OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALI

LAW NO. 2024-027 OF DECEMBER 13, 2024 ESTABLISHING THE PENAL CODE

GENERAL SECRETARIAT OF THE GOVERNMENT

LAW NO. 2024-027 OF DECEMBER 13, 2024 ESTABLISHING THE PENAL CODE

The National Transitional Council deliberated and adopted, in its session of October 31, 2024,

The President of the Transition, Head of State, promulgates the law whose content follows:

BOOK I

GENERAL PROVISIONS TITLE I: CRIMINAL LAW

Chapter 1: General principles

Article 111-1

Criminal offenses are classified, according to their severity, into crimes, délits and contraventions.

Article 111-2

The law determines crimes and délits and sets the penalties applicable to their perpetrators.

Regulations determine contraventions and set, within the limits and according to the distinctions established by law, the penalties applicable to offenders.

Article 111-3

No one may be punished for a crime or for a délit whose elements are not defined by law, or for a contravention whose elements are not defined by law or regulation.

No one may be punished with a penalty that is not provided for by law, if the offense is a crime or a délit, or by regulation, if the offense is a contravention.

Article 111-4: Criminal law is strictly interpreted

Article 111-5

Criminal courts have jurisdiction to interpret administrative acts, whether regulatory or individual, and to assess their legality when the solution to the criminal proceedings before them depends on such examination.

Chapter 2: Application of criminal law in time

Article 112-1

Only acts constituting an offense on the date they were committed are punishable. Only penalties legally applicable on the same date may be imposed.

However, new provisions apply to offenses committed before their entry into force and which have not resulted in a conviction that has become res judicata when they are less severe than the former provisions.

Article 112-2

The following apply immediately to the punishment of offenses committed before their entry into force:

1°) laws on jurisdiction and judicial organization, as long as a judgment on the merits has not been rendered at first instance;

2°) laws setting the procedures for prosecution and the forms of procedure;

3°) laws relating to the regime for execution and application of penalties; however, these laws, when they would result in making more severe the penalties imposed by the conviction decision, are only applicable to convictions pronounced for acts committed after their entry into force;

4°) when prescription has not been acquired, laws relating to the prescription of public prosecution and the prescription of penalties.

Article 112-3

Laws relating to the nature and grounds for opening remedies as well as the time limits within which they must be exercised and the capacity of persons admitted to appeal apply to appeals filed against decisions pronounced after their entry into force. Appeals are subject to the formal rules in force on the day they are exercised.

Article 112-4

The immediate application of the new law has no effect on the validity of acts performed in accordance with the former law.

However, the penalty ceases to be executed when it was imposed for an act which, by virtue of a law subsequent to the judgment, no longer has the character of a criminal offense.

Chapter 3: Application of criminal law in space

Article 113-1

For the application of this chapter, the territory of the Republic includes the airspace connected to it.

Section 1

Offenses committed or deemed committed on the territory of the Republic

Article 113-2

Malian criminal law is applicable to offenses committed on the territory of the Republic.

An offense is deemed committed on the territory of the Republic when one of its constituent acts took place on that territory.

Article 113-3

Any crime or any délit committed by means of an electronic communication network, when it is attempted or committed to the detriment of a natural person residing on the territory of the Republic or a legal person whose headquarters is located on the territory of the Republic, is deemed committed on the territory of the Republic.

Article 113-4

Malian criminal law is applicable to offenses committed on board vessels flying the Malian flag, or against such vessels or persons on board, wherever they may be. It alone is applicable to offenses committed on board vessels of the national navy, or against such vessels or persons on board, wherever they may be.

Article 113-5

Malian criminal law is applicable to offenses committed on board aircraft registered in Mali, or against such aircraft or persons on board, wherever they may be. It alone is applicable to offenses committed on board Malian military aircraft, or against such aircraft or persons on board, wherever they may be.

Article 113-6

Malian criminal law is applicable to anyone who has been guilty on the territory of the Republic, as an accomplice, of a crime or a délit committed abroad if the crime or délit is punished both by Malian law and by foreign law and if it has been established by a final decision of the foreign court.

Section 2: Offenses committed outside the territory of the Republic

Article 113-7

Any Malian who, outside the territory of Mali, commits an act qualified as a crime punished by Malian law, may be prosecuted and tried by Malian courts.

Any Malian who, outside the territory of Mali, commits an act qualified as a délit by Malian law, may be prosecuted and tried by Malian courts if the act is punished by the legislation of the country where it was committed.

The same applies if the accused, the defendant or the accused person acquired Malian nationality only after the commission of the crime or délit.

However, whether it is a crime or a délit, no prosecution takes place if the accused, the defendant or the accused person proves that he has been definitively tried abroad, and in case of conviction, that he has served or his sentence has been prescribed or he has obtained pardon.

In case of a délit committed against a Malian or foreign private individual, prosecution may only be initiated at the request of the Public Prosecutor; it must be preceded by a complaint from the injured party or an official denunciation to the Malian authority by the authority of the country where the délit was committed.

Article 113-8

Any foreigner who, outside the territory of Mali, commits either as perpetrator or as accomplice, a crime against the security of the State or counterfeiting of the State seal, national currencies in circulation, national papers, banknotes authorized by law, may be prosecuted and tried according to the provisions of Malian laws, if he is arrested in Mali or if the Government obtains his extradition.

Article 113-9

Malian criminal law is applicable to crimes and offences committed on board or against aircraft not registered in Mali or against persons on board:

1°) when the perpetrator or the victim is of Malian nationality; 2°) when the aircraft lands in Mali after the crime or offence;
3°) when the aircraft has been leased without crew to a person who has the principal place of business or, failing that, permanent residence in the territory of the Republic.

Article 113-10

Malian criminal law applies to crimes and offences classified as acts of terrorism and punished by articles 251-1 to 251-7 of this Code, committed abroad by a Malian or by a person habitually residing in Malian territory.

Article 113-11

Malian criminal law applies and national courts have jurisdiction over offences provided for in articles 257-1 to 257-11 of this Code, relating to the fight against the financing of terrorism, and in articles 431-1 to 431-11 of this Code, relating to money laundering, committed by any natural or legal person, regardless of their nationality or the location of their headquarters, even outside the national territory, provided that the place of commission is located in one of the Member States.

They may also have jurisdiction over the same offences committed in a third State, provided that an international convention gives them jurisdiction.

Article 113-12

The provisions of this chapter are supplemented by those of articles 814 to 820 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

TITRE II : DE LA RESPONSABILITE PENALE

Chapitre 1 : Des dispositions générales

Article 121-1 : No one is criminally liable except for their own act

Article 121-2

Legal persons, with the exception of the State, are criminally liable for offences committed, on their behalf, by their organs or representatives.

However, local authorities and their groupings are criminally liable only for offences committed in the exercise of activities that may be the subject of public service delegation agreements.

The criminal liability of legal persons does not exclude that of natural persons who are perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts.

Article 121-3 : There is no crime or offence without intent to commit it

However, when the law so provides, there is an offence in the case of deliberate endangerment of another person.

There is also an offence, when the law so provides, in the case of recklessness, negligence or breach of an obligation of care or safety provided for by law or regulation, if it is established that the perpetrator of the acts did not exercise normal diligence taking into account, where applicable, the nature of their duties or functions, their competence and the power and means at their disposal.

In the case provided for in the preceding paragraph, natural persons who did not directly cause the damage, but who created or contributed to creating the situation that allowed the damage to occur or who did not take measures to avoid it, are criminally liable if it is established that they either manifestly and deliberately violated a particular obligation of care or safety provided for by law or regulation, or committed a gross fault that exposed others to a risk of particular gravity that they could not have been unaware of.

There is no contravention in the case of force majeure.

Article 121-4

The perpetrator of the offence is the person who: 1°) commits the incriminated acts;
2°) attempts to commit a crime or, in cases provided for by law, an offence.

Any natural person who personally and principally accomplishes the constituent elements of an offence by commission or omission or who is at the origin of such acts is a perpetrator or co-perpetrator.

Any legal person with a civil, commercial, industrial or financial purpose in whose name and in whose interest acts of execution or abstention constituting an offence have been accomplished by the deliberate will of its organs or its representative in the exercise of their functions is also a perpetrator or co-perpetrator.

Article 121-5

An attempt is constituted when, manifested by a commencement of execution, it was suspended or failed to have its effect only by reason of circumstances independent of the will of its perpetrator.

Article 121-6 : Are punished as accomplices to an act classified as a crime or offence

1°) those who, by gift, promise, threat, order, abuse of authority or power, machination or culpable artifice, advice, injunction, provoke this action or give instructions, indications, information, to commit it;

2°) those who provide weapons, instruments, or any other means that served the action, knowing that they were to be used for it;

3°) those who, with knowledge, aid or assist the perpetrator or perpetrators of the action in the acts that prepared or facilitated it or in those that consummated it, without prejudice to the penalties that are specifically provided by this Code against the perpetrators of conspiracies or attacks against the security of the State, even in the case where the crime that was the object of the conspirators or instigators was not committed;

4°) those who knowingly suppress or attempt to suppress evidence of the action, or who, with knowledge, by any means whatsoever, help the perpetrators or accomplices of the crime or offence to evade the action of justice.

5°) The perpetrators of acts of complicity are punished with the same penalties as the perpetrators of the crime or offence of which they have made themselves accomplices.

The provisions of paragraph 5 of this article are not applicable to direct line ascendants and descendants of the perpetrators or accomplices of the action, to their brothers, to their sisters, to their spouses, to their guardians and to their wards.

Article 121-7

Also accomplices to a crime or an offence are those who, without risk to themselves and to their relatives, having witnessed it, refrain from intervening to prevent its perpetration or who, having had knowledge of it, refrain from reporting the perpetrators or accomplices.

Chapitre 2 : Des causes d'irresponsabilité ou d'atténuation de la responsabilité

Article 122-1

A person who was suffering, at the time of the acts, from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that abolished their discernment or control of their acts is not criminally liable.

A person who was suffering, at the time of the acts, from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that impaired their discernment or hindered the control of their acts remains punishable. However, the court takes this circumstance into account when it determines the penalty and sets its regime.

Article 122-2

A person who acted under the influence of a force or constraint to which they could not resist is not criminally liable.

Article 122-3

A person who performs an act prescribed or authorized by legislative or regulatory provisions is not criminally liable.
Subject to the provisions of Title 1 of Book III relating to crimes against humanity, a person who performs an act ordered by legitimate authority is not criminally liable, unless that act is manifestly unlawful.

Article 122-4

A person is not criminally liable who, faced with an unjustified attack against themselves or others, performs, at the same time, an act commanded by the necessity of self-defence of themselves or others, unless there is a disproportion between the means of defence employed and the seriousness of the attack.

A person is not criminally liable who, in order to interrupt the commission of a crime or an offence against property, performs an act of defence, other than voluntary homicide, when that act is strictly necessary for the purpose pursued provided that the means employed are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence.

Article 122-5

A person is presumed to have acted in a state of self-defence who performs the act:

1°) to repel, at night, entry by breaking and entering, violence or trickery into an inhabited place;

2°) to defend themselves against the perpetrators of thefts or looting carried out with violence.

Article 122-6

A person is not criminally liable who, faced with a present or imminent danger that threatens themselves, others or property, performs an act necessary for the protection of the person or property, unless there is a disproportion between the means employed and the seriousness of the threat.

Article 122-7

The age of criminal majority is set at eighteen years. Minors capable of discernment are criminally liable for crimes, offences or contraventions of which they have been found guilty, under conditions laid down by the Code of Criminal Procedure and all other legislative or regulatory provisions determining the measures of protection, assistance, supervision and education to which they may be subject.

These provisions also determine the educational measures that may be imposed on minors from ten to under eighteen years of age as well as the penalties to which minors from thirteen to under eighteen years of age may be sentenced, taking into account the mitigation of liability from which they benefit by reason of their age.

TITRE III : DES PEINES, DES MESURES DE SURETE ET DES MESURES EDUCATIVES

Article 130-1

In order to ensure the protection of society, to prevent the commission of new offences and to restore social balance, with respect for the interests of the victim, the penalty has the following functions:

1°) to punish the perpetrator of the offence;

2°) to promote their reform, integration or reintegration.

Article 130-2

The judge must impose only penalties that are provided for and strictly and evidently necessary.

Chapitre 1 : De la nature des peines

Section 1

Des peines applicables aux personnes physiques Sous-section 1: Des peines criminelles

Article 131-1 : Les peines criminelles encourues par les personnes physiques sont

1°) la mort ;

2°) la réclusion criminelle à perpétuité ;

3°) la réclusion criminelle de trente ans au plus ; 4°) la réclusion criminelle de vingt ans au plus ; 5°) la réclusion criminelle de quinze ans au plus ; 6°) la réclusion criminelle de dix ans au plus.

Article 131-2

La peine de réclusion criminelle n'est pas exclusive d'une peine d'amende et d'une ou de plusieurs des peines complémentaires prévues à l'article 131-6.

Sous-section 2 : Des peines correctionnelles

Article 131-3 : Les peines applicables aux délits sont

1°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas dix ans ; 2°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas sept ans ; 3°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas cinq ans ; 4°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas trois ans ; 5°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas deux ans ; 6°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas un an ; 7°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas six mois ; 8°) l'emprisonnement pour une durée n'excédant pas trois mois;

9°) la peine de travail d'intérêt général ; 10°) l'amende ;
11°) les peines complémentaires prévues à l'article 131-6 ci- dessous.

La peine d'un jour d'emprisonnement est de vingt-quatre heures. Celle d'un mois est de trente jours. Celle d'un an est de douze mois.

Article 131-4

La peine de travail d'intérêt général est une peine alternative à l'emprisonnement.

Elle a pour but de promouvoir les meilleures conditions de réhabilitation, de réinsertion sociale et d'amendement du condamné.

Article 131-5

[Décret n°036 du 31 janvier 2007] La peine de travail d'intérêt général consiste à faire exécuter par le condamné qui y consent un travail non rémunéré au profit d'une Collectivité publique, d'un service public ou d'une association reconnue d'utilité publique.

Elle est prononcée à titre de peine principale et ne peut être cumulée avec une peine d'emprisonnement.

Elle n'est applicable qu'aux délits pour lesquels le maximum de la peine encourue n'excède pas deux ans.

Elle ne peut être inférieure à 40 heures ni supérieure à 240 heures pour le condamné majeur.

Elle ne peut être inférieure à 20 heures ni supérieure à 180 heures pour le condamné mineur de seize à dix- huit ans non révolus.

La non-exécution, même partielle de la peine de travail d'intérêt général entraîne, sur décision du juge de l'application des peines, l'application en tout ou partie de la peine d'emprisonnement prononcée au moment de la condamnation.

Sous-section 3 : Des peines complémentaires encourues pour certains crimes ou délits

Article 131-6

Lorsque la loi le prévoit, un crime ou un délit peut être sanctionné d'une ou de plusieurs peines complémentaires qui, frappant les personnes physiques, emportent interdiction, déchéance, incapacité ou retrait d'un droit, injonction de soins ou obligation de faire, immobilisation ou confiscation d'un objet, confiscation d'un animal, fermeture d'un établissement ou affichage de la décision prononcée ou diffusion de celle-ci soit par la presse écrite, soit par tout moyen de communication au public par voie électronique.

Article 131-7

Lorsqu'un délit est puni d'une ou de plusieurs des peines complémentaires mentionnées à l'article 131-6 ci- dessus, la juridiction peut ne prononcer que la peine complémentaire ou l'une ou plusieurs des peines complémentaires encourues à titre de peine principale.

La juridiction peut alors fixer la durée maximum de l'emprisonnement ou le montant maximum de l'amende dont le juge de l'application des peines peut ordonner la mise à exécution en tout ou partie en cas de violation par le condamné des obligations ou interdictions résultant des peines prononcées en application des dispositions du présent article.

Le Président de la juridiction en avertit le condamné après le prononcé de la décision.

L'emprisonnement ou l'amende que fixe la juridiction ne peut excéder les peines encourues pour le délit pour lequel la condamnation est prononcée.

Sous-section 4 : Des peines contraventionnelles

Article 131-8

La peine contraventionnelle encourue par les personnes physiques est l'amende n'excédant pas 100 000 francs sous réserve des textes spécifiques.

La confiscation peut être appliquée comme peine complémentaire.

Subsection 5: Content and Methods of Application of Certain Penalties

Article 131-9

The complementary penalty of confiscation is incurred in the cases provided for by law or regulation. It is also incurred for crimes and for offenses punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year, with the exception of press offenses.

Confiscation applies to all property, movable or immovable, whatever its nature, divided or undivided, having been used to commit the offense or which were intended to commit it, and of which the convicted person is the owner or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal.

It also applies to all property which is the instrument or object or the direct or indirect proceeds of the offense, with the exception of property capable of restitution to the victim. If the proceeds of the offense have been mixed with funds of lawful origin for the acquisition of one or more properties, confiscation may apply to such property only up to the estimated value of such proceeds.

Confiscation may furthermore apply to any movable or immovable property defined by the law or regulation which punishes the offense.

If it is a crime or an offense punishable by at least five years' imprisonment and having procured a direct or indirect profit, confiscation also applies to movable or immovable property, whatever its nature, divided or undivided, belonging to the convicted person or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal, when neither the convicted person nor the owner, given the opportunity to explain the property whose confiscation is contemplated, have been able to justify its origin.

When the law which punishes the crime or offense so provides, confiscation may also apply to all or part of the property belonging to the convicted person or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal, whatever its nature, movable or immovable, divided or undivided. Confiscation is mandatory for objects classified as dangerous or harmful by law or regulation, or whose possession is unlawful, whether or not such property is the property of the convicted person.

The complementary penalty of confiscation applies under the same conditions to all incorporeal rights, whatever their nature, divided or undivided.

Confiscation may be ordered in value. Confiscation in value may be executed on all property, whatever its nature, belonging to the convicted person or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal.

The confiscated thing is, except for special provision providing for its destruction or attribution, devolved to the State, but it remains encumbered, up to its value, with real rights lawfully constituted in favor of third parties.

When the confiscated thing is a vehicle which has not been seized or impounded during the proceedings, the convicted person must, upon the injunction made to him by the Public Prosecutor, surrender this vehicle to the service or organization responsible for its destruction or disposal.

Confiscation in the absence of criminal conviction is ordered at the request of the Public Prosecutor, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, when the perpetrator of the offense cannot be prosecuted due to death, flight or absence or in other appropriate cases such as when the property to be confiscated is perishable, when it has been abandoned by the owner, when its preservation would cost more than the property itself, when its preservation is dangerous for public health or safety and when it will lose value over time.

In these cases, the Public Prosecutor demonstrates that the property constitutes the proceeds or instrument of an offense or that the criminal conduct is established by applying the criterion of the highest probability, which means that the assets may be obtained even when the evidence is not sufficient to obtain a criminal conviction.

Article 131-10: The prohibition of civic, civil and family rights applies to

1°) the right to vote; 2°) eligibility;
3°) the right to exercise a judicial function or to be an expert before a court, to represent or assist a party before the courts;

4°) the right to testify in court other than to make simple statements;

5°) the right to be a guardian or curator; this prohibition does not exclude the right, after the conforming opinion of the guardianship judge, the family council having been heard, to be guardian or curator of one's own children.

The prohibition of civic, civil and family rights may not exceed a duration of ten years in case of conviction for a crime and a duration of five years in case of conviction for an offense.
The court may pronounce the prohibition of all or part of these rights.
The prohibition of the right to vote or ineligibility pronounced pursuant to this article entails prohibition or incapacity to exercise a public function.

Article 131-11

The penalty of prohibition of residence entails a prohibition to appear in certain places determined by the court. It includes, in addition, measures of supervision and assistance.

The list of prohibited places as well as the measures of supervision and assistance may be modified by the sentence enforcement judge, under the conditions set by the Code of Criminal Procedure.

The prohibition of residence may not exceed a duration of ten years in case of conviction for a crime and a duration of five years in case of conviction for an offense.

Article 131-12

When the prohibition of residence accompanies a custodial sentence without suspension, it applies from the commencement of that sentence and its execution continues, for the duration fixed by the conviction decision, from the day the deprivation of liberty ended.
Any detention occurring during the prohibition of residence is credited against the duration thereof.

Section 2

Penalties Applicable to Legal Persons Subsection 1: Criminal and Correctional Penalties

Article 131-13

The criminal or correctional penalties incurred by legal persons are:

1°) the fine;

2°) in the cases provided for by law, the penalties listed in Article 131-15 below.

Article 131-14

The maximum rate of the fine applicable to legal persons is equal to five times that provided for natural persons by the law which punishes the offense.

When it is a crime for which no fine is provided against natural persons, the fine incurred by legal persons is 100,000,000 francs.

Article 131-15

Where the law so provides against a legal person, a felony or misdemeanor may be punished by one or more of the following penalties:

1°) dissolution, where the legal person was created or, in the case of a felony or misdemeanor punishable in respect of natural persons by a term of imprisonment of three years or more, diverted from its purpose to commit the incriminated acts;

2°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of five years at most, from directly or indirectly engaging in one or more professional or social activities;

3°) placement for a period of five years at most under judicial supervision;

4°) permanent closure or closure for a period of five years at most of the establishments or of one or more of the establishments of the enterprise that were used to commit the incriminated acts;

5°) exclusion from public contracts permanently or for a period of five years at most;

6°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of five years at most, from making a public offer of financial securities or from having its financial securities admitted to trading on a regulated market;

7°) prohibition, for a period of five years at most, from issuing cheques other than those that allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those that are certified or from using payment cards;

8°) the penalty of confiscation, under the conditions and according to the procedures provided for in Article 131-9 of this Code;

9°) posting of the decision rendered or dissemination thereof either by the written press or by any means of communication to the public by electronic means;

10°) confiscation of the animal that was used to commit the offence or against which the offence was committed;

11°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of five years at most, from keeping an animal;

12°) prohibition, for a period of five years at most, from receiving any public aid granted by the State, local authorities, their establishments or their groupings as well as any financial aid paid by a private person entrusted with a public service mission.

The additional penalty of confiscation is also incurred automatically for felonies and for misdemeanors punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year, with the exception of press offences.

The penalties defined in 1° and 3° above are not applicable to legal persons under public law whose criminal liability is capable of being engaged. They are also not applicable to political parties or groupings or to trade unions. The penalty defined in 1° is not applicable to staff representative institutions.

Sous-section 2 : Des peines contraventionnelles

Article 131-16 : Les peines contraventionnelles encourues par les personnes morales sont

1°) the fine;

2°) the penalties depriving or restricting rights provided for in Article 131-18 below.

Article 131-17

The maximum rate of the fine applicable to legal persons is equal to five times that provided for natural persons by the regulation that punishes the offence.

Article 131-18

The penalty of a fine may be replaced by one or more of the following penalties depriving or restricting rights:

1°) prohibition, for a period of one year at most, from issuing cheques other than those that allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those that are certified or from using payment cards;

2°) confiscation of the thing that was used or was intended to commit the offence or of the thing that is the product thereof.

Sous-section 3 : Du contenu et des modalités d'application de certaines peines

Article 131-19

The decision ordering the dissolution of the legal person includes the referral thereof to the competent Court to proceed with its liquidation.

Article 131-20

The decision to place the legal person under judicial supervision includes the appointment of a judicial representative whose mission the court specifies. This mission may only relate to the activity in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of which the offence was committed. At least every six months, the judicial representative reports to the sentence enforcement judge on the performance of his mission.

In view of this report, the sentence enforcement judge may refer the matter to the court that ordered the placement under judicial supervision. The latter may then either impose a new penalty or release the legal person from the placement measure.

Article 131-21

The prohibition from making a public offer of financial securities or from having its financial securities admitted to trading on a regulated market entails prohibition, for the placement of securities of any kind whatsoever, from having recourse both to credit institutions, financial institutions or brokerage firms and to any methods whatsoever of advertising.

Chapitre 2 : Du régime des peines

Article 132-1

Where the law or regulation punishes an offence, the regime of penalties that may be imposed is subject, except where otherwise provided by law, to the rules of this chapter.

Any penalty imposed by the court must be individualized.

Within the limits set by law, the court determines the nature, quantum and regime of the penalties imposed according to the circumstances of the offence and the personality of its perpetrator as well as his material, family and social situation, in accordance with the purposes and functions of the penalty set out in Article 130-1 of this Code.

Section 1 : Des Dispositions générales

Sous-section 1 : Des peines applicables en cas de concours d'infractions

Article 132-2

There is a concurrence of offences where an offence is committed by a person before that person has been definitively convicted for another offence.

Article 132-3

Where, in the course of the same proceedings, the person prosecuted is found guilty of several concurrent offences, and where several penalties of the same nature are incurred, only one penalty of that nature may be imposed within the limit of the highest statutory maximum.

Each penalty imposed is deemed common to the concurrent offences within the limit of the statutory maximum applicable to each of them.

Article 132-4

Where, in the course of separate proceedings, the person prosecuted has been found guilty of several concurrent offences, the penalties imposed are served cumulatively within the limit of the highest statutory maximum. However, total or partial merger of penalties of the same nature may be ordered either by the last court called upon to rule or under the conditions provided for by the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Article 132-5

For the application of Articles 132-3 and 132-4 above, custodial sentences are of the same nature and any custodial sentence is merged with a life sentence.

Account is taken, where appropriate, of recidivism.

Where life imprisonment, incurred for one or more of the concurrent offences, has not been imposed, the statutory maximum is set at thirty years' imprisonment.

The benefit of the suspended sentence attached in whole or in part to one of the penalties imposed for concurrent offences does not preclude the execution of penalties of the same nature not accompanied by a suspended sentence.

Article 132-6

When a sentence has been the subject of a pardon or remission, the sentence resulting from the measure or decision is taken into account for the application of merger.

Remission occurring after merger applies to the sentence resulting from the merger.

The duration of the sentence reduction is credited against that of the sentence to be served, where applicable, after merger.

Article 132-7

Notwithstanding the preceding provisions, fines for contraventions accumulate among themselves and with those incurred or imposed for crimes or offenses in concurrence.

Sous-section 2

Penalties applicable in case of recidivism Paragraphe 1: General provisions

Article 132-8

The offenses of theft, extortion, fraudulent dispossession, blackmail, fraud, stellionate, usury, breach of trust, misuse of corporate assets, insider trading and complicity in these offenses are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

Article 132-9

The offenses of sexual violence and complicity provided for by articles 325-3, 325-5, 325-7, 327-2, and 327-3 of this Code are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

Article 132-10

The offenses of involuntary homicide or involuntary injury to the person committed while driving a motorized land vehicle are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

The offenses and complicity in offenses provided for such as hit and run, driving under the influence of alcohol, driving without a license, failure to comply with driving license regulations, are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

Article 132-11

The acts of trafficking in persons, procuring, slavery and similar practices, pledging, hostage-taking, kidnapping, smuggling of migrants and child trafficking and complicity in these acts are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

Article 132-12

The offenses of intentional violence against persons as well as any offense committed with the aggravating circumstance of violence are considered, with regard to recidivism, as a single offense.

Article 132-13

The offenses of vagrancy, begging and incitement to begging are considered with regard to recidivism as a single offense.

Article 132-14

Third-class police contraventions are considered with regard to recidivism as a single offense.

In this case, the fine incurred may be increased to double the maximum provided by law.

Article 132-15

Legal recidivism is the commission of any offense that results in an aggravation of the sentence under the conditions specified in articles 132-16 to 132-21 below.

The state of legal recidivism may be raised on the court's own motion even when it is not mentioned in the prosecution document, provided that during the hearing, the person prosecuted has been informed of it and has been given the opportunity to be assisted by a lawyer and to present observations.

Paragraphe 2 : Natural persons

Article 132-16

When a natural person, already definitively convicted of a crime or of an offense punishable by ten years' imprisonment under the law, commits a crime, the maximum sentence incurred may, for temporary sentences, be increased up to double.

Article 132-17

When a natural person, already definitively convicted of a crime, commits, within five years from the expiration or prescription of the previous sentence, an offense punishable by imprisonment, the maximum imprisonment and fine sentences incurred is doubled.

Article 132-18

When a natural person, already definitively convicted of an offense, commits, within five years from the expiration or prescription of the previous sentence, either the same offense or an offense assimilated to it under the rules of recidivism, the maximum imprisonment and fine sentences incurred is doubled.

Paragraphe 3 : Legal persons

Article 132-19

When a legal person, already definitively convicted of a crime or of an offense punishable by imprisonment with respect to natural persons, engages its criminal liability through a crime, the maximum rate of the fine applicable to legal persons is doubled. In this case, the legal person also incurs the penalties mentioned in article 131-15 above, subject to the provisions of the last paragraph of that article.

Article 132-20

When a legal person, already definitively convicted of a crime or of an offense punishable by imprisonment with respect to natural persons, engages its criminal liability through an offense punishable by the same sentence, within ten years from the expiration or prescription of the previous sentence, the maximum rate of the fine applicable to legal persons is doubled.

In the cases provided for in the preceding paragraph, the legal person also incurs the penalties mentioned in article 131-15 above, subject to the provisions of the last paragraph of that article.

Article 132-21

When a legal person, already definitively convicted of an offense, engages its criminal liability, within five years from the expiration or prescription of the previous sentence, either through the same offense or through an offense assimilated to it under the rules of recidivism, the maximum rate of the fine applicable to legal persons is doubled.

Sous-section 3 : Penalties applicable in case of repetition of offenses

Article 132-22

There is repetition of criminal offenses when a person has already been definitively convicted of a crime or an offense and commits a new offense that does not meet the conditions of legal recidivism.
The sentences imposed for the offense committed in repetition accumulate without limitation of quantum and without possibility of merger with the sentences definitively imposed in the previous conviction.

Sous-section 4 : Pronouncement of sentences

Article 132-23

No sentence may be applied if the court has not expressly imposed it.

The court may impose only one of the sentences incurred for the offense before it.

When an offense is punishable by a sentence of imprisonment, the court may impose a sentence of imprisonment for a duration less than that which is incurred.

When an offense is punishable by a fine, the court may impose a fine of an amount less than that which is incurred.

Article 132-24

The sentence, like the decision on guilt, must be reasoned. This reasoning takes into consideration the seriousness of the facts of the case, the personality of their perpetrator as well as his material, family and social situation.

Section 2 : Methods of personalizing sentences

Article 132-25

Sentences may be personalized according to the methods provided for in this section.

Sous-section 1

Semi-liberty, external placement and placement under electronic monitoring

Paragraphe 1 : De la semi-liberté et du placement à l'extérieur

Article 132-26

Where the trial court pronounces a sentence equal to or less than two years' imprisonment, or, for a person in a state of legal recidivism, a sentence equal to or less than one year, it may decide that this sentence shall be executed in whole or in part under the regime of semi-liberty with regard to the convicted person who provides evidence:

1°) either of the exercise of a professional activity, even temporary, of participation in an internship or of his or her regular attendance at teaching, vocational training or job seeking;

2°) either of his or her essential participation in the life of his or her family; 3°) either of the necessity of undergoing medical treatment;
4°) either of the existence of serious efforts at social rehabilitation resulting from his or her sustained involvement in any other specific project of integration or reintegration likely to prevent the risks of recidivism.

These provisions are also applicable in the case of pronouncement of an imprisonment partially accompanied by suspension or suspension with probation, where the firm part of the sentence is less than or equal to two years, or, if the person is in a state of legal recidivism, less than or equal to one year.

In the cases provided for in the preceding paragraphs, the court may also decide that the sentence of imprisonment shall be executed under the regime of external placement.

Article 132-27

The convicted person admitted to the benefit of semi-liberty is required to return to the penitentiary establishment according to the procedures determined by the sentence enforcement judge based on the time necessary for the activity, teaching, vocational training, job seeking, internship, participation in family life, treatment or integration or reintegration project for which he or she was admitted to the regime of semi-liberty. He or she is required to remain in the establishment on days when, for any reason whatsoever, his or her external obligations are interrupted.

The convicted person admitted to the benefit of external placement is required, under the supervision of the administration, to carry out activities outside the penitentiary establishment.

The trial court may also subject the convicted person admitted to the benefit of semi-liberty or external placement to the measures provided for by Articles 132-35 to 132-39 below relating to suspension with probation.

Paragraphe 2 : Du placement sous surveillance électronique

Article 132-28

Where the trial court pronounces a sentence equal to or less than two years' imprisonment or, for a person in a state of legal recidivism, a sentence equal to or less than one year, it may decide that the sentence shall be executed in whole or in part under the regime of placement under electronic monitoring with regard to the convicted person who provides evidence:

1°) either of the exercise of a professional activity, even temporary, of participation in an internship or of his or her regular attendance at teaching, vocational training or job seeking;

2°) either of his or her essential participation in the life of his or her family;

3°) either of the necessity of undergoing medical treatment;

4°) either of the existence of serious efforts at social rehabilitation resulting from his or her sustained involvement in any other specific project of integration or reintegration likely to prevent the risks of recidivism.

These provisions are also applicable in the case of pronouncement of an imprisonment partially accompanied by suspension or suspension with probation, where the firm part of the sentence is less than or equal to two years, or, if the person is in a state of legal recidivism, less than or equal to one year.

The decision of placement under electronic monitoring may only be taken with the consent of the convicted person previously informed that he or she may request to be assisted by the lawyer of his or her choice, where applicable, the one appointed ex officio by the Bar President at his or her request, before giving his or her consent.

If it concerns an unemancipated minor, this decision may only be taken with the consent of the holders of the exercise of parental authority.

Article 132-29

Placement under electronic monitoring entails, for the convicted person, a prohibition on being absent from his or her home or any other place designated by the sentence enforcement judge outside the periods fixed by the latter. The periods and places are fixed taking into account: the exercise of a professional activity by the convicted person; the fact that he or she is attending teaching or training, carrying out an internship or occupying temporary employment with a view to his or her social integration; his or her participation in family life; the prescription of medical treatment.

Placement under electronic monitoring also entails for the convicted person the obligation to respond to summonses from any public authority designated by the sentence enforcement judge.

Article 132-30

The trial court may also subject the convicted person admitted to the benefit of placement under electronic monitoring to the measures provided for by Articles 132-38, 132-39 and 132-40 below relating to suspension with probation.

Sous-section 2 : Du sursis simple

Article 132-31

In the case of a conviction to imprisonment or to a fine, the courts and tribunals may, if the accused or the defendant has not undergone, during the five years preceding the facts, a conviction to imprisonment for a crime or offence, order by giving reasons for their decision, that execution of all or part of the sentence shall be suspended.

If during the period of five years, from the pronouncement of the judgment or the decision, the convicted person has not incurred any conviction, the latter is considered as null and void.

After the pronouncement of the conviction accompanied by suspension, the president of the court warns the convicted person, when he or she is present, of the consequences that would result from a conviction for a new offence committed within the period of five years. He or she also informs him or her of the possibility of having his or her conviction declared null and void.

Article 132-32

The court may, by special decision, revoke totally or partially, for a duration or an amount that it determines, the suspension previously granted, whatever the sentence it accompanies, when it pronounces a new conviction to a sentence of criminal imprisonment or to a sentence of imprisonment without suspension.

Article 132-33

In the case of revocation of simple suspension ordered by the court, the first sentence is executed without it being able to merge with the second.

Article 132-34

Where the benefit of simple suspension has been granted only for part of the sentence, the conviction is deemed null and void in all its elements if the total revocation of the suspension has not been pronounced under the conditions provided for in Article 132-32 above, the fine or the part of the fine not accompanied by suspension remaining due.

Subsection 3: Suspended sentence with probation

Paragraph 1: Conditions for granting suspended sentence with probation

Article 132-35

The court that pronounces a term of imprisonment may, under the conditions provided hereinafter, order that its execution be suspended, with the convicted natural person being placed under the probation regime.

Suspended sentence with probation is applicable to sentences of imprisonment pronounced for common law crimes or offences.

In this case, the Court may declare the execution of the sentence provisionally.

It sets the probation period which may not be less than three years nor more than five years, as well as the probationary measures assigned to the convicted person.

After pronouncing the imprisonment with suspended sentence with probation, the president of the court notifies the convicted person, when present, of the obligations to be respected during the suspended sentence with probation and warns of the consequences that would result from a conviction for a new offence committed during the probation period or a breach of the control measures and particular obligations imposed upon them. The president informs them of the possibility of having their conviction declared null and void if they observe satisfactory conduct.

Article 132-36

When a conviction is accompanied by suspended sentence with probation, the convicted person is placed under the supervision of the sentence enforcement judge or, failing that, the public prosecutor in the jurisdiction where they have their habitual residence or, if they have no residence in Mali, under the supervision of the sentence enforcement judge or, failing that, the public prosecutor of the court that pronounced the conviction.

If the acts necessary for the execution of the probationary measures must be carried out outside the limits of their jurisdiction, the sentence enforcement judge or, failing that, the public prosecutor instructs their territorially competent counterpart to oversee them.

Paragraph 2: Probation regime

Article 132-37

During the probation period, the convicted person must comply with the control measures provided for in Article 132-38 below and with those particular obligations provided for in Article 132-39 below that are specifically imposed upon them. In addition, the convicted person may benefit from assistance measures intended to promote their social rehabilitation.

These measures and particular obligations cease to apply and the probation period is suspended during the time the convicted person is incarcerated.

Article 132-38

The control measures to which the convicted person must submit are as follows:

1°) respond to summonses from the sentence enforcement judge or the designated social worker;

2°) receive visits from the social worker and provide them with information or documents of a nature to allow verification of their means of subsistence and the execution of their obligations;

3°) notify the social worker of changes in employment;

4°) notify the social worker of changes in residence or any travel exceeding fifteen days and report their return;

5°) obtain prior authorization from the sentence enforcement judge for any change in employment or residence, when such change is of a nature to hinder the execution of their obligations;

6°) inform the sentence enforcement judge in advance of any travel abroad.

Article 132-39

The sentencing court or the sentence enforcement judge may specifically impose upon the convicted person compliance with one or more of the following obligations:

1°) engage in a professional activity or pursue education or vocational training;

2°) establish their residence in a specified place;

3°) submit to medical examination, treatment or care measures, even under hospitalization. These measures may consist of a therapeutic injunction when it appears that the convicted person uses narcotics or habitually and excessively consumes alcoholic beverages;

4°) prove that they contribute to family expenses or regularly pay maintenance for which they are liable;

5°) make reparation in whole or in part, according to their contributory capacity, for the damage caused by the offence, even in the absence of a decision on the civil action;

6°) prove that they pay, according to their contributory capacity, the sums owed to the Public Treasury following the conviction;

7°) refrain from driving certain vehicles determined by the licence categories provided for in the Road Code;

8°) not engage in the activity in the exercise of or on the occasion of the exercise of which the offence was committed or not engage in an activity involving habitual contact with minors;

9°) refrain from appearing in any place, any category of places or any specifically designated area;

10°) not place bets, particularly with mutual betting organizations, and not take part in games of money and chance;

11°) not frequent drinking establishments;

12°) not associate with certain convicted persons, particularly the perpetrators or accomplices of the offence;

13°) refrain from entering into contact with certain persons, including the victim, or certain categories of persons, and particularly minors, except, where applicable, those designated by the court;

14°) not possess or carry a weapon;

15°) in case of an offence committed either against their spouse, or against their children or those of their spouse, reside outside the home or residence of the couple and, where applicable, refrain from appearing in this home or residence or in the immediate vicinity thereof, as well as, if necessary, undergo health, social or psychological care; these provisions are also applicable when the offence is committed by the former spouse of the victim, the home concerned being then that of the victim. For the application of this paragraph, the victim's opinion is obtained, as soon as possible and by all means, on the advisability of requiring the convicted person to reside outside the couple's dwelling. Except in special circumstances, this measure is taken when acts of violence likely to be repeated are involved and the victim requests it. The court may specify the terms for covering the costs relating to this accommodation;

16°) obtain prior authorization from the sentence enforcement judge for any travel abroad.

Paragraph 3: Revocation of suspended sentence with probation

Article 132-40

Suspended sentence with probation may be revoked by the trial court under the conditions provided for in Article 132-41 below.

It may also be revoked by the sentence enforcement judge when the convicted person has not complied with the control measures and particular obligations imposed upon them. Any breach of these measures and obligations committed after the probation has become enforceable may justify revocation of the suspension. If this revocation is ordered while the conviction had not yet acquired a final character, it becomes null and void in the event that this conviction is subsequently reversed or annulled.

Article 132-41

If the convicted person commits, during the probationary period, a common law crime or offence followed by a conviction to a custodial sentence without suspension, the trial court may, after obtaining the opinion of the sentence enforcement judge, order the revocation in whole or in part of the suspension or suspensions previously granted. This revocation may not be ordered for offences committed before the conviction accompanied by the suspension has acquired a final character.

Article 132-42

The decision ordering partial revocation of the suspension does not end the probation regime and does not attach to the conviction the effects of a conviction without suspension.

Article 132-43

When the court orders the revocation of the suspension in whole or in part, it may, by special and reasoned decision, enforceable provisionally, have the convicted person incarcerated.

Section 3

On the definition of certain circumstances resulting in the aggravation of penalties

Article 132-44

Premeditation consists in the design formed before the action, to make an attempt on the person of an individual, or even on that of whoever will be found or encountered even though this design may be dependent on some circumstance or some condition.

Article 132-45

Lying in wait consists in waiting for a longer or shorter time in one or various places, for an individual, either to put him to death, or to exercise on him acts of violence provided for by Article 321-4 of this Code.

Article 132-46

Breaking and entering consists in the forcing, degradation or destruction of any closing device or any kind of enclosure. Assimilated to breaking and entering is the use of false keys, keys unduly obtained or any instrument that can be fraudulently used to operate a closing device without forcing or degrading it.

Article 132-47

Scaling is the act of entering any place, either over an element of enclosure, or through any opening not intended to serve as an entrance.

Article 132-48: A weapon is any object designed to kill or injure

Any other object likely to present a danger to persons is assimilated to a weapon when it is used to kill, injure or threaten or when it is intended, by the person carrying it, to kill, injure or threaten.

Assimilated to a weapon is any object which, presenting with the weapon defined in the first paragraph a resemblance likely to create confusion, is used to threaten to kill or injure or is intended, by the person carrying it, to threaten to kill or injure.

The use of an animal to kill, injure or threaten is assimilated to the use of a weapon. In case of conviction of the owner of the animal or if the owner is unknown, the Court may decide to hand over the animal to an animal protection organization recognized as being of public utility or declared, which may freely dispose of it.

Pocket knives and scissors, simple canes are deemed weapons only insofar as they have been used.

Chapter 3: On the execution of penalties

Article 133-1: Every person sentenced to death shall be shot

The woman sentenced to death who is recognized as pregnant shall not undergo her sentence until after her delivery.

The woman who is breastfeeding shall not be executed until after the weaning of the child.

Article 133-2

Persons sentenced to imprisonment may be employed in works of public utility with the exception of those aged sixty years completed at the time of judgment; women are employed in works appropriate to their sex.

Article 133-3

The duration of any custodial sentence counts from the day when the convicted person is detained by virtue of the conviction that has become irrevocable which pronounces the sentence.

In case of provisional detention, this is entirely deducted from the duration of the sentence pronounced by the judgment of conviction.

Article 133-4

All individuals convicted for the same crime or for the same offence are held jointly and severally liable for fines, restitutions, damages and costs.

BOOK II: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE NATION, THE STATE AND PUBLIC PEACE

TITLE I: HIGH TREASON

Single Chapter: High treason

Article 211-1

There is high treason when the President of the Republic violates his oath provided for in Article 55 of the Constitution.

Article 211-2

The sanction for high treason and its implementation are carried out in accordance with the provisions of Article 73 of the Constitution.

TITLE II: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE EXTERNAL SECURITY OF THE STATE

Chapter 1: Treason

Article 221-1

Is guilty of treason and punished by death: 1°) any Malian who bears arms against Mali;
2°) any Malian who maintains intelligence with a foreign power with a view to engaging it to undertake hostilities against Mali or provides it with the means, either by facilitating the penetration of foreign forces on Malian territory, or by undermining morale or shaking the loyalty of the land or air forces, or in any other manner;

3°) any Malian who delivers to a foreign power or to its agents, Malian troops, portion of the national territory, cities, fortresses, works, posts, stores, arsenals, equipment, munitions, vessels or aircraft, belonging to Mali or placed under its guard;

4°) any Malian who, in time of war, incites military personnel to enter the service of a foreign power, facilitates the means for them or makes enlistments for a power at war against Mali;

5°) any Malian who, in time of war, maintains intelligence with a foreign power or with its agents, with a view to favouring the enterprises of this power against Mali.

Article 221-2: Is guilty of treason and punished by death

1°) any Malian who delivers to a foreign power or to its agents, in whatever form and by whatever means, a secret of national defence, or who secures, by whatever means, possession of a secret of this nature, with a view to delivering it to a foreign power or to its agents;

2°) any Malian who destroys or voluntarily damages a ship, an aircraft, equipment, a supply, a construction or an installation capable of being used for national defence, or knowingly commits, either before or after their completion, defects likely to prevent them from functioning or to cause an accident;

3°) any Malian who knowingly participates in an enterprise of demoralization of the army having as its object to harm national defence.

However, in time of peace, is punished by ten years' imprisonment, any Malian or foreigner who is guilty of:

a) voluntary defect in the manufacture of war material when this defect is not likely to cause an accident;

b) voluntary damage or destruction of equipment or supplies intended for national defence or used for it;

c) obstruction of the circulation of this equipment;

d) participation with knowledge of the facts in an enterprise of demoralization of the army, having as its object to harm national defence.

Also punished by twenty years' imprisonment is voluntary participation in an action committed in a gang and by open force, having as its object and result one of the crimes provided for in paragraphs a, b, c of this article, as well as the preparation of said action.

Chapter 2: Espionage

Article 222-1

Any foreigner who commits one of the acts referred to in Articles 221-1 paragraphs 2, 3, 4 above and 221-2 paragraphs 1°, 2° and 3° above is guilty of espionage and punished by death.

The provocation to commit or the offer to commit one of the crimes referred to in Articles 221-1 and 221-2 above and in this article is punished as the crime itself.

Article 222-2

The following are deemed national defense secrets for the application of this Code:
1°) information of a military, diplomatic, economic or industrial nature which, by its nature, must be known only to persons qualified to hold it, and must, in the interest of national defense, be kept secret from any other person;
2°) objects, materials, writings, drawings, plans, maps, photographs or other reproductions, and all other documents whatsoever which, by their nature, must be known only to persons qualified to handle or hold them, and must be kept secret from any other person, which may lead to the discovery of information belonging to one of the categories referred to in the preceding paragraph;

3°) military information of any nature, not made public by the Government and not included in the above enumerations, the publication, dissemination, disclosure or reproduction of which is prohibited by a law or by a decree;

4°) information relating to measures taken to discover and arrest the perpetrators and accomplices of crimes or offenses against the security of the State.

Chapter 3: Other offenses against the external security of the State

Article 223-1

Any Malian or any foreigner is guilty of an offense against the external security of the State and punished by the penalties set forth in Article 223-5 below:

1°) who, by hostile acts not approved by the Government, exposes Mali to a declaration of war;

2°) who, by acts not approved by the Government, exposes Malians to suffer reprisals;

3°) who, in time of peace, enlists soldiers on behalf of a foreign power, in Malian territory;

4°) who, in time of war, knowingly maintains, without authorization from the Government, correspondence or relations with the subjects or agents of an enemy power;

5°) who, in time of war, in defiance of enacted prohibitions, directly or through an intermediary, engages in acts of commerce with the subjects or agents of an enemy power.

Article 223-2

Any Malian or any foreigner is guilty of an offense against the external security of the State and punished by the penalties set forth in Article 223-5 below:

1°) who undertakes, by any means whatsoever, to undermine the integrity of Malian territory;
2°) who maintains with the agents of a foreign power intelligence having as its object or having as its effect to harm the military or diplomatic situation of Mali.

Article 223-3

Any Malian or foreigner is guilty of an offense against the external security of the State and punished by the penalties set forth in Article 223-5 below:

1°) who, for a purpose other than delivering it to a foreign power or its agents, or secures, being without qualification by any means whatsoever, possession of a national defense secret, or knowingly and without qualification holds an object or document deemed a national defense secret, or which may lead to the discovery of such a secret, or brings said secret, in whatever form and by whatever means, to the knowledge of the public or of a qualified person;

2°) who, through imprudence, negligence or non-observance of regulations, allows to be destroyed, removed or taken away, in whole or in part, and even momentarily, objects, materials, documents or information entrusted to him, and knowledge of which may lead to the discovery of a national defense secret, or allows knowledge, copy or reproduction thereof to be taken, even in part;

3°) who, without prior authorization from the competent authority, delivers or communicates to a person acting on behalf of a power or a foreign enterprise, either an invention concerning national defense, or information, studies or manufacturing processes relating to an invention of this kind, or to an industrial application concerning national defense.

Article 223-4

Also guilty of an offense against the external security of the State, and punished by the same penalties, without prejudice if applicable, to the penalties imposed for the attempt of the crimes provided for in Articles 221-1 and 221-2 of this Code, any Malian or any foreigner:

1°) who enters, in disguise or under a false name, or by concealing his quality, or his nationality, into a fortress, a work, post or arsenal, into the works, camps, bivouacs or cantonments of an army, into a warship, or a merchant vessel employed for national defense, into a military establishment of any nature, or into an establishment or shipyard working for national defense;

2°) who, even without disguising himself or without concealing his name, his quality or his nationality, organizes in a covert manner any means of correspondence or remote transmission likely to harm national defense;

3°) who flies over Malian territory by means of a foreign aircraft without being authorized to do so by a diplomatic convention or permission from the Malian authority;

4°) who, in a prohibited zone fixed by the military authority, executes without the authorization thereof drawings, photographs, surveys or topographical operations inside or around military and maritime places, works, posts or establishments;

5°) who stays, in defiance of an enacted regulatory prohibition, within a determined radius around fortified works or military and maritime establishments.

Article 223-5

If they are committed in time of war, offenses against the external security of the State are punished by imprisonment for twenty years.

If they are committed in time of peace, they are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,600,000 francs.

However, the imprisonment may be increased to ten years and the fine to 3,600,000 francs with regard to the offenses referred to in Articles 223-1 paragraph 1, 223-2 paragraph 1 and 223-3 above.

In time of war, all other acts, knowingly accomplished, of a nature to harm national defense, are punished, if they are not already punished by another text, by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,600,000 francs.

In all cases, the guilty parties may in addition be deprived for twenty years of the rights mentioned in Article 131-6 of this Code. They may also be subject to a residence ban of twenty years.

The attempt of the offense is punished as the offense itself.

The offense committed abroad is punished as the offense committed in Malian territory.

Article 223-6

The confiscation of the object of the crime or offense and of the objects and instruments used to commit it is automatic, without there being any need to investigate whether or not they belong to the convicted persons.

The remuneration received by the guilty party, or the amount of its value when the remuneration could not be seized, are declared acquired by the Public Treasury by the judgment.

For the application of the penalty and the regime of provisional detention, crimes and offenses against the external security of the State are considered as common law crimes and offenses.

Article 223-7

In addition to the persons designated in Article 121-6 of this Code, any Malian or any foreigner is punished as an accomplice or as a receiver:

1°) who, knowing the intentions of the perpetrators of crimes and offences against the external security of the State, provides them with subsidies, means of existence, lodging, place of retreat or meeting;

2°) who knowingly carries the correspondence of the perpetrators of crimes or offences against the security of the State or who facilitates for them in any manner whatsoever, the search for, concealment, transport or transmission of the object of the crime or offence;

3°) who knowingly conceals the objects and instruments having served or intended to serve to commit the crime or offence or the objects, materials or documents obtained by the crime or offence;

4°) who knowingly destroys, removes, conceals, hides or alters a public or private document of a nature to facilitate the investigation of the crime or offence, the discovery of evidence or the punishment of its perpetrators.

Article 223-8

Unless there are express provisions to the contrary, the penalties imposed for crimes or offences against the external security of the State are applied to those of these offences which are committed in time of peace, as well as to those which are committed in time of war.

The Government may, by decree taken in the Council of Ministers, extend either for time of war or for time of peace, all or part of the provisions relating to crimes and offences against powers allied or friendly to Mali.

TITRE III : DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA SURETE INTERIEURE DE L'ETAT

Chapitre 1 : Des attentats et complots contre le Gouvernement

Article 231-1

An attack the purpose of which is either to overthrow the lawful Government by force or to change the republican form of the State, or to incite citizens or inhabitants to arm themselves against the authority, is punished by the death penalty or by imprisonment for life or for a term.

The attempt is punished as the crime.

Article 231-2

There is a conspiracy as soon as the resolution to act is concerted and agreed upon between two or more persons.

A conspiracy having as its purpose the crimes mentioned in the preceding article, if it is followed by an act committed or begun to prepare its execution, is punished by imprisonment for twenty years.

If the conspiracy is not followed by any act committed or begun to prepare its execution, the penalty is that of imprisonment for ten years.

If there has been a proposal made and not agreed to act, to form a conspiracy to achieve the crimes mentioned in the preceding article, the person who made such a proposal is punished by imprisonment for five years, a fine of 500,000 francs and a residence ban for ten years.

Chapitre 2

Des crimes portant atteinte à la sécurité intérieure de l'Etat ou à l'intégrité du territoire par la guerre civile, l'emploi illégal de la force armée, la dévastation et le pillage public

Article 232-1

An attack the purpose of which is either to provoke the secession of a part of the territory of the Republic, or to incite civil war, by arming or pushing citizens or inhabitants to arm themselves against each other, or to bring devastation, massacre and pillage in one or more regions, cities, communes and villages of the Republic, is punished by the death penalty or by imprisonment for life.

A conspiracy having as its purpose one of the crimes provided for in this article and the proposal to form this conspiracy, are punished by the penalties set forth in Article 223-5 above according to the distinctions established therein.

Article 232-2 : Sont punis de mort

1°) those who raise or cause to be raised armed troops, engage or enlist soldiers or provide or procure arms or ammunition for them without order or authorization from the lawful authority;

2°) those who, without right or legitimate reason, take command of a troop and any other public force, of a garrison or of a camp of this garrison, of an administrative center, of a locality;

3°) those who retain, against the order of the Government, a command of the public forces, the commanders of said forces who keep their troops assembled after the discharge or separation has been ordered.

Article 232-3

Any person who, being able to dispose of the public force, has requisitioned or ordered, caused to be requisitioned or ordered the action or use thereof against the orders of the Government, is punished by imprisonment for a term. If this requisition or this order has been followed by effect, the guilty party is punished by death.

Article 232-4

Those who, participating in an insurrectionary movement, are found carrying arms and ammunition, occupy or attempt to occupy public buildings or private properties; erect barricades, oppose by violence and threats the convocation or assembly of the public force; provoke or facilitate the gathering of insurgents by flags, rallying signs or any other means; break or attempt to break telegraph or telephone lines; intercept or attempt to intercept communications between the depositaries of the public force; seize by violence or threat arms and ammunition, by pillaging shops, posts, stores, arsenals or other public establishments or by disarming agents of the public force, are punished by imprisonment for life.

Those individuals who have made use of their arms are punished by the death penalty.

Article 232-5 : Est puni de mort

1°) any individual who sets fire to or destroys by explosive device buildings, stores, arsenals or other properties belonging to the State;

2°) whoever, either to invade domains or properties of the State, cities, posts, stores, arsenals, or to pillage and share public funds, public or national properties or those of a generality of citizens, or to make attack or resistance against the public force acting against the perpetrators of these crimes, places himself at the head of armed bands or exercises therein any command function whatsoever;

3°) the same penalty is applied to those who direct the association, raise or cause to be raised, organize or cause to be organized bands or knowingly and voluntarily provide or procure for them subsidies, arms, ammunition and instruments of crime, or send substances, or who have, in any other manner, practiced intelligence with the leaders of the bands.

Article 232-6

In the case where one or more of the crimes mentioned in Articles 231-1 and 232-1 of this Code are executed or simply attempted by a band, the death penalty is applied, without distinction of rank, to all individuals forming part of the band and who are seized at the place of the seditious assembly.

Anyone who directs the sedition or exercises any command whatsoever in the band is punished by the same penalties, although not seized at the place.

Article 232-7

Except in the case where the seditious assembly has as its object or result one or more of the crimes set forth in Articles 231-1 and 232-1 of this Code, individuals forming part of the aforementioned bands, without exercising any command therein, and who have been seized at the places, are punished by imprisonment for twenty years.

Article 232-8

Those who, knowing the purpose and character of said bands, provide them without constraint with lodgings, place of retreat or meeting, are punished by imprisonment for twenty years.

Article 232-9

No penalty is imposed for the act of sedition against those who, having been part of these bands, without exercising any command and without holding any position or function, withdraw at the first warning from the civil or military authorities, or even those who are seized outside the places of seditious assembly, without offering resistance and without weapons.

They are punished, in these cases, only for the particular crimes and offences that they personally committed; nevertheless, they may be subject to a residence ban of ten years.

Article 232-10

All objects designed to kill or injure, within the meaning of Article 132-48 of this Code, are considered as weapons.

Article 232-11

Those who, before any execution or attempt of these conspiracies or these crimes and before any proceedings have commenced, were the first to give the Government, the administrative authorities or the judicial police authorities, knowledge of these conspiracies and crimes and of their authors or accomplices, or who, even since the commencement of proceedings, facilitated the arrest of said authors or accomplices, are exempted from the penalties imposed against the perpetrators of conspiracies or other crimes against the security of the State.

The guilty parties who have given such information or facilitated such arrests may, nevertheless, be subject to a residence ban of five years.

TITLE IV: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC INTEREST

Chapter 1

Crimes and offences against the public interest committed by natural persons holding public authority or entrusted with a public service mission or vested with an elective mandate

Section 1: Attack on the Constitution

Article 241-1

Any conduct violating the Constitution and its principles constitutes an attack on the Constitution.

An attack on the Constitution is punished by thirty years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Article 241-2

Any public official, public agent or administrative employee, within the meaning of Article 241-14 below, who requisitions or orders, causes to be requisitioned or ordered, the action or use of public force against the execution of an order, a judicial warrant, any order emanating from the lawful authority, is punished by ten years' imprisonment. If this requisition or this order is carried out, the penalty is fifteen years' imprisonment.

The penalties stated do not cease to be applicable to officials or employees who have acted on the orders of their superiors except insofar as this order was given by them for matters within their jurisdiction and on which hierarchical obedience was owed to them; in this case, the penalties set out above are applied only to the superiors who first gave this order.

If as a result of said orders or requisitions, other crimes punishable by penalties stronger than those expressed in this article occur, these stronger penalties are applied to the officials, public agents or employees guilty of having given said orders or made said requisitions.

Article 241-3

When a public official within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code orders or does any arbitrary act or act violating either individual liberty, or the civic rights of one or more citizens, or the Constitution, he is deprived of his civic rights.

If however, he proves that he acted on the orders of his superiors for matters within the jurisdiction of the latter, on which hierarchical obedience was owed to them, he is exempted from the penalty, which, in this case, is applied only to the superiors who gave the order.

Article 241-4

If it is a minister who orders or does the acts or one of the acts mentioned in Articles 241-2 and 241-3 above, if he refuses or neglects to have these acts repaired, he is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,800,000 francs.

Article 241-5

If a minister accused of having ordered or authorized the act contrary to the Constitution claims that his signature was obtained by deception, he is required, while causing the act to cease, to denounce the person he declares to be the author of the deception; otherwise he is prosecuted personally and liable to the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Article 241-6

The damages that may be awarded in respect of the attacks referred to in Article 241-3 above are claimed, either in the prosecution or by civil action and are determined, having regard to the persons, the circumstances and the harm suffered, without in any case, and whatever the injured individual, said damages being able to be below 5,000 francs, for each day of illegal and arbitrary detention and for each individual.

Article 241-7

If the arbitrary act in violation of the Constitution is done pursuant to a false signature of the name of the minister or a public official, the authors of the forgery and those who knowingly made use of it are punished by the penalty of fixed-term imprisonment, the maximum of which is always applied in this case.

Article 241-8

Public officials responsible for administrative or judicial police, who refuse or neglect to comply with a lawful complaint seeking to establish illegal and arbitrary detentions, either in houses intended for the custody of detainees, or anywhere else and who do not prove that they reported them to the superior authority, are punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 240,000 francs.

Article 241-9

The managers and supervisors of penitentiary establishments who receive a prisoner without a warrant or judgment or without an extradition detention order, those who detain him or have refused to present him to the judicial police officer or to the bearer of his orders without justifying the prohibition of the public prosecutor or the judge; those who refuse to exhibit their registers to the judicial police officer, are considered guilty of arbitrary detention and punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Article 241-10

Any crime or offence committed by a public official in the exercise of his functions is a malfeasance.

Article 241-11

Any act of malfeasance is punished by ten years' imprisonment when the law does not provide for a lesser or greater penalty.

Article 241-12

All Judicial Police Officers, all Prosecutors General or Advocates General, all Public Prosecutors, all Deputy Prosecutors, all Judges who provoke, give or sign a judgment, an order or a warrant tending to the personal prosecution or the indictment, either of a minister or of a member of Parliament without the formalities or authorizations prescribed by law or who do not suspend the detention or prosecution at the request of Parliament, or who, outside cases of flagrante delicto, without the same formalities and authorizations, give or sign the order or warrant to seize or arrest one or more ministers or members of Parliament, are guilty of malfeasance and punished by twenty years' imprisonment.

Article 241-13

Prosecutors General or Advocates General, Public Prosecutors, Deputy Prosecutors, Judges or Judicial Police Officers who detain or cause to be detained an individual outside the places determined by the Government or by the public administration, or who bring a citizen before a criminal court without his having been previously lawfully indicted, are also punished by ten years' imprisonment.

Section 2: Coalition of public officials against the Constitution and the laws

Article 241-14

For the purposes of this Code, all natural persons who are depositaries of public authority, entrusted with a public service mission, vested with an elective mandate, exercising functions as representatives, administrators or agents of the State or of a public authority, of a public establishment or of a State company, of a company with majority public financial participation, of a private law legal entity acting on behalf of the State or of a public law legal entity benefiting from its financial support or guarantee, as well as all other persons acting on behalf of one of the aforementioned persons, are deemed to be public officials or agents.

All citizens who, under any designation and to any extent, are vested with a mandate, even temporary, remunerated or gratuitous, the execution of which is linked to a public interest, and who in this capacity contribute to the service of the State, public administrations, municipalities or administrative groupings, are assimilated to public officials and agents.

Furthermore, persons chosen by private individuals or delegated by the courts in the capacity of expert, arbitrator or interpreter are assimilated to public officials and agents.

Article 241-15

All depositaries of any part of authority, by delegation or correspondence between them, who concert measures contrary to the Constitution and the laws, are punished by twenty years' imprisonment. In addition, deprivation of civil rights and of any public employment may be pronounced for ten years.

Article 241-16

If by one of the above means, measures are concerted against the execution of the laws or against the orders of the Government, the penalty is five years' imprisonment and optionally a residence ban of ten years.
If this concert takes place between the civil authorities and the military or security forces or their leaders, those who are the authors or instigators thereof are punished by ten years' imprisonment and a residence ban of twenty years.
In the cases referred to in this article, deprivation of civil rights and of any public employment for twenty years is, in addition, pronounced.

Article 241-17

In the case where this concert has had as its object or result a plot threatening the internal security of the State, the guilty parties are punished by life imprisonment or the death penalty.

Article 241-18

Public officials who, with the intention of opposing the laws or governmental action, by deliberation, decide to give resignations individually or collectively the object or effect of which would be to prevent or suspend either the administration of justice or the performance of any public service, are guilty of malfeasance and punished by ten years' imprisonment.

Article 241-19

The foregoing provisions do not in any way prejudice the right to strike and the freedom to join cooperative organizations or trade union organizations of their choice for the defence of their professional interests.

Section 3: Encroachment by administrative and judicial authorities

Article 241-20

Judges, Prosecutors General or Prosecutors of the Republic or their Deputies, Judicial Police Officers who either irregularly arrest or suspend the execution of one or more laws, or prohibit the execution of regular orders emanating from the administration, are punished by a fine of 200,000 francs.

Ministers, mayors and other administrators who either irregularly arrest or suspend the execution of one or more laws, or illegally interfere in the cognizance of private rights and interests within the jurisdiction of the courts, are punished by the same penalties.

Section 4: Illegally prolonged exercise of public authority

Article 241-21

Any public official revoked, dismissed, suspended or legally prohibited who, after having had official knowledge thereof, continues the exercise of his functions or who, vested with elective or temporary functions, exercises them after having been replaced or when his functions have ended, is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs. He is prohibited from exercising any function or public employment for ten years.

Section 5: Refusal of a service legally due and denial of justice

Article 241-22

Any commander of internal security forces, any administrator or administrative authority legally served with a requisition from the civil authority, who refuses his services or refrains from causing the forces under his orders to act, is punished by dismissal and five years' imprisonment.

Article 241-23

Any judge who, under any pretext whatsoever, even the silence or obscurity of the law, denies rendering the justice he owes to the parties, after having been requested to do so, and who persists in his denial, after warning or injunction from his hierarchical superiors, is punished by a fine of 240,000 francs, and prohibition from exercising public functions for five years.

Article 241-24

Witnesses or assessors who allege an excuse recognized as inaccurate, are punished, in addition to the fines pronounced for non-appearance, by two months' imprisonment.

Chapter 2

Crimes and offences against the public interest committed by private individuals

Section 1: Crimes and offences of a racial, regionalist or religious nature

Article 242-1

Any statement, any act likely to establish or give rise to racial or ethnic discrimination, any statement, any act aimed at provoking or maintaining regionalist propaganda, any dissemination of news tending to undermine the unity of the nation or the credit of the State, any manifestation contrary to freedom of conscience and freedom of worship likely to set citizens against one another, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a residence ban of ten years.

Section 2: Crimes and offences relating to the exercise of civic rights

Article 242-2

When, by unlawful assembly, acts of violence or threats, one or more citizens are prevented from exercising their civic rights, each of the guilty parties is punished by two years' imprisonment and deprived of his civic rights for ten years.

Article 242-3

If this act is committed pursuant to a concerted plan to be executed either throughout the Republic, or in one or more administrative districts, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a residence ban of twenty years.

Article 242-4

Any citizen member of a polling station, any scrutineer who, during operations, falsifies or attempts to falsify, removes or attempts to remove, adds or attempts to add ballots, writes or attempts to write on the ballots of illiterate voters names other than those declared to them, misleads or attempts to mislead as to the meaning of the colours of the ballots, prevents or attempts to prevent a citizen from exercising his right to vote, is punished by two years' imprisonment and deprivation of the right to vote and to be eligible for ten years.

All other persons guilty of the acts set out above are punished by six months' imprisonment, deprivation of the right to vote and to be eligible for ten years.

Article 242-5

Anyone who, by gifts or donations in money or in kind, by promises of donations, favours, public or private employment or other advantages, influences or attempts to influence the vote of one or more electors, either directly or through an intermediary, anyone who, by the same means, determines or attempts to determine one or more electors to abstain, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.
May also be pronounced the forfeiture of civil rights and of all public functions or employment for ten years.

Article 242-6

Any person who knowingly publishes or disseminates false, misleading or fictitious data or information or who spreads disinformation in the written press, broadcasting or on a computer system, with the intention that the data or information will be considered or treated as authentic, with or without financial gain, commits an offence, punished by imprisonment of five years or a fine of 5,000,000 francs.
False information or fake news means news, allegations or imputations that are false, inaccurate or misleading with the aim of manipulating or deceiving the public or of a nature to weaken the State and institutions, to spread disorder, war or to incite persons to violence, to advocate hatred, ethnic, separatist or regionalist discrimination, to affect the reputation of others or to alter the sincerity of the ballot, disseminated in a deliberate, artificial or automated and massive manner in the media, on the internet and social networks.

Section 3

Serious disturbances to public order Paragraph 1: Unlawful demonstrations

Article 242-7

A demonstration is lawful when the organisers have made a declaration thereof to the competent administrative authority under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations in force relating to freedom of assembly and demonstration on the public highway.

Article 242-8: For the purposes of this Code, a demonstration is unlawful when

1°) the organisers have not taken the precaution of making a declaration thereof to the competent administrative authority under the conditions provided for by law;

2°) the demonstration has been prohibited by the competent administrative authority after the declaration has been made to it;

3°) the organisers have made an incomplete or inaccurate declaration of a nature to mislead as to the object or conditions of the planned demonstration.

Article 242-9

The organisers of an unlawful demonstration as defined in Article 242-7 above are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

The penalty is imprisonment of one year and a fine of 600,000 francs for persons who have participated therein voluntarily.

Article 242-10

When as a result of an unlawful demonstration or one prohibited by the administrative police authority, acts of vandalism have been committed:

1°) the organisers of that demonstration who have not given the order to disperse as soon as they become aware of such violence or assault, destruction or damage, are punished by imprisonment of four years and a fine of 3,000,000 francs;

2°) persons who continue to participate actively in that demonstration, after the commencement and with knowledge of the violence, assault, destruction or damage, are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs;

3°) are punished by imprisonment of five years persons authorised or not to demonstrate on the public highway and who have voluntarily destroyed all or part thereof.

Article 242-11

Persons found guilty of one of the offences referred to in this paragraph are held jointly and severally liable for civil reparations [Law No. 06-029 of 29 June 2006, as amended, relating to the protection of the public highway].

Paragraph 2: Unlawful assemblies

Article 242-12

The formation of armed unlawful assemblies on the public highway as well as unarmed unlawful assemblies which are of a nature to disturb public tranquillity are prohibited.

An unlawful assembly is deemed to be armed when several of the individuals composing it are carrying visible or concealed weapons or when a single one of these individuals, carrying visible weapons, is not immediately expelled from the unlawful assembly by those very persons who form part of it.

Article 242-13

All persons who form unlawful assemblies in public places or on the public highway are required to disperse at the summons of the authorities responsible for maintaining order.

If the unlawful assembly does not disperse, the summons is repeated twice.

If the three summonses have remained without effect or even in the case where after a first summons or a second, it is not possible to make the second or the third, force may be used.

Article 242-14: The public force may be used without summons

1°) if there is imminence of serious or fatal injuries or if violence or assault is exercised against the forces of order and/or against a third person;

2°) if the forces of order cannot otherwise defend with less violent means the ground they occupy or the persons and posts in their charge.

Article 242-15

Anyone who, having formed part of an armed unlawful assembly which disperses at the customary summonses, is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 600,000 francs. If the unlawful assembly is formed at night, the penalty of imprisonment is three years and the fine 1,000,000 francs.

Nevertheless, no penalty for unlawful assembly is pronounced against those who, having formed part thereof without being personally armed, withdraw at the first summons.

Article 242-16

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs anyone who forms part of an armed unlawful assembly which disperses only after use of the public force.

The penalty of imprisonment is ten years and the fine 4,000,000 francs, if the armed unlawful assembly has been dispersed only after the public force has made use of its weapons.

Article 242-17

The aggravation of penalties provided for in Article 242-15 above is applicable to unarmed individuals forming part of an armed unlawful assembly, in the case of concealed weapons, only when they have had knowledge of the presence in the unlawful assembly of several persons carrying those weapons.
Those who have not had such knowledge incur the penalties provided for in Article 242-15 above.

Article 242-18

In the cases provided for in Article 242-15 above, the court seised may also pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil rights for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 242-19

Is punished as the crime or the offence according to the distinctions established in the preceding articles, any provocation followed by effect, to an armed or unarmed unlawful assembly by speeches publicly uttered or by writings or printed matter posted or distributed.

Printers, engravers, lithographers, bill-posters and distributors are punished as accomplices, when they act knowingly.

Provocation not followed by effect is punished by imprisonment of six months.

Article 242-20

Prosecutions brought for crimes and offences of unlawful assembly do not preclude the prosecution of crimes and offences which are committed during those unlawful assemblies.

Article 242-21

In all cases, the confiscation of weapons and ammunition must be pronounced.

Paragraph 3: Acts of vandalism

Article 242-22

An act of vandalism is the act of damaging, destroying, degrading or deteriorating intentionally property belonging to another during demonstrations on public roads.

Vandalism is punishable by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 242-23

The offence of act of vandalism applies: 1°) to acts of vandalism as provided for in the following article;
2°) to the organizers of unlawful demonstrations on public roads, during which acts of vandalism have been committed;

3°) to the perpetrators and accomplices of acts of vandalism;

4°) to persons who enter a demonstration, even a lawful one, with the intent to commit or cause other participants to commit acts of vandalism.

Article 242-24

The following acts committed during demonstrations on public roads constitute acts of vandalism: destruction or damage caused to property, movable or immovable, private or public, destruction of registers, minutes or acts of public authority.

Paragraph 4: Obstruction of public roads

Article 242-25

Obstruction of public roads by unlawful assembly, barricades, lighting or maintaining fire with the intent to hinder or prevent the free movement of persons or to sow panic among the population, is punishable by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

If the acts provided for in the preceding paragraph are committed by armed assembly, in a gathering or in a gang and by open force, the penalty of imprisonment may be increased to five years and the fine to 400,000 francs.

Paragraph 5

Violation of general building and urban planning regulations

Article 242-26

The project owner for the preparation and execution of a construction requiring authorization must appoint a project manager and a contractor. The project owner must provide to the authorities responsible for building control, the necessary documents in accordance with the regulations in force.

For constructions, installations and equipment not requiring authorization, the appointment of a project manager is not mandatory. For works carried out oneself or with the help of third parties, the appointment of a contractor is not necessary, if technicians provide their assistance. Demolition works requiring authorization must be carried out by a specialist.

If the project owner appoints persons who, for their tasks, do not have the expertise and experience necessary to accomplish these tasks, the authority responsible for building control and regulation may require that these persons be replaced by qualified persons. The authority responsible for building control and regulation may stop the works until there are the required skills for the execution of the works.

The authority responsible for building control may require for specific works that a reputable contractor be appointed. If the project ownership changes holder, the new project owner must immediately inform the authority responsible for building control in writing of this change.

The project owner bears the following costs: 1°) the taking of samples and their testing;
2°) the services of experts or expert offices; 3°) the surveying by a surveyor - expert.

Article 242-27

Anyone wishing to undertake or establish a construction for residential use or not, must, beforehand, obtain a building permit.

This obligation applies to public services of the State, regions, circles and communes as well as to private persons.

The building permit is required for works to be carried out on existing constructions, when they have the effect of changing their purpose, modifying their external appearance or their volume or creating additional levels.

Article 242-28

[Law No. 2017-038 of 14 July 2017 amending Law No. 01-077 of 18 July 2001 establishing the general rules of construction]:

Shall be punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who:

1°) erects a construction despite a work stoppage order;

2°) wilfully refuses to present or deposit the required documents at the construction site;

3°) violates the provisions concerning the servicing of land, the rules of location and ground coverage and the height rules;

4°) whether architect, engineer, contractor or property developer, participates in the execution of unauthorized works;

5°) erases or removes markings made on constructions by agents of the technical services responsible for control;

6°) narrows the accesses as well as the vehicular areas by constructions, does not keep them continuously clear or parks equipment there, in violation of the general rules of construction;

7°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of assembly establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	parks or deposits objects on the emergency exits or on the movement areas for firefighting equipment;

b)	does not keep the emergency exits clear or does not light them during darkness at the time of operation of the assembly establishment;

c)	closes the doors or keeps them fixed;

d)	keeps on the stage, extensions or other performance areas, decorations, furniture, accessories, costumes and similar objects;

e)	uses on the stage decorations and equipment made of flammable materials;

f)	uses on the forestages and platforms other than non-combustible decorations and scenic elements or fixes on the fixing elements furniture and lamps made of flammable materials;

g)	is not present or represented during the operation of the establishment;

h)	authorizes the operation of stages or platforms without the technical staff being present;

i)	authorizes the operation of an installation without fire safety monitoring being ensured;

j)	does not take into account the remarks and suggestions of the fire safety monitoring;

k)	changes the order established in the seating plan or occupies seats not provided for in the plan;

l)	keeps in the assembly hall more film reels than authorized;

8°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of high-rise buildings, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	does not keep the emergency exits clear;

b)	fixes the doors in the open state without smoke-reactive devices;

c)	does not keep in service permanently the safety lighting;

9°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of educational establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	keeps in the rescue and evacuation routes combustible products and materials such as books, papers and school equipment;

b)	does not keep in specially appropriate places waste, such as packaging material, old papers, etc...;

c)	fixes the fire doors;

d)	does not display on the ground floor in a clearly visible place the plans containing all safety information;

e)	does not keep clear the spaces intended for firefighters;

10°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of catering and accommodation establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	parks vehicles or deposits objects on the emergency exits outside the building as well as the parking areas and movement areas for firefighters;

b)	does not keep clear or does not light the emergency exits inside the building in case of darkness during the operating time of the establishment;

c)	fixes the smoke-tight and automatically closing doors as well as the doors of fire resistance class P 30 and P 90, as well as those equipped with smoke-reactive fixing devices;

d)	does not keep in service during the presence of customers, the safety lighting in catering establishments and permanently in accommodation establishments;

e)	uses materials not having the properties defined for decorations;

f)	does not remove flammable waste from dining rooms;

g)	does not place in the indicated location the identification sign for emergency exits in accommodation establishments;

11°) In violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of commercial establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	parks equipment or deposits, stores or suspends objects on the emergency exits as well as the movement areas for firefighting equipment;

b)	closes the doors leading to the emergency exits so that it is not easy to open them;

c)	closes the openings of doors, gates or passages during operating hours;

d)	does not light the emergency exits and signs;

e)	deposits articles and sales stands on the stairs or stair landings;

f)	uses inside sales rooms, display cases or exhibition rooms decoration materials that are not difficult to ignite, or places in the main corridors or in the main stairwells decorations.

Article 242-29

[Law No. 01-077 of 18 July 2001 establishing the general rules of construction]:

Is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, anyone who:

1°) uses non-regulated construction materials, products or components, in violation of the rules for the use of construction materials, products and components;

2°) uses construction techniques provided for by law without the required authorisations and approvals;

3°) does not engage a company for the execution of a construction requiring a company, in violation of paragraph 1 of Article 242-26 above;

4°) carries out himself or with the help of acquaintances demolition works requiring authorisation in violation of paragraph 2 of Article 242-26 above;
In case of recidivism, the maximum penalty is applied;

5°) undertakes or establishes a construction without a building permit in violation of Article 242-27 above.

In the event that the construction does not conform to the vocation of the land, in addition to the penalties cited above, the construction is entirely demolished;

6°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of assembly establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	smokes, uses open fire or keeps flammable liquids in the specified places;

b)	smokes, uses open fire, in particular matches and lighters or uses cooking appliances in the projection booth for Celluloid films;

c)	does not suspend the operation of the assembly establishment in case of failure of an installation, equipment or device necessary for safety;

7°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of hospital establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	does not carry out inspections or does not carry them out on time;

b)	does not repair the defects noted by experts during inspections;

8°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of educational establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	does not carry out inspections or does not carry them out on time;

b)	does not repair the defects noted by experts during inspections;

c)	uses open fire in inappropriate rooms and without permanent supervision;

d)	does not maintain and regularly inspect technical installations and equipment;

e)	does not keep fire extinguishers ready in rooms with a high risk of fire.

9°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of catering and accommodation establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

a)	does not have the prescribed inspections carried out or does not have them carried out on time;

b)	does not repair the defects noted;

10°) in violation of the specific rules applicable to the construction and operation of commercial establishments, established by decree taken in the Council of Ministers:

c)	smokes or uses an open fire;

d)	uses electric radiant cookers;

e)	carries out welding work or similar fire work without supervision of the fire safety service.

Article 242-30

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any person who, despite sufficient knowledge, makes false declarations or submits false documents to obtain or prevent the execution of an administrative act issued in accordance with this paragraph.

In case of recidivism, the maximum penalty is always applied.

The Court may, in addition, order the total or partial demolition of the constructions.

Article 242-31

[Law No. 02-016 of 03 June 2002, establishing the general rules of urban planning]:

Any person who carries out or undertakes, has carried out or has undertaken constructions or installations in a subdivided zone without prior authorisation from the administration or in violation of the legislative and regulatory provisions in force, is punished by a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

This fine is calculated according to the state of progress of the works.

Architects, contractors or any other person having contributed to the execution of said constructions or installations, are punished by the same penalties.

Article 242-32

[Law No. 02-016 of 03 June 2002, establishing the general rules of urban planning]:

Any person who divides a property for family use in a subdivided zone without prior authorisation from the administration, is punished by a fine of 50,000 francs per parcel resulting from the division.

Any person who divides a property other than family property in a subdivided zone without prior authorisation from the Administration is punished by a fine of 1,000,000 francs per parcel resulting from the division;

Article 242-33

[Law No. 02-016 of 03 June 2002, establishing the general rules of Urban Planning]:

Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by other legislative and regulatory texts, any person who subdivides a property in a subdivided zone without having obtained prior administrative authorisation, is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 2,000,000 francs per parcel resulting from the subdivision.

The Court may, upon request of the Administration, order for all the offences referred to in this chapter, the demolition of constructions erected in violation of the applicable provisions and the restoration of the premises at the expense of the offender.

Section 4

Acts of obstruction to Justice Paragraph 1: Obstruction of access to Justice

Article 242-34

Any threat or any other act of intimidation towards anyone, committed with a view to inducing the victim of a crime or an offence not to file a complaint or to retract, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 242-35

The act for anyone having knowledge of a crime of which it is still possible to prevent or limit the effects, or whose perpetrators are likely to commit new crimes which could be prevented, of not informing the judicial or administrative authorities is punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Are exempted from the preceding provisions, except with regard to terrorist acts and crimes committed against minors:

1°) relatives in direct line and their spouses, as well as brothers and sisters and their spouses, of the perpetrator or accomplice of the crime;

2°) the spouse of the perpetrator or accomplice of the crime, or the person who notoriously lives in a marital situation with him.
Also exempted from the provisions of the first paragraph are persons bound to secrecy under the conditions provided for by Article 322-2 of this Code.

Paragraph 2: Obstruction of the proper functioning of justice

Article 242-36

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs anyone who:
1°) resorts to physical force, threats or intimidation or promises to offer or grant an undue advantage to obtain false testimony or prevent testimony or the presentation of evidence in a proceeding;
2°) resorts to physical force, threats or intimidation to prevent an officer of justice or an officer of the detection and law enforcement services from exercising the duties of his office.

Article 242-37

Is punished by the same penalties the act, with a view to obstructing the manifestation of truth:
1°) of modifying the state of the scene of a crime or offence either by altering, falsifying or erasing traces or evidence, or by adding, moving or removing any objects;

2°) of destroying, removing, concealing or altering a public or private document or an object likely to facilitate the discovery of a crime or offence, the search for evidence or the conviction of the guilty.

When the acts provided for in this article are committed by a person who, by virtue of their functions, is called upon to contribute to the manifestation of truth, the penalty is increased to seven years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3 : Du faux témoignage-du refus de témoigner et de la subornation de témoin

Article 242-38

Whoever, in any manner whatsoever, is guilty of perjury without retracting before the close of proceedings, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 francs. If the perjury is committed in criminal matters, the penalty is twenty years' imprisonment, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a residence ban of twenty years.

The person guilty of subornation of a witness is liable to the same penalties as the perpetrator of perjury.

Article 242-39

The refusal to answer questions by a witness or by an expert, either during the investigation or at the hearing, is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Section 5 : De l'opposition à l'autorité légitime

Article 242-40

Are punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 120,000 francs:

1°) those who oppose by acts, words, gestures, or any manoeuvres whatsoever the exercise of the lawful authority of an agent holding public authority or of any citizen charged with a ministry of public service and, thereby, undermine or attempt to undermine public order or obstruct or attempt to obstruct the proper functioning of administrative or judicial services, as well as any incitement to such opposition;

2°) those who, without lawful excuse, have not responded to lawful summonses from administrative or judicial authorities;

3°) those who without lawful excuse, refuse to respond to requests for information from the National Financial Intelligence Processing Unit in the context of the analysis, enrichment and exploitation of any information likely to establish the origin or destination of sums or the nature of transactions that have been the subject of declarations or information received;

4°) those who, by wilful abstention undermine or attempt to undermine public order or obstruct or attempt to obstruct the proper functioning of administrative or judicial services.

Wilful abstention, under the terms of this article, must reveal in the person who is its author a will of characterized indiscipline.

When the offence defined above is committed by several persons acting in concert, the penalties provided for may be doubled.

Article 242-41

In case of recidivism, a term of imprisonment is mandatorily imposed and the Judges may, in addition, pronounce a residence ban for a period of five years.

There is recidivism when a first judgment for an identical offence has been rendered against the offender in the preceding twelve months.

Section 6 : Des atteintes à la liberté de travail

Article 242-42

Is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs, whoever, by means of violence, assault, threats or fraudulent manoeuvres, either undermines freedom of hiring and work, or provokes or maintains an individual or collective cessation of work, or disrupts the normal course of school or university work.

The attempt is punished as the offence itself.

Article 242-43

The same penalty is applied to whoever, abusing their functions or authority, compels an individual to work for their account or for the account of another.

Section 7

De la résistance, de la désobéissance et autres manquements envers l'autorité publique

Paragraphe 1 : De la rébellion

Article 242-44

Any attack, any resistance with violence, assault or threats against public Officers or ministerial officers, officials, agents or employees of public authority, acting for the execution of laws, regulations or orders of public authority, is qualified as rebellion.

If the rebellion is committed by more than two persons equipped with weapons, instruments or projectiles visible or concealed, the offenders are punished by twenty years' imprisonment, and a residence ban of twenty years; if it takes place without weapons, the penalty is five years' imprisonment. The penalty of a residence ban of five years may, in addition, be pronounced.

If the rebellion is committed by fewer than three persons, equipped with weapons, instruments or projectiles visible or concealed, it is punished by two years' imprisonment, and if it takes place without weapons, by six months' imprisonment.

Article 242-45

In case of rebellion with a gang or gathering, Article 232-9 of this Code is applicable to rebels without function or employment in the gang, who withdrew at the first warning from public authority, or even since, if they were seized only outside the place of rebellion, and without new resistance and without weapons.

Article 242-46

Any gathering of individuals for the commission of a crime or offence is deemed an armed gathering when more than two persons carry visible weapons.

Article 242-47

Persons who are found equipped with concealed weapons and who are part of a troop or gathering not deemed armed are individually punished as if they were part of an armed troop or gathering.

Article 242-48

The perpetrators of crimes and offences committed during or on the occasion of a rebellion, are punished by the penalties pronounced for each of these crimes, if they are more severe than those for rebellion.

Article 242-49

In all cases where a simple penalty of imprisonment is pronounced for an act of rebellion, the offenders may be sentenced, in addition, to a fine of 240,000 francs.

Article 242-50

Are considered and punished as gatherings of rebellion, those which have been formed, with or without weapons and accompanied by violence or threats against the administrative authority, the public force or the agents who represent them:

1°) by persons working in workshops or factories;

2°) by individuals admitted to State hospital establishments;

3°) by detainees.

Article 242-51

The penalty applied for rebellion by detainees is served under the following conditions:

For those who are sentenced to a penalty other than the death penalty or life imprisonment, immediately after the expiration of their sentence.

And for the others, immediately after the final judgment or decision or the act that ends their detention.

Article 242-52

The leaders of a rebellion and those who provoked it may be sentenced to ten years' residence ban.

Paragraphe 2

De la destruction et de la profanation du drapeau national et des autres attributs de l'Etat

Article 242-53

Any person who, in order to express their discontent or opinion, publicly soils, tramples, tears or burns the national flag is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 400,000 francs.

Any person who, for the same reasons and in the same circumstances, desecrates the national flag is punished by the same penalties.

Any use and any desecration of other attributes of the State are punished by the penalties provided for in the first paragraph.

Paragraphe 3

Insults and violence against holders of authority or public force

Article 242-54

Anyone who, either by speeches, cries or threats uttered in public meetings or places, or by writings, printed matter, sold or distributed, offered for sale or displayed in public meetings or places, insults the person of the Head of State is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 600,000 francs.

The same provisions are applicable with regard to foreign Heads of State visiting Mali.

When one or more magistrates of the administrative or judicial order, when one or more assessors receive in the exercise of their functions or on the occasion of that exercise, any insult by word, writing or drawing not made public tending in these various cases to harm their honour or their integrity, the person who addressed that insult to them is punished by imprisonment of one year.

If the insult by word takes place at the hearing or within the precincts of a court or tribunal, the imprisonment is two years.

The insult made by gesture or by threat or by sending any objects with the same intention and targeting a magistrate or an assessor in the exercise of their functions, is punished by six months' imprisonment; if the insult takes place at the hearing of a court or tribunal, it is punished by imprisonment of two years.

Article 242-55

The insult made by words, gestures or threats, writings or drawings not made public or by sending any objects with the same intention and targeting any ministerial officer or agent holding public force, in the exercise of their functions is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 240,000 francs.

Article 242-56

The insult mentioned in the preceding article, when it is directed against a commander of the public force, is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 600,000 francs.

Article 242-57

Any individual who, without a weapon and without resulting injury, engages in violence or assault against a magistrate in the exercise of their functions or on the occasion of that exercise, or commits any other violence or assault against them in the same circumstances, is punished by imprisonment of five years. The maximum of this penalty is always pronounced if the assault or violence takes place at the hearing or within the precincts of a court or tribunal.

In either of the cases referred to, the offender may in addition be sentenced to stay away for ten years from the place where the magistrate sits and within a radius of fifty kilometres. This provision is enforceable from the date of the day when the convicted person serves their sentence. If the convicted person violates this order before the expiry of the fixed time, they are punished by imprisonment of three months and a residence ban of five years.

Article 242-58

The violence or assault provided for in Article 242-57 above directed against a ministerial officer, an agent of the public force, compliance agents and officials of the National Financial Information Processing Unit in the context of the fight against money laundering, terrorist financing and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, if they took place in the exercise of their functions are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 600,000 francs.

Article 242-59

If the violence and assault exercised against the officials and agents designated in Articles 242-57 and 242-58 above cause an incapacity for work exceeding twenty days, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment. If death ensues, the offender is punished by life imprisonment.

In the case where such violence and assault have not caused bloodshed, injury or illness, the offenders are punished by imprisonment of twenty years if the blows are struck with premeditation and ambush.

Article 242-60

If the blows are struck, or the injuries inflicted, on officials or agents designated in Articles 242-57 and 242-58 above in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions with intent to kill, the offender is punished by the death penalty.

Paragraphe 4 : Mutiny

Article 242-61

Any operation launched by a group of military personnel, prisoners, crew personnel of a vehicle, aircraft or military vessel following a revolt or disputes manifesting themselves by a descent into premises, offices, establishments, vehicles, aircraft or vessels with a view to capturing the leaders, the authorities on whom they depend in order to exercise acts of violence or assault, torture, summary executions while seizing key points of the city, military garrisons, gendarmerie, post offices and stations, whatever its reduced duration or not, its limited scope or not and which may be used for political purposes or to free themselves from subjugation, oppression or for any other cause, is punished by imprisonment of five years.

Incitement to mutiny is punished by the same penalty.

If it is followed by a panic movement of soldiers facing a possible reaction of reprisals from Officers or leaders facing nervous and disorderly soldiers, the penalty is imprisonment of seven years.

Article 242-62

Detainees or persons interned in an establishment by decision of the authority who have rioted with the intention of attacking, by common accord, an official of the establishment or any other person responsible for supervising them, of compelling, by violence or the threat of violence, an official of the establishment or any other person responsible for supervising them to do an act or to refrain from doing so or to escape by using violence, are punished by imprisonment of three years.

Those among them who have committed violence against persons or property are punished by imprisonment of five years.

Section 8 : Detainee and escape of detainee

Article 242-63 : For the purposes of this Code, any person is considered a detainee

1°) who is placed in police custody;

2°) who is pending or in the process of being presented to the judicial authority at the end of police custody or in execution of a warrant to bring or arrest warrant;

3°) who has been notified of a committal warrant or an arrest warrant continuing to produce effect;

4°) who is serving a custodial sentence or who has been arrested to serve that sentence;

5°) who is placed under extradition detention;

6°) who is the subject of an order of arrest; 7°) who is placed under a community service regime; 8°) who is placed under electronic monitoring.

Article 242-64

Any detainee who escapes or attempts to escape from the place where they are detained, from a health or hospital establishment where they are transferred, or during a work detail, is punished by imprisonment of one year.

Article 242-65 : Also constitutes an escape punishable by the same penalties the act by

1°) a detainee placed in a health or hospital establishment, of evading the surveillance to which he is subject;

2°) any convicted person, of evading the control to which he is subject when he has been the subject of a decision of placement outside a penitentiary establishment or when he benefits either from the semi-liberty regime, or from a leave permit;

3°) any convicted person, of failing to return to the penitentiary establishment at the end of a measure of suspension or splitting of imprisonment, of placement outside, of execution of community service work; of semi-liberty or of leave permit.

Article 242-66

Any person assigned to the custody or escort of a detainee, guilty of having let him escape through negligence, is punished:

a)	if the escapees or one of them were charged or convicted for a crime, by three years' imprisonment;

b)	if the escapees or one of them were charged for an offence, by one year's imprisonment.

Those who, without being charged with the custody or escort of the detainee, procure, facilitate or attempt to procure or facilitate his escape, are punished as follows:

c)	if the detainee who escaped is in the case provided for by paragraph a) of this article, by two years' imprisonment;

d)	if the detainee who escaped is in the case provided for by paragraph b) of this article, by six months' imprisonment.

Article 242-67

Detainees who escape or who attempt to escape by prison breaking or by violence are, by that fact alone, punished by imprisonment of two years. They shall serve this sentence immediately after the expiry of that which they incur for the crime or offence by reason of which they were detained, or immediately after the judgment or decision which acquitted or discharged them, absolved them of the said crime or offence, all without prejudice to the convictions they may have incurred for offences committed on the occasion of such violence.

Article 242-68

The penalties referred to in Article 242-66 above cease when the escapees are recaptured.

Section 9 : Des bris de scellés et de la dégradation de monuments

Article 242-69

Whoever intentionally breaks or removes seals, notices, by means of which the administrative or judicial authorities have prohibited access to premises or the removal of objects, is punished by imprisonment of three years.

If it is the custodian of the seals who breaks them, he is punished by imprisonment of five years. If he is convicted of simple negligence, the penalty is imprisonment of six months.

In the cases provided for in the first two paragraphs of this article, a fine of 200,000 francs is imposed on the offender.

Article 242-70

Any theft committed by means of breaking seals is considered as theft committed by means of breaking and entering.

Article 242-71

For the removal, destruction, taking away of documents of criminal proceedings or other papers, registers, acts or effects contained in archives, registry offices or public depositories or entrusted to a public depositary in that capacity, the penalties are against negligent court clerks, notaries and other depositaries, imprisonment of one year and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Whoever has voluntarily destroyed, demolished, mutilated, or damaged monuments, statues and other immovable property intended for public utility or decoration, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 400,000 FCFA.

Article 242-72

Whoever is guilty of removal, misappropriation, taking away, alteration or destruction mentioned in the preceding article, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a residence ban of five years.

If the offence is the work of a depositary himself, he is punished by imprisonment of twenty years and residence ban of twenty years.

If the removal, misappropriation, taking away, alteration, destruction referred to in the first paragraph of this article are committed with violence against persons or property, the penalty is, against any person, imprisonment of twenty years and residence ban of twenty years.

Section 10 : De l'usurpation de titre ou de fonction

Article 242-73

Whoever, without title interferes in public civil or military functions, or performs an act of one of these functions, is punished by imprisonment of five years, without prejudice to other convictions incurred on the occasion of the offence.

Any person who publicly wears a costume, uniform or decoration to which he is not entitled, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 50,000 francs.

Is punished by the same penalties whoever, without fulfilling the required conditions, uses or claims a title attached to a legally regulated profession, an official diploma or a quality whose conditions of attribution have been fixed by the public authority.

Is punished by a fine of 600,000 francs whoever, without right, and with a view to attributing to himself an honorary distinction, publicly adorns himself with a title, or changes, alters or modifies the name assigned to him by civil status records.

In all cases provided for in this article, the Court may order the full or partial publication of the judgment in the newspapers it designates, at the expense of the convicted person.

Section 11

Des atteintes au crédit de l'Etat et du refus de payer les impositions, contributions et taxes assimilées

Paragraphe 1 : Des atteintes au crédit de l'Etat

Article 242-74

Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 240,000 francs:

1°) those who, by any ways and means whatsoever, knowingly spread among the public false news or mendacious allegations likely to shake directly or indirectly its confidence in the credit of the State, territorial collectivities, public establishments, all organizations in which these collectivities and public establishments have a participation;

2°) those who, by any ways and means whatsoever, incite the public to withdraw funds from public funds or from establishments obliged by law to make their payments into the funds;

3°) those who, by the same means and with the aim of provoking panic, incite the public to sell annuity securities or other public securities, or dissuade them from purchasing or subscribing to them, whether or not these incitements are followed by effect.

In all cases, the judgment is published in two newspapers designated by the Court and at the expense of the convicted person.

Paragraphe 2 : Du refus de payer les impositions, contributions et taxes assimilées

Article 242-75

Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,400,000 francs those who, by violence, acts of force, threats or concerted maneuvers, organize or attempt to organize the collective refusal to pay taxes, contributions and similar charges.

Article 242-76

Are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 400,000 francs those who collectively refuse payment of taxes, contributions and similar charges.

Article 242-77

Individual refusal to pay taxes, contributions and similar charges, if not justified by a certificate of relief or discharge, is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 120,000 francs.

Article 242-78

In case of recidivism within five years, the penalties provided for in Articles 242-75, 242-76, and 242-77 above are doubled.

Article 242-79

In the cases provided for in Articles 242-75, 242-76 and 242-77 above, proceedings may only be initiated by the Public Prosecutor upon complaint of the minister responsible for Finance or, where applicable, at the request of the legal representatives of the organizations concerned.

Article 242-80

In the case provided for in Article 242-79 above, proceedings may be initiated upon complaint by the officer responsible for collection.

However, and except where expressly provided by the finance law, no criminal proceedings may take place before the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which the tax rolls are made enforceable.

The provisions of Articles 242-77, 242-78 and 242-79 above do not preclude the procedure of fiscal seizure and sale pursued normally by the Treasury against recalcitrant taxpayers.

In all cases, payment of taxes, contributions and similar taxes stops the proceedings or the execution of the sentence.

Section 12

On the obligation for citizens to provide their assistance in the event of public calamity

Article 242-81

In the event of fire, bush fires, cyclone, earthquake, invasion of locusts, grasshoppers, millet-eaters, or other harmful animals and generally in the event of calamities or public threat, endangering the life and property of all or a fraction of the citizens, any person present at the scene, called for help or requisitioned by the administrative authorities, is required to provide assistance to the public authorities to combat this scourge.

Those who, without valid reason, refuse or neglect to provide the assistance to which they are required, are punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 300,000 francs. In the event of a repeat offence, the prison sentence is mandatory and the fine is doubled.

Those who, without valid reason, refuse to respond to the requisition of which they are the subject or, responding to it, refuse without valid reason or neglect to do the work or service required, are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 500,000 francs. In the event of a repeat offence, the prison sentence is mandatory and the fine is doubled; in addition, deprivation of all or part of civil rights is imposed for a period of three years.

Section 13: Crimes and offences against public peace

Paragraphe 1: Criminal association - harbouring of criminals

Article 242-82

Any association formed, whatever its duration and the number of its members, any agreement, for the purpose of preparing or committing an attack against persons or property, constitutes a crime against public peace.

Whoever, with knowledge, joins an association formed or participates in an agreement established for the purpose specified in the paragraph above, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a residence ban of ten years.

Those who are guilty of the crime mentioned in this article are exempted from punishment if, before any proceedings against a named person, they reveal to the constituted authorities the agreement established or the existence of the association.

Article 242-83

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years, whoever knowingly and voluntarily favours the perpetrators of the crimes provided for in Article 242-82 above by providing them with instruments of the crime, means of correspondence, shelter, accommodation or meeting place.

The guilty party may, in addition, be subject to the residence ban provided for in the preceding article.
However, the provisions contained in the last paragraph of Article 242-82 above are applicable to the guilty party of the acts provided for by this article.

Article 242-84

Those who, knowing the criminal conduct of criminals engaging in brigandage or violence against the security of the State, public peace, persons, provide them with accommodation, shelter, place of retreat or meeting, are punished as accomplices.

Those who, outside the cases provided for above, knowingly harbour a criminal or an individual sought by justice or who remove or attempt to remove the criminal from arrest or searches, or help him to hide or take flight, are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 500,000 francs, all without prejudice to other convictions.

The persons referred to in Article 121-6 in fine of this Code are exempted from the foregoing provisions.

Paragraphe 2

Recruitment and use of children by armed forces and groups

Article 242-85

Recruitment and use of children means the conscription or compulsory, forced or voluntary incorporation of children into national armed forces of a State or an armed group of any nature whatsoever, or the act of using them, whatever the function exercised therein. This may include, in particular but not exclusively, children, girls or boys, used as combatants, cooks, porters, messengers, spies or for sexual purposes.

The term does not only designate a child who participates or has participated directly in hostilities.

Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 242-83 above, the act of recruiting, in a forced or voluntary manner, children under eighteen years of age into security forces or armed groups, or using them in security forces or armed groups, whatever the function they exercise therein.

Paragraphe 3: Violence in stadiums or on the occasion of shows

Article 242-86

Are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 500,000 francs those who bring into a sports enclosure or into a performance hall, weapons, flares, fireworks, or any other object likely to constitute a weapon.

Article 242-87

Are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 200,000 francs:

1°) those who bring alcoholic beverages into a sports enclosure or into a performance hall;

2°) those who, on the occasion of a sports competition or a cultural performance, incite spectators to hatred or violence, towards the referee, a sports judge, a player, an artist or any other person or group of persons;

3°) those who bring, carry or display in a sports enclosure or in a performance hall, insignia, signs or symbols of a racist or xenophobic nature;

4°) those who deliberately disturb the course of the competition or cultural performance, or harm the safety of persons or property;

5°) those who throw projectiles or any other object manifestly presenting a danger to the safety of persons and property.

Paragraphe 4: Vagrancy

Article 242-88

Work is a duty for every Malian and for every person residing on the national territory.

Vagrants or persons of no fixed abode are those who have neither a fixed domicile, nor means of subsistence and who do not habitually exercise any trade or profession.

Article 242-89

Vagrants or persons of no fixed abode who are legally declared as such are, for this fact alone, punished by imprisonment of six months. They may in addition, in the event of a repeat offence, be subject to a residence ban for five years.

Article 242-90

Individuals not originating from the Republic of Mali declared vagrants may be conducted by order of the Government outside the Republic.

Vagrants born in Mali may, even after a judgment that has become final, be claimed by resolution of the Council of the commune or village where they were born or guaranteed by a solvent citizen.

If the Court accepts the claim or approves the guarantee, the individuals thus claimed or guaranteed are by order of the Government returned or conducted to the commune or village that claims them or to such other locality that is assigned to them as residence at the request of the guarantor.

Paragraphe 5 : Begging-Incitement to begging

Article 242-91

Any able-bodied and adult person who is found begging on the public highway is punished by imprisonment of six months.

Persons with disabilities who, during their stay in hospital or charitable institutions, are found begging in public places are punished by the same penalty.

In all circumstances, incitement to begging is prohibited.

Any person convicted of incitement to begging is liable to the penalty set out in the first paragraph above.

However, if the person incited to begging is a minor child, the offender is punished by imprisonment of one year.
Any beggar, even with a disability, who uses threats or insults or has entered without permission and against the will of the owner or occupants of the house, into a dwelling, into an enclosure dependent thereon, is punished by imprisonment of six months.

Paragraphe 6 : Common provisions relating to vagrants and beggars

Article 242-92

Any vagrant or beggar who is apprehended disguised in any manner whatsoever and equipped with instruments suitable either to commit thefts or other offences, or to provide him with the means to enter houses, is punished by imprisonment of five years.
Any vagrant or beggar who exercises or attempts to exercise any act of violence whatsoever against persons, is punished by imprisonment of five years.

Vagrants and beggars who are sentenced to the penalties set out in this article are prohibited from residing for ten years.

Paragraphe 7 : Games of chance

Article 242-93

Lotteries or all other games of chance offering the hope of a substantial gain for a relatively small stake are prohibited on the territory of the Republic, except by authorization by law which sets the conditions thereof.

Article 242-94

Those who illegally install on the public highway machines dispensing money or consumption tokens and in general all machines whose operation is based on skill or chance and which are intended to provide a gain or consumption in return for a stake are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Those who, unlawfully, keep a house of games of chance where the public is admitted, either freely or upon presentation of interested parties or affiliates are punished by the same penalties. In case of infringement, the owners of the premises, administrators, directors, agents or employees of the establishment are prosecuted.

The offenders may furthermore, from the day they have served their sentence, be deprived of civic and civil rights for ten years.

In all cases, all funds and effects which are found exposed to the game or to the lottery or raffle, the furniture, instruments, utensils, machines used or intended to be used for games or lotteries or raffles, the furniture and movable effects with which the premises are furnished or decorated are confiscated.

Article 242-95

Those who engage in all kinds of games of chance not authorized by law, on the territory of the Republic are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 200,000 francs.

In case of recidivism, the penalty may be increased fivefold.

Article 242-96

Individuals domiciled or not who habitually derive their subsistence only from practicing or facilitating the exercise of illicit games are punished by imprisonment of three years and five years' prohibition from residing.

Paragraphe 8 : Simulation of an offence

Article 242-97

Anyone who reports to the public authorities an offence which he knows did not exist or who fabricates false evidence relating to a real or imaginary offence, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Paragraphe 9 : Offences relating to prohibition from residing

Article 242-98

The convicted person who contravenes the prohibition from residing or who leaves the residence assigned to him pursuant to the provisions in force, is punished by imprisonment of five years.

Section 14 : Provocation within associations

Article 242-99

If by speeches, exhortations, invocations or prayers, in whatever language or by reading, posting, publication or distribution of any writings whatsoever, any provocation to crimes or offences is made in the assemblies of an association, the penalty is imprisonment of three years and a fine of 200,000 francs against the leaders, directors and administrators of that association and against the authors of the provocation, without prejudice, with regard to the latter, to the more severe penalties provided by law for the offences which were committed in the circumstance.

Chapitre 3 : Economic crimes and offences and offences against public property

Section 1

Offences against currency, marks, titles or other fiduciary securities issued by public authority and forgery

Sous-section 1

Counterfeiting of currency Paragraphe 1: General provisions

Article 243-1

The provisions of this section are intended to punish counterfeiting of currency and other offences against monetary signs. They apply to offences committed:

1°) on the national territory;

2°) on the territory of other member States of the West African Monetary Union - WAMU;

3°) abroad, outside the member States of WAMU, according to the distinctions and conditions provided by the legislation in force.

Article 243-2: For the purposes of this Code, the following terms mean

1°) competent authorities: bodies which, by virtue of a legal or regulatory provision, are empowered to perform or order the acts or measures provided for by the uniform law relating to counterfeiting;

2°) BCEAO or Central Bank: the Central Bank of West African States;

3°) counterfeiting: the manufacture of a monetary sign imitating a monetary sign issued by the BCEAO or any other authorized foreign issuing institution;

4°) foreigner: any person who lives in the Union without having the nationality of one of the member States of WAMU;

5°) falsification: the alteration of a monetary sign with a view to modifying its substance or weight;

6°) counterfeit currency, counterfeit banknotes or counterfeit coins: banknotes and coins which have the appearance of banknotes or coins issued by the BCEAO or any other authorized foreign issuing body or, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose;

7°) counterfeiting:

a)	all fraudulent acts, counterfeiting and falsification of manufacture or alteration of monetary signs issued by the BCEAO or any other authorized foreign issuing institution, for this purpose, whatever the means employed to produce the result;

b)	the putting into circulation of counterfeit currency with full knowledge;

c)	the act of holding, importing, exporting, transporting, receiving or obtaining counterfeit currency, with the aim of putting it into circulation with full knowledge;

d)	the fraudulent act of manufacturing, holding, receiving or obtaining instruments, objects, computer programs or any other process intended, by their nature, for the manufacture of counterfeit currency, the alteration of currencies or the manufacture of security elements for monetary signs;

8°) FCFA: Franc of the African Financial Community;

9°) putting counterfeit currency into circulation: the issue of counterfeit currency, regardless of the number of banknotes or coins circulated;

10°) reproduction of monetary signs: creation of any tangible or intangible image which bears a resemblance to a banknote or the image of a coin, whatever the size of the image, the materials, instruments and techniques used to produce it and regardless of whether the patterns, letters and symbols appearing on the monetary sign have been modified or not;

11°) monetary signs: banknotes or coins having or having had legal tender;

12°) WAMU or Union: West African Monetary Union.

Paragraph 2: Offences and applicable penalties

Article 243-3

The counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins having legal tender in the national territory of a member State of WAMU or abroad is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a fine equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than 20,000,000 francs.

The counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins which, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose, is punished by the same penalties.
If the offender benefits from mitigating circumstances, the penalty may not be less than five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.
Suspension of sentence may not be granted.

Article 243-4

The custodial sentence provided for in the first two paragraphs of the preceding article is accompanied by a safety period of seven years.
During the safety period, the convicted person may not benefit from the provisions relating to the method of adjustment of sentences, in particular those concerning the suspension or splitting of the sentence, external placement, leave permits, semi-liberty and conditional release.

Article 243-5

The counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins having had legal tender in the national territory or abroad, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine equal to ten times the value of said signs, without being less than 2,000,000 francs.

Article 243-6

The manufacture of banknotes and coins carried out using authorized installations or equipment intended for this purpose, when it is carried out in violation of the conditions set by the institutions authorized to issue these monetary signs and without their agreement, is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 243-3 above.

Article 243-7

The putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation, exportation, transport, receipt, possession, with full knowledge, of monetary signs having legal tender that are counterfeited or falsified, is punished by seven years' imprisonment and a fine equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than 5,000,000 francs.

When they are committed by an organized gang, the offences provided for in the preceding paragraph are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 243-3 above.

The putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation, exportation, transport, receipt, possession, of monetary signs having had legal tender that are counterfeited or falsified, with full knowledge, is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine equal to ten times the value of said signs, without being less than 1,000,000 francs.

When they are committed by an organized gang, the offences provided for in paragraph 3 of this article are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 243-5 above.

Article 243-8

Those who, having received monetary signs believing them to be good and who, after having discovered their defects, knowingly keep them and refrain from handing them over to the BCEAO or to the competent authorities, are punished by a fine equal to ten times their value, without the amount of the fine being less than 250,000 francs.

Credit institutions, decentralized financial systems, authorized manual currency exchangers and postal financial services which, having received counterfeited or falsified monetary signs during transactions with their customers, have not retained them, against receipt, for the purpose of handing them over to the BCEAO or to the competent authorities, are punished by a fine equal to ten times their value, without the amount being less than 2,000,000 francs.

Article 243-9

The putting back into circulation, after having discovered the defects, of counterfeited or falsified banknotes which were believed to be good at the time of receipt, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than 500,000 francs.

Article 243-10

The manufacture, offer, receipt, importation, exportation, or possession, without authorization, of marks, materials, apparatus, instruments, computer programs, or any other element specially intended for the manufacture or protection against counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins is punished by seven years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Article 243-11

The manufacture, possession, circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of unauthorized monetary signs, intended to replace coins or banknotes having legal tender in the national territory or abroad, is punished by imprisonment of seven years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

The same penalties apply to the possession, circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of banknotes and coins which, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose and do not yet have legal tender in the national territory or abroad.

Article 243-12

The manufacture, possession, circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of printed matter, forms or tokens intended to be accepted as a means of payment, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Article 243-13

Any person who commits the following acts is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 1,000,000 francs:
reproduces, totally or partially, by any means whatsoever, monetary signs having legal tender in the national territory or abroad, without the prior authorization of the BCEAO or, in the case of foreign monetary signs, of the authority that issued them;
displays, distributes, imports or exports reproductions of monetary signs, including by means of newspapers, books or prospectuses without the prior authorization of the Central Bank or, in the case of foreign monetary signs, of the authority that issued them;
uses banknotes having legal tender in the national territory or abroad, as a medium for any advertising.

Article 243-14

The deliberate deterioration, defacement or overloading of a monetary sign is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, when it has the effect of rendering it unfit for use as a means of payment.

Article 243-15

The refusal to accept currency having legal tender in a Member State of the Union according to the value for which it has legal tender is punished by a fine of 600,000 francs.

Article 243-16

The collection of a commission in exchange for the delivery of monetary signs issued by the BCEAO against other monetary signs of its issue, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 3,000,000 francs.

Article 243-17

Regardless of the classification of the offense, the counterfeited or falsified monetary signs and others referred to in articles 243-3 to 243-14 above as well as the metals, papers and other materials found in the possession of the offenders and intended for the commission of similar offenses are confiscated.

The instruments used to commit the offense are also confiscated, except when they were used without the knowledge of their owner.

Article 243-18

The competent court shall mandatorily impose on natural persons found guilty of the offenses provided for in articles 243-3 to 243-12 above, the following additional penalties:

1°) the prohibition from engaging in an activity in the banking and financial sector for a period not exceeding twenty years;

2°) the prohibition of residence, permanently, or for a period not exceeding twenty years for foreigners.

It may, in addition, impose on them the deprivation of civil rights for a period not exceeding twenty years.

Article 243-19

Legal persons other than the State are criminally liable for the offenses defined herein, when they are committed on their behalf by their organs or representatives.

The legal person found criminally liable is, without prejudice to the penalties incurred by the natural persons who are co-perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts, punished by a fine equal to five times the amount provided for natural persons.

The competent court shall also impose the following additional penalties:

1°) the dissolution of the legal person, when it was created or diverted from its corporate purpose to commit the offenses referred to in articles 243-3 to 243-12 above;

2°) the permanent closure of the enterprise or for a period between one year and five years.

Article 243-20: The attempt of the offenses referred to in this section is punishable

Article 243-21

In case of recidivism, the penalties provided for in this section are doubled.

Convictions pronounced by the criminal courts of a Member State of UMOA for the offenses provided for in this section, are taken into account for recidivism in all other Member States.

Article 243-22

Any person who, having participated in the offenses provided for in articles 243-3 to 243-12 above, has disclosed them to the competent authorities or revealed the perpetrators before any prosecution, is exempted from penalties. However, such person may be prohibited from residence if he or she has the status of a foreigner.

Any person who, having participated in the offenses referred to in the preceding paragraph, has, after the initiation of prosecution, enabled the arrest of the other participants, may be exempted from penalties, totally or partially. However, such person may be prohibited from residence if he or she has the status of a foreigner.

Article 243-23

When it pronounces a conviction pursuant to the provisions of this section, the competent court may order the posting or dissemination of all or part of the decision or of a press release informing the public of the reasons for and the operative part of the decision.

It shall determine, where applicable, the extracts of the decision and the terms of the press release that must be posted or disseminated.

The posting or dissemination of the decision or press release may include the identity of the victim only with the consent of the victim or his or her legal representative or successors in title.

The posting shall be carried out in the places and for the duration indicated by the court. Unless otherwise decided by the court, the posting may not exceed two months. In case of removal, concealment, or tearing of the posted notices, posting shall be carried out again at the expense of the person found guilty of these acts.

The dissemination of the decision is done by one or more press publications or by one or more electronic communication services available to the public. The publications or electronic communication services available to the public responsible for this dissemination are designated by the court. They may not oppose this dissemination.

The posting and dissemination may be ordered cumulatively.

The posting of the decision pronounced or the dissemination thereof is at the expense of the convicted person. The posting or dissemination costs recovered from the latter may not, however, exceed the maximum fine incurred.

Paragraphe 3: Applicable procedure

Article 243-24

By way of derogation from the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the correctional courts have jurisdiction to hear the crimes provided for in this chapter.

The procedure followed is that applicable in correctional matters.

Article 243-25

By way of derogation from the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for the offenses provided for in this section, the public prosecution is subject to limitation according to the following distinctions:
by twenty years for crimes;
by ten years for offenses.

Article 243-26

When they are seized with cases relating to counterfeiting or discover, during their investigations, counterfeit or falsified monetary signs, the competent authorities are required to transmit to the Central Bank, for analysis and identification, at least one specimen of each type of banknotes or coins suspected to be false.

The provisions of the preceding paragraph are not applicable when there exists only one specimen of a type of banknotes or coins suspected to be false, as long as it is necessary for the establishment of the truth.

Article 243-27

Counterfeit or falsified monetary signs as well as materials and instruments intended to be used for their manufacture, confiscated pursuant to Article 243-17 above, are handed over to the Central Bank for their possible destruction, subject to the requirements of the administration of justice.

Article 243-28

When the Central Bank recognizes as counterfeit or falsified monetary signs that are handed over to it, it is authorized to retain them and possibly to destroy them, subject to the requirements of the administration of justice.

Sous-section 2

Counterfeiting of State seals, public or private instruments, punches, stamps and marks

Article 243-29

Is punished by thirty years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, whoever counterfeits a seal of the State or makes use of a counterfeit seal.

Article 243-30

Is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, whoever counterfeits or falsifies either one or more national stamps, or one or more punches of the State used to mark gold or silver materials, or who makes use of falsified or counterfeit stamps or punches.

Article 243-31

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 francs, whoever, having improperly obtained genuine stamps or punches of the State designated in the preceding article, makes an application or use thereof prejudicial to the rights and interests of the State, its subdivisions and third parties.

Article 243-32

Is punished by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 600,000 francs, whoever:
manufactures the seals, stamps, marks, cachets of the State or of any authority without the written order of the accredited representatives of the State or of that authority;
manufactures, holds, distributes, purchases or sells stamps, seals, marks or cachets likely to be confused with those of the State or of any authority whatsoever, even foreign.

Article 243-33

Is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs, whoever manufactures, sells, hawks, distributes or uses printed matter which, by its format, its color, its text, its typographical layout or any other characteristic, presents with letterhead papers or official printed matter in use in institutions, public administrations and the various courts, a resemblance likely to cause confusion in the mind of the public.

Article 243-34

Is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs, whoever:

1°) counterfeits marks intended to be affixed in the name of the Government or of a public service on various kinds of foodstuffs or goods, or who makes use of these false marks;

2°) counterfeits the seal, stamp or mark of any authority whatsoever or makes use of the counterfeit seal, stamp or mark;

3°) counterfeits or falsifies postage stamps, franking impressions or reply coupons issued by the Malian postal administration, mobile fiscal stamps, stamped papers or forms, stamps, impressions, reply coupons, stamped papers or forms that are counterfeit or falsified.

In addition, deprivation of civil and professional rights and prohibition of residence may be pronounced for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 243-35

Is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, whoever, having improperly obtained genuine seals, marks or printed matter provided for in the preceding article, makes or attempts to make a fraudulent application or use thereof.

In addition, deprivation of civil and/or professional rights and/or prohibition of residence may be pronounced for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 243-36

Is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 600,000 francs, whoever:

1°) knowingly makes use of postage stamps, mobile stamps or stamped papers or forms having already been used, or who, by any means, alters stamps with the aim of removing them from cancellation and thus permitting their subsequent reuse;

2°) overprints by printing, perforation or any other means Malian postage stamps or other postal fiduciary values, expired or not, or who sells, hawks, offers, distributes, exports postage stamps thus overprinted;

3°) counterfeits, imitates or alters stamps, vignettes, franking impressions or reply coupons issued by the postal service of a foreign country, sells, hawks or distributes said stamps, vignettes, franking impressions or reply coupons or knowingly makes use thereof.

Article 243-37

Is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs, whoever is guilty of manufacturing, introducing into Mali, selling or distributing any objects, tokens, printed matter or forms, obtained by any process whatsoever and which, by their appearance, would present with annuity certificates, shares, bonds, interest shares, dividend or interest coupons relating thereto and generally with fiduciary securities issued by companies or private enterprises, a resemblance likely to facilitate the acceptance of said objects, tokens, printed matter or forms in place of the imitated securities.

In addition, deprivation of civil and professional rights and prohibition of residence may be pronounced for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 243-38

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, whoever counterfeits, falsifies or alters certificates, bonds or obligations issued by the Public Treasury with its stamp or its mark, or interest coupons relating to these certificates, bonds or obligations.

Article 243-39

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, whoever, in any manner whatsoever, knowingly participates in the issue, distribution, sale or introduction into Mali of the certificates, bonds or obligations designated in the preceding article.

Article 243-40

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, whoever manufactures, acquires, holds or transfers knowingly products or equipment intended for the commission of the offenses punished above, unless the act constitutes a more serious offense.

Article 243-41

Benefits from an absolute excuse one of the perpetrators of the crimes mentioned in Articles 243-39 and 243-40 above who, before the consummation of these crimes and before any prosecution, gives notice thereof to the authorities and reveals the identity of the perpetrators or who, even after prosecution has commenced, facilitates the arrest of the other perpetrators.

Article 243-42

In the case of the offenses referred to in Articles 243-38, 243-39 and 243-40 above, the trial court pronounces the confiscation of products and equipment.

It may in addition order the closure of the establishment for a period which may not exceed five years.

Section 2: Forgery in writing

Article 243-43

Forgery constitutes a crime when it is any alteration of the truth likely to cause harm to others and committed in a writing, with criminal intent:

1°) either by distorting the substance or circumstances of an act;

2°) either by writing therein agreements other than those drawn up or dictated by the parties;

3°) either by recording as true facts that are false or as acknowledged facts that were not;

4°) either by fabrication of all or part of a document;

5°) either by counterfeiting or alteration of writings or signatures; 6°) either by false signature;
7°) either by substitution of persons;

8°) either by addition or alteration of clauses, declarations or facts that any act was intended to receive or record.

Article 243-44

Any public official, within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code, who commits forgery in the exercise of their functions, is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and twenty years' prohibition from residence.

Forgery committed by any other person is punished by ten years' imprisonment and ten years' prohibition from residence.

When the certain or potential harm is assessable in money and less than 50,000 francs, the penalty is, regardless of the perpetrator, five years' imprisonment. Prohibition from residence may in addition be imposed for five years.

Article 243-45

Those who knowingly make use of forged documents are punished by the penalty incurred by the author of the forgery.

Article 243-46

Any person who assumes a false name in a passport, work permit or any other document issued by the Malian administrative authority or assists as a witness in having said documents issued under a false name is punished by two years' imprisonment.

The same penalty applies to any individual who makes use of the documents referred to above under a name other than their own.

Article 243-47

In the cases referred to in Article 243-46 above, a fine is always imposed on the convicted person, the maximum of which is double the amounts unduly demanded or received.

Section 3

Corruption and related offences Subsection 1: Corruption

Paragraph 1: Corruption of public officials and agents

Article 243-48

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine double the value of the promises accepted or things received or requested, without said fine being less than 100,000 francs, anyone who solicits or accepts offers or promises, solicits or receives gifts or presents to:

1°) being a public official of the administrative or judicial order, being a member of the military or equivalent, being an assessor of a court of judgment, agent or employee of a public administration or an administration placed under the control of public authority, citizen charged with a ministry of public service, being invested with an elective mandate, do or refrain from doing an act of their functions or employment, just or not but not subject to salary;

2°) being an arbitrator or expert appointed either by the Court or by the parties, render a decision or give an opinion favourable or unfavourable to a party;

3°) being a doctor, dental surgeon or midwife, falsely certify or conceal the existence of diseases or infirmities or a state of pregnancy or provide false information on the origin of a disease or infirmity or the cause of a death.
The custodial sentence incurred by the author or accomplice of the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of this article is reduced by two thirds if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, they have made it possible to stop the offence or to identify, where applicable, the other authors or accomplices.
The confiscation of the proceeds or instrument or object of corruption is imposed as an additional penalty.

Paragraph 2

Corruption of foreign public agents and officials of public international organizations

Article 243-49: For the purposes of this Code, the following are understood as

1°) foreign public agent, any person who holds a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial mandate in a foreign country, whether appointed or elected; and any person who exercises a public function for a foreign country, including for a public body or public enterprise;
2°) official of a public international organization, an international official or person authorized by such an organization to act on its behalf.

Article 243-50

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine equal to triple the value of the promises accepted or things received or requested, without said fine being less than 5,000,000 francs:
1°) any foreign public agent or official of a public international organization who, directly or indirectly solicits or accepts offers or promises or receives gifts or presents or other undue advantages, for themselves or for another person or entity, so that they perform or refrain from performing an act in the exercise of their functions or employment, with a view to granting, obtaining, causing to be obtained, retaining or causing to be retained a contract or other undue advantage, in connection with an economic or commercial transaction;

2°) anyone who promises, offers or grants to a foreign public agent or to an official of a public international organization, directly or indirectly, promises, gifts or presents or other undue advantages, for themselves or for another person or entity, so that they perform or refrain from performing an act in the exercise of their functions or employment, with a view to obtaining, causing to be obtained, retaining or causing to be retained a contract or other undue advantage, in connection with an economic or commercial transaction.

Article 243-51

Is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) anyone who promises, offers or grants to a foreign public agent or to an official of a public international organization, directly or indirectly, gifts or presents or any other undue advantage, for themselves or for another person or entity, so that they perform or refrain from performing an act in the exercise of their official functions;

2°) any foreign public agent or official of a public international organization, who solicits or accepts directly or indirectly, for themselves or for another person or entity, promises, offers, gifts or presents or any other undue advantage, so that they perform or refrain from performing an act within their official functions;

3°) any foreign public agent or official of a public international organization, who solicits or accepts remuneration in cash or in kind, for themselves or for a third party, in payment for an act of their function already performed).

The confiscation of the proceeds of corruption is imposed as an additional penalty.

A ten-year prohibition from residence may be imposed on the foreign public agent and the official of the public international organization.

Paragraph 3: Corruption in the private sector

Sub-paragraph 1: Incrimination of corruption in the private sector

Article 243-52

Is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine corresponding to twice the value of the proceeds of corruption, provided that the amount of the fine may not be less than 2,000,000 francs:

1°) the act by any individual, in the context of economic, financial or commercial activities, of promising, offering or granting, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage to any person who directs a private sector entity or works for such an entity, in any capacity whatsoever, for herself or himself or for another person, so that, in violation of her or his duties, she or he performs or refrains from performing an act;

2°) the act by any person who directs a private sector entity or works for such an entity, in any capacity whatsoever, of soliciting or accepting, directly or indirectly, in the context of economic, financial or commercial activities, an undue advantage for herself or himself or for another person, in order to perform or refrain from performing an act in violation of her or his duties.

The custodial sentence incurred by the perpetrator or accomplice of the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of this article is reduced by two thirds if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, he or she has enabled the offence to be stopped or, where applicable, the other perpetrators or accomplices to be identified.

The confiscation of the proceeds or the instrument or object of corruption is imposed as an additional penalty.

It is prohibited to allow tax deductibility of expenses that constitute bribes, the payment of which is one of the constituent elements of the offences established in accordance with articles 243-48 and 243-49 to 243-51 above and, where applicable, other expenses incurred for purposes of corruption.

Article 243-53

Is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, any director of a commercial company, a financial institution, a cooperative, any agent of an association, a private enterprise, a mutual society or any foundation, who makes use of the property or credit of the said company, institution, cooperative, association, private enterprise or foundation in a manner which he or she knows to be contrary to the interest of that company, institution, cooperative, association, private enterprise or foundation, for personal purposes, material or moral, or to favour a third party or another legal person in which he or she has a direct or indirect interest.

Sub-paragraph 2: Misappropriation of property in the private sector

Article 243-54

Is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, any person who directs a private sector entity or works for such an entity in any capacity whatsoever and who, intentionally, in the context of economic, financial or commercial activities, misappropriates any property or any private funds or securities or any other thing of value which have been entrusted to him or her by reason of his or her functions.

Sous-section 2

Offences assimilated to corruption Paragraph 1: Offences against public property

Article 243-55

The following property has the character of public property: property belonging to the following institutions and bodies:

1°) the State and public authorities; 2°) State Companies and Enterprises; 3°) Public Establishments;
4°) cooperative bodies, unions, associations or federations of such bodies;

5°) Associations recognised as being of Public Utility;

6°) bodies of an industrial or commercial nature in which the State or other public authorities hold a fraction of the share capital.

The property referred to in the preceding paragraph includes:

1°) monies, funds, coins, fiduciary securities and generally all securities having an estimated value in money, which have entered the coffers or which are collected to be paid into the coffers of the State, public authorities or the bodies referred to in the first paragraph above;

2°) active securities representing such monies;

3°) payment instruments and securities, transferable securities; 4°) documents containing or effecting obligation or discharge;
5°) movable property, materials, equipment, weapons, ammunition, goods, foodstuffs or any objects whatsoever;

6°) immovable property titles.

Article 243-56

Any official, civil or military within the meaning of article 241-14 of this Code, any agent or employee of the State, public authorities or the bodies referred to in the preceding article, who commits an offence against public property by one of the following means: fraudulent misappropriation, embezzlement or breach of trust, fraud, forgery and use of forgery, other malfeasance, is punished by the penalties provided for in this article.

Are considered as accomplices, the heads of State companies and enterprises, officials and agents of the State or enterprises, persons responsible for control who, by failing in the duties of their offices, facilitate or cover up offences against public property.

In all the cases cited in the preceding paragraphs:

1°) when the amount of the damage is less than ten million francs, the penalty is five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs;

2°) when the amount of the damage is equal to ten million but less than twenty million francs, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs;

3°) when the amount of the damage is equal to or greater than twenty million francs, but less than fifty million francs, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs;

4°) when the amount of the damage exceeds fifty million francs, the penalty is life imprisonment and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

A prohibition on residence of twenty years may be imposed in the cases provided for in 2° and 3° above.

Paragraphe 2

Unlawful and abusive use and retention of public property by a public agent

Article 243-57

Is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs any public agent within the meaning of article 241-14 of this Code who knowingly and unlawfully retains for his or her own benefit or for the benefit of another person or entity, any property, any public funds or securities, or any thing of value which have been entrusted to him or her either by virtue of a contract or by reason of his or her functions, or who makes unlawful and abusive use of public property.

Paragraphe 3 : Unjustified advantages and corruption in public procurement

Article 243-58

Is punishable by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs:

1°) any official or public agent within the meaning of article 241-14 of this Code who enters into, endorses or reviews a contract, an agreement, a public order or an amendment in violation of the legislative and regulatory provisions in force with a view to procuring an unjustified advantage for another person;

2°) any merchant, industrialist, artist or artisan, private sector contractor or in general, any natural or legal person who enters into, even on an occasional basis, a contract or a public order with the State, Territorial Authorities, public law establishments or bodies and State companies by taking advantage of the authority or influence of the agents of the aforementioned bodies to increase the prices they normally and habitually charge or to modify, to their advantage, the quality of goods or services or the delivery or supply deadlines.

Article 243-59

Is punishable by the penalties provided for in article 243-58 above, anyone who compels or attempts to compel by force or threats, corrupts or attempts to corrupt by promise, offer, gift or present, a public agent, whether or not the attempt has been successful.

Article 243-60

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine equivalent to three times the amount or value of the benefit received or to be received, any public official or public agent within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code who, on the occasion of the preparation, negotiation, conclusion or execution of a public order, contract or amendment concluded in the name of the State or Territorial Authorities, public establishments of the State or State-owned companies, receives or attempts to receive, directly or indirectly, for his own benefit or for the benefit of a third party, remuneration or a benefit of any nature whatsoever from a private contractor.

Article 243-61

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine equivalent to twice the promises accepted, undue benefits, things received or requested of the value of a public order and a prohibition from bidding on public contracts for two years, any natural or legal person contracting with the State or Territorial Authorities, public establishments of the State or State-owned companies who grants or proposes remuneration or any benefit by himself or through an intermediary to a public agent with a view to obtaining a public order.

Article 243-62

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine equivalent to twice the promises accepted, undue benefits, things received or requested, of the value of the public order, any public official or public agent within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code who abusively resorts to the direct agreement procedure in a public order concluded in the name of the State or Territorial Authorities, public establishments of the State or State-owned companies.

Paragraphe 4 : De la surfacturation

Article 243-63

Is punished by imprisonment of five years, confiscation of the amount received as a rebate and a fine equivalent to three times the value received without this fine being less than 2,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by the regulations on public procurement, any public agent who proceeds or causes to proceed with the invoicing, for an amount higher than its actual cost, of a good or service to be acquired by an entity of the national or local public administration.

Paragraphe 5 : De la concussion

Article 243-64

Public officials or public agents within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code, their clerks or agents who, with fraudulent intent, order the collection of and demand or receive what they know is not due for duties, taxes, contributions, revenues, salaries or wages are punished by:

1°) imprisonment of five years if the total of the sums unduly demanded or received or whose collection is ordered is less than 50,000 francs;

2°) imprisonment of ten years, if the total of the sums unduly demanded or received or whose collection is ordered is equal to or greater than 50,000 francs.

The attempt of this offence is punished as the offence itself.

Paragraphe 6 : Des exonérations et franchises illégales

Article 243-65

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine increased to ten times the value of the property or right compromised, any public agent who, for whatever reason, in an illegal manner, grants exemptions or franchises from taxes, duties, fines, bonds and other rights or gives free of charge or sells at a low price, public property in violation of laws and regulations.

Paragraphe 7

De l'ingérence des personnes physiques dépositaires de l'autorité publique ou chargées d'une mission de service public ou investies d'un mandat électif dans les affaires du commerce incompatible avec leur qualité

Sous paragraphe 1: Du conflit d'intérêts et de la prise illégale d'intérêt

Article 243-66

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any public agent within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code whose private interests coincide with the public interest and are likely to influence the normal exercise of his functions, and who does not inform his hierarchical superior thereof.

Article 243-67

Any public official, under the terms of Article 241-14 of this Code who, either openly, or by simulated acts, or by interposition of persons, takes or receives any interest whatsoever in acts, adjudications, enterprises or administrations of which he has or had at the time of the act, in whole or in part the administration or supervision, or in a matter of which he was responsible for ordering payment or making the settlement, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine which cannot exceed one quarter of the restitutions and compensation.

Any public official responsible by reason of his very function, for the supervision or direct control of a private enterprise and who, either on leave or availability status, or after admission to retirement, or in a position of dismissal or revocation and for a period of five years from the cessation of the function, except in the case of hereditary devolution with regard to capital, takes or receives a participation through work, advice or capital in the concessions, enterprises or administrations which were directly subject to his supervision or control, is punished by the same penalty of imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

The managers of a concession, enterprise, administration, considered as accomplices, are subject to the same penalties.

The guilty parties may, in addition, be declared incapable of exercising a public function for five years.

Article 243-68

The act for a natural person holding public authority within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code, of taking, receiving or keeping directly or indirectly, any interest whatsoever in an enterprise or operation of which he has, at the time of the act, in whole or in part, responsibility for ensuring the supervision, administration, settlement or payment is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine which cannot exceed one quarter of the restitutions and compensation.

Sous paragraphe 2: Du népotisme et du favoritisme

Article 243-69

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and prohibition from exercising a function in the national public administration for a period of five years, any political personality, any public agent, any member of the defence and security forces who uses his function or uses his influence, to procure directly or indirectly any undue material benefit, or employment, to a member of his family in the direct line or in the collateral line up to the third degree.

Article 243-70

Any natural person holding public authority within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code, who procures or attempts to procure for another an unjustified benefit by an act contrary to the rules of the Public Procurement Code, intended to guarantee freedom of access and equality of candidates in public contracts, is punished by imprisonment of eighteen months and a fine of 100,000,000 francs.

Without prejudice to disciplinary proceedings, the perpetrator may in addition be prohibited from exercising the functions he held at the time of the award of the contracts for a period equal to or less than three years.

The court seized may order the publication at the expense of the convicted person of all or an extract of its decision in a legal notices newspaper.

Article 243-71

Offences relating to the methods of awarding public contracts and the legal threshold for awarding public contracts are punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, without prejudice to compensation for damage suffered by the contracting authority.

Article 243-72 : Splitting of expenditure is an offence

The persons designated in Article 243-70 above, perpetrators or accomplices of splitting of expenditure, are punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 francs.

Article 243-73

The persons designated in Article 243-70 above who, in the absence of any derogation, award public contracts to contractors, suppliers or service providers excluded from the award of public contracts in accordance with the laws and regulations in force, are punishable by the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Article 243-74

Public officials, State agents and any other person responsible for monitoring the execution of a public contract who, through negligence or fraud, voluntarily refrain from sending periodic reports to the contracting authority on compliance with the performance schedule and on any failures by the contract holder, if this has resulted in damage to the contracting authority equal to fifty per cent of the initial contract amount, are punishable by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

However, if the damage is less than fifty per cent, they are punishable by a fine at least equal to the amount of the damage.

Article 243-75

The perpetrators or accomplices of deliberate inaccuracies committed in the justifications of eligibility for public contracts are punishable in accordance with Articles 243-43, 243-44 and 243-45 of this Code.

Article 243-76

All other types of fraud, not specified in Articles 243-69, 243-70, 243-71, 243-72, 243-73 and 243-74 of this Code, intended to procure or attempt to procure for another person an unjustified advantage by an act contrary to the rules of the Public Procurement Code aimed at guaranteeing freedom of access and equality of candidates in public contracts, are punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 243-70 above.

Article 243-77

The following are punishable in accordance with the provisions of this Code punishing corruption:
1°) tenderers who have used promises, offers or gifts for the purpose of acquiring a public contract;
2°) persons responsible for the preparation of public contracts and members of the tender opening and evaluation committee who have solicited or accepted offers or promises, solicited or received gifts or presents for the purpose of undermining freedom of access and equality of candidates in public contracts.

Paragraphe 8 : Du trafic d'influence et de l'abus de fonction

Article 243-78

Any person who solicits or accepts offers or promises, solicits or receives gifts or presents in order to obtain or attempt to obtain decorations, medals, distinctions, rewards, positions, functions or employment or any favours granted by the public authority, contracts, undertakings or other benefits resulting from contracts concluded with the public authority or an administration placed under the control of the public authority, or, in general, a favourable decision from such an authority or administration and thus abuses real or supposed influence, is punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 243-48 of this Code.

Article 243-79

Anyone who, in order to obtain either the performance or obtaining of an act, or one of the advantages or favours provided for in the preceding articles, uses violence or threats, promises, offers, gifts or presents, or yields to solicitations tending to corruption, even if he does not take the initiative, is, whether or not the corruption has produced its effect, punishable by the penalties laid down by Article 243-48 of this Code against the corrupted person.

Article 243-80

The act, for a public agent, of intentionally abusing his functions or position, by performing or refraining from performing, in the exercise of his functions, an act in violation of laws and regulations in order to obtain an undue advantage for himself or for another person or entity, is punishable by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Article 243-81

Where the corruption or influence peddling relates to a criminal act carrying a heavier penalty than that laid down in Article 243-48 of this Code, that heavier penalty shall be applied to the offender.

The corruptor is never granted restitution of the things delivered by him, nor of their value; these are confiscated.

The custodial sentence incurred by the perpetrator or accomplice of the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of this article is reduced by two thirds if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, he has made it possible to bring the offence to an end or to identify, where appropriate, the other perpetrators or accomplices.

Paragraphe 9 : De l'utilisation d'informations non connues du public

Article 243-82

Any agent of the public or private sector who exploits, in anticipation, knowingly, information not known to the public of a nature to break equality of opportunity or which would influence the course of any economic activity and of which he became aware by virtue of his situation or position, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 20,000,000 francs which may be up to ten times the value of the profit made.

The trial court orders ex officio the confiscation of the property and income that are the subject of the offence.

Paragraphe 10 : Du commerce incompatible

Article 243-83

Any public agent engaging in commercial or lucrative activities other than the marketing of his non-industrial, literary, scientific and artistic agro-pastoral productions is punishable by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

In addition, confiscation of the means of such trade or lucrative activity is ordered.

Paragraphe 11 : De la simulation illicite

Article 243-84

Any person in the private sector who agrees to represent a public agent, acquires property or engages in commercial or lucrative activities on his behalf pursuant to a written or verbal nominee agreement, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs.
The public agent, party to such nominee agreement, is punishable by the same penalties, notwithstanding the administrative and disciplinary sanctions to which he may be subject.
In addition, the trial court orders ex officio the confiscation of the property and income that are the subject of the offence.

Paragraphe 13 : Du défaut ou de la fausse déclaration d'intérêt ou de patrimoine

Article 243-85

Any public agent legally subject to a declaration of interest or assets who, three months after a written formal notice from the institution responsible for combating illicit enrichment, knowingly fails to make a declaration of his assets or makes an incomplete, inaccurate or false declaration or knowingly makes false observations or deliberately violates the obligations imposed on him by law, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 14: Disclosure of information

Article 243-86

Any agent of the authority holding declarations of interest and assets or of the registry offices found guilty of having disclosed, except in cases provided for by law, in any manner whatsoever, totally or partially, declarations of interest or assets or observations received, shall be punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 15: Offence of acceptance or offer of undue gifts

Article 243-87

Any public agent who accepts from a person or grants to a person a gift or any undue advantage likely to influence the handling of a procedure or transaction in progress related to his functions or having a connection with such handling or such transaction shall be punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

The donor shall be punished by the same penalties.

Sous-section 3: Receiving the proceeds of corruption and related offences

Article 243-88

Any person who, knowingly, receives, conceals or continuously retains in whole or in part, property knowing that said property comes from one of the offences provided for in this section shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Sous-section 4: Laundering the proceeds of corruption and related offences

Article 243-89

The following constitute laundering of the proceeds of corruption and related offences:

a) the conversion, transfer or assignment of ownership knowing that such ownership is the proceeds of acts of corruption or related offences with a view to hiding or disguising the illicit origin of the ownership or assisting any person involved in the perpetration of the offence to escape the legal consequences of his action;

b) the concealment or disguising of the true nature, source, location, disposition, movement or ownership or rights concerning ownership which is the proceeds of acts of corruption or related offences;

c) the acquisition, possession or use of ownership knowing, at the time of its receipt, that such ownership is the fruit of acts of corruption or related offences;

d) whether or not such operations have a transnational character.

The laundering of the proceeds of the offences referred to in this section shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the uniform law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

Section 4

Protection of witnesses, experts, whistleblowers and victims

Article 243-90

No one may be excluded from a recruitment procedure or from access to an internship or training period in a company, no employee may be sanctioned, dismissed or subjected to discriminatory measures, direct or indirect, particularly regarding remuneration, training, reclassification, assignment, qualification, classification, professional promotion, transfer or contract renewal for having reported or testified, either to his employer or to judicial or administrative authorities, about facts qualified as an offence within the meaning of this chapter of which he became aware in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.

No civil servant or public agent, civil or military, may be sanctioned or subjected to discriminatory measures, direct or indirect, for having reported or testified, either to the hierarchical authority or to judicial or administrative authorities, about facts qualified as an offence within the meaning of this chapter of which he became aware in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.

Article 243-91

Any person who resorts to physical or moral violence, revenge, intimidation or threat in any form whatsoever and in any manner whatsoever, against the person of witnesses, experts, whistleblowers or victims or their relatives or other persons close to them shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Any person who reveals the identity or address of a witness having benefited from the protection provisions provided for in this chapter shall be punished by the same penalties, without prejudice to other repressive provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure regarding the protection of persons referred to in the above paragraph.

Article 243-92: The protection period begins

1°) for the person who reported the crime or offence on the date of receipt of the report by the competent authority;

2°) for the person associated with the investigation and his counsel, on the date on which they were associated with the investigation.

The duration of protection is set at three years from the date of closure of the investigation report or of a final judicial conviction.

Article 243-93

The protection granted to the person who reports a crime or offence shall be lifted on the date of closure of the investigation report if it contains sufficient elements to conclude that the person who reported the crime or offence acted knowing full well that such report was not sincere.

Article 243-94

The protection granted to the person associated with the investigation shall be lifted on the date of closure of the investigation report if it contains sufficient elements to conclude that the associated person deliberately provided dishonest information, not in conformity with reality and manifestly incomplete to the investigators.

Article 243-95

If during the protection period, measures referred to in Article 243-90 above are taken against the protected person, once he presents factual elements that allow the presumption that he reported or testified in good faith about facts constituting an offence or a crime, the burden of proof that no measure or threat of measure is or has been taken or formulated lies with the authority presumed to have taken such measure or threat of measure.

Article 243-96

On the basis of the final conviction, the employer shall reinstate within three months following such decision the person who was subjected to a measure in violation of Article 243-90 above.

After this period, the labour court or the administrative court seized shall order the reinstatement of the person who was subjected to non-renewal of contract, dismissal or revocation or any other measure affecting the conditions or circumstances of his work.

This decision is not subject to appeal.

Article 243-97

The whistleblower is a natural person who reveals or reports, in a disinterested manner and in good faith, a crime or offence, a threat or serious harm to the general interest, of which he has personally become aware.

Facts, information or documents, whatever their form or medium, covered by national defence secrecy, medical secrecy or the secrecy of relations between a lawyer and his client are excluded from the alert regime defined by this article.

TITRE V: TERRORISM

Chapitre 1: Acts of terrorism

[Loi n°08-025 du 23 juillet 2008 portant répression du terrorisme au Mali]

Article 251-1 : Constitute acts of terrorism

1°) the act of hijacking an aircraft, a ship or a vehicle by violence, threat of violence or any other form of intimidation; seizing an aircraft, a ship or a fixed platform in order to exercise control over it;

2°) the act of compromising the security of an aircraft, the services of an airport, a railway station or a river wharf, the navigation of a ship, by knowingly communicating false information;

3°) the act of committing an act of violence:
against one or more persons on board an aircraft in flight, a ship, a fixed platform or a vehicle, if such act is likely to compromise the security of that aircraft, the navigation of the ship or the platform or the vehicle;
using a device, a substance or a weapon, in an airport, an aerodrome, a railway station or a river wharf, an act of violence which causes or is likely to cause serious violence or death, if such act, in the case of an airport, is likely to compromise its security.

4°) the act of destroying an aircraft in service, a ship, a fixed platform, a vehicle, air or maritime navigation facilities or services, including the facilities of an airport serving international civil aviation;

5°) the act of damaging:
an aircraft in service, a ship, its cargo or a fixed platform, a vehicle in such a way as to compromise its security;
the facilities of an airport serving international aviation, an aircraft parked at the airport.

6°) the act of disrupting the services of the airport, using a device, a substance or a weapon; if such act is likely to compromise security at that airport;

7°) the act of interrupting, disrupting air or maritime navigation services, disrupting their operation, if any of these acts is likely to compromise the security of an aircraft in flight or the navigation of a ship;

8°) the act of attempting to sabotage a train, or a watercraft, using an explosive or substance capable of destroying said train or watercraft, causing damage to it that renders it unfit for circulation or navigation;

9°) the act of placing or causing to be placed on an aircraft in service, a ship or a fixed platform, a vehicle, by any means whatsoever, a device or substances capable of destroying the aircraft, the ship, the vehicle or the fixed platform, or causing damage to it likely to compromise its security;

10°) the act of threatening to commit any of the offences provided for in this chapter if such threat is likely to compromise the security of an aircraft, a ship or a fixed platform, a vehicle with the aim of compelling a natural or legal person to perform or refrain from performing any act.

Article 251-2 : Also constitute acts of terrorism

1°) the act of seizing a person or detaining them and threatening to kill them, injure them or continue to detain them in order to compel a State, an international organization, intergovernmental organization, a natural or legal person or a group of persons to perform any act or refrain from doing so as an explicit or implicit condition for the release of the person;

2°) the act of seizing under the same conditions and for the same purposes a civilian or any other person who does not participate directly in hostilities in a situation of armed conflict;

3°) the act of recruiting and using children under eighteen years of age by groups involved in acts of terrorism, regardless of the function that the children perform therein;

4°) the act of committing murder, kidnapping or another attack against the person or liberty of a person enjoying international protection;

5°) the act of committing, by resorting to violence, against the official premises, private residence or means of transport of a person enjoying international protection an attack likely to endanger their person or liberty;

6°) the act of threatening to commit such an attack;

7°) the act of delivering, placing, exploding or detonating an explosive device or any other lethal device, in or against a public place, a Government facility or other public facility, a public transport system or infrastructure:
with the intent to cause death or serious bodily harm;
with the intent to cause massive destruction to the places and property referred to above, when such destruction causes or is likely to cause considerable economic losses.

Article 251-3 : Also constitute acts of terrorism

1°) when, either by their nature or their context, they are intended to intimidate a population or to compel a Government or an international organization to perform or abstain from performing any act:
the act of using against or on board a ship or a fixed platform, or of discharging from a ship or a fixed platform, explosives, radioactive materials or biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, in a manner that causes or is likely to cause death or serious bodily or material damage;
the act of discharging, from a ship or a fixed platform, hydrocarbons, liquefied natural gas, or other harmful or potentially dangerous substances, which are not covered by the preceding paragraph, in quantities or concentrations that cause or are likely to cause serious bodily or material damage;
the act of using a ship in a manner that causes death or serious bodily or material damage;
the act of threatening to commit any of the offences referred to above;

2°) the act of transporting on board a ship:
explosives or radioactive materials, knowing that they are intended to cause or to threaten to cause death, serious bodily or material damage, such threat being accompanied or not by a condition, in order to intimidate a population or to compel a Government or an international organization to perform or abstain from performing any act;
any biological, chemical or nuclear weapon, knowing that it is such a weapon;
source materials or special fissionable materials, equipment or materials specially designed or prepared for the processing, use or production of special fissionable materials, knowing that such materials, products or equipment are intended for a nuclear explosive activity or any other nuclear activity not subject to safeguards under a comprehensive safeguards agreement of the International Atomic Energy Agency;
equipment, materials or software or related technologies that contribute significantly to the design, manufacture or delivery of a biological, chemical or nuclear weapon;
any person knowing that such person has committed an act that constitutes an offence covered by this chapter, with the intention of helping them to evade criminal prosecution;

3°) the concealment, transfer, alteration, disposal or dispersal of nuclear materials, without the required authorization, resulting in or likely to result in death or serious injury to others or substantial damage to property or the environment;

4°) the possession of nuclear materials, without the required authorization, resulting in or likely to result in the death of a person or causing them serious bodily harm or with the intention of causing substantial damage to property or the environment;

5°) the use of radioactive materials or devices in any manner whatsoever or the use or damaging of a nuclear facility so as to release or risk releasing radioactive materials:
with the intention of causing the death of a person or causing them serious bodily harm;
with the intention of causing substantial damage to property or the environment;
with the intention of compelling a natural or legal person, an international organization or a Government to perform or not perform an act.

6°) simple theft or aggravated theft of nuclear materials;

7°) the diversion or any other unlawful appropriation of nuclear materials;

8°) the transport, dispatch or movement of nuclear materials to or from a State without the required authorization;

9°) the act directed against a nuclear facility, or disrupting its operation by which the perpetrator intentionally causes or knows that they may cause death or serious injury to others or substantial damage to property or the environment as a result of exposure to radiation or the release of radioactive substances unless such act is undertaken in accordance with the law of the State on whose territory the nuclear facility is located;

10°) the act of demanding:
nuclear materials for the purpose of causing death or serious injury to others or substantial damage to property or the environment or of committing the offence described in point 251-3.3 of this article;
the commission of one of the offences described in points 251-3.6 and 251-3.9 of this article for the purpose of compelling a natural or legal person, an international organization or a State to do or abstain from doing an act;
the commission in circumstances that make the threat credible, of one of the offences covered by this Code.

Article 251-4 : Also constitute acts of terrorism

1°) the act of participating in the commission of one of the offences provided for in articles 251-1, 251-3 and 257-1 of this Code;

2°) the act of organizing, instigating or facilitating the commission of one of the said offences by one or more other persons knowing their intention.

Article 251-5

Also constitute acts of terrorism, when they are intentionally in connection with an individual or collective enterprise aimed at seriously disturbing public order through intimidation or terror:

1°) computer offences as defined by this Code;

2°) harbouring of criminals, forgery, the offence relating to combat groups or dissolved movements as defined by this Code and ratified conventions;

3°) the acquisition, possession, transport or illegal carrying of explosive substances or devices manufactured using such substances;

4°) the possession, carrying and transport of weapons and ammunition of war or defence defined by law;

5°) the act of introducing, spreading on the ground, in the atmosphere, the subsoil or waters, a substance likely to endanger the health of humans or animals or the natural environment.

Article 251-6 : Terrorist offences of a criminal nature are not subject to a statute of limitations

Article 251-7

The offences provided for by this chapter when they are of a criminal nature are punishable by life imprisonment.

However, when the act of terrorism has resulted in the death of one or more persons, it is punished by the death penalty.

In all cases, a fine of 10,000,000 francs is imposed.

In addition, a residence ban of ten years may be imposed for nationals and a temporary or permanent ban from the national territory for foreigners.

Nevertheless, the person who has attempted to commit an act of terrorism is exempted from punishment if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, they have made it possible to prevent the commission of the offence and to identify, where applicable, their co-perpetrators.

However, a residence ban may be imposed on the said person if they are a national or a ban from the territory if they are a foreigner.

Article 251-8

Subject to the provisions provided for by the Code of Criminal Procedure, children associated with a group involved in acts of terrorism, being victims of recruitment and/or use by this group, are not prosecuted for the sole fact of their association with the group, nor for acts that they are driven to commit during their association. These children are transferred without delay to the civil child protection authorities for their social reintegration.

Chapter 2: Preparatory acts

Article 252-1

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, whoever provides or facilitates the provision of weapons as defined in Article 132-48 of this Code, knowing that they may be used for the commission of one of the offences provided for in this title.

Article 252-2

Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 252-1 above, whoever recruits, maintains or provides training to another person to commit or participate in the commission of one of the offences provided for in this title or asks them to commit or participate in the commission of one of these offences or to join an association or group, with the intention or knowing that the purpose of this recruitment or request is to participate in the commission of one or more offences provided for in this title.

Article 252-3: Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 252-1 above

1°) the national who travels or attempts to travel to a State other than their State of residence or of which they are a national, or any person who leaves or attempts to leave the national territory to travel to a State other than their State of residence or nationality, with the intent to commit, organize or prepare acts of terrorism, to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism;

2°) any person who deliberately provides or collects, by any means whatsoever, directly or indirectly, funds which they intend to use or which they know will be used to finance the travel of persons who travel to a State other than their State of residence or of which they are nationals, with the intent to commit, organize or prepare acts of terrorism, or to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism;

3°) any person who, on the national territory, deliberately organizes the travel of persons who travel to a State other than their State of residence of which they are nationals, with the intent to commit, organize or prepare acts of terrorism, or to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism, or participation in other activities that facilitate these acts, including recruitment.

Article 252-4

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, the act for a person of being unable to justify resources corresponding to their lifestyle, while being in regular contact with one or more persons engaging in one or more of the terrorist acts defined in this title.

Article 252-5

Constitutes an act of terrorism and punished by a penalty of imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, the act of training or being trained in the handling of weapons or any form of combat, in the manufacture or use of explosive, incendiary, nuclear, radiological, biological or chemical substances or in the piloting of aircraft for terrorist purposes.

Article 252-6

Constitutes an act of terrorism and punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, the act of habitually consulting, for terrorist purposes, one or more communication services of acts of terrorism.

Chapter 3

Criminal association with a view to perpetrating acts of terrorism

Article 253-1

The act of participating in a group formed or an agreement established with a view to preparing one of the terrorist acts characterized by one or more material facts is punished by imprisonment of ten years.

Article 253-2

The act of directing or organizing the group or agreement is punished by imprisonment of thirty years.

Chapter 4: Harbouring of terrorists

Article 254-1

Those who, knowing the actions of individuals committing terrorist acts or any other provided for in this title, habitually provide them with lodging, place of retreat or meeting, are punished by imprisonment of ten years.

Article 254-2

Those who knowingly harbour a person whom they know is sought by justice, for acts provided for in this title or who remove them or attempt to remove them from arrest or searches, or help them to hide or take flight, even if they are members of their families, are punished by imprisonment of ten years.

Chapter 5: Apology for terrorism

Article 255-1

Any person who, by any means, calls for or incites the commission of terrorist offences, incites ethnic, racial or religious fanaticism or uses a name, term, symbol, public expressions of support for acts of terrorism and/or terrorist groups, disseminates hate speech or promotes ideologies favourable to terrorism, reinforces ethnic and religious tensions likely to provide a basis for terrorism, or uses any other sign for the purpose of making an apology for an organization qualified as terrorist, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

The penalties are increased to imprisonment of seven years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs when the acts were committed using an online public communication service.

When the acts are committed through the written or audiovisual press or online public communication, the particular provisions of the laws governing these matters are applicable with regard to the determination of the persons responsible.

Chapter 6: Recruitment of terrorists

Article 256-1

Whoever recruits a person to commit or participate in the commission of one or more of the offences provided for in this title, with the intention or knowing that the purpose of this recruitment or request is to participate in the commission of one or more offences provided for in this title, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Chapter 7: Financing of terrorism

[Law No. 2016/08 of 17 March 2016 establishing uniform law on the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism].

Section 1

Criminalization of the financing of terrorism Article 257-1: Financing of terrorism means:
1°) any act committed by a natural or legal person who, by any means whatsoever, directly or indirectly, has deliberately provided or collected property, funds and other financial resources with the intention of using them or knowing that they will be used, in whole or in part, for the commission of:

a)	one or more terrorist acts;

b)	one or more terrorist acts by a terrorist organization;

c)	one or more terrorist acts by a terrorist or a group of terrorists;

2°) the act by any person on Malian territory of collecting, providing, managing and making available funds, securities, financial assets, economic resources, financial services or other related services or any property whatsoever with the intention of using them or knowing that such funds, securities, financial assets, economic resources, financial services or other related services or any property whatsoever are intended to finance the travel of individuals to a third country other than their country of residence or of which they hold nationality for the purpose of perpetrating, planning, preparing or participating in terrorist acts, or to administer or receive terrorist training or simply to provide for needs related to terrorism.

The attempt to commit an offense of financing of terrorism or the act of aiding, inciting or assisting someone to commit it, or the act of facilitating its execution, also constitutes an offense of financing of terrorism.

The offense is committed whether or not the act referred to in this article occurs, or whether or not the property has been used to commit such act.

The offense is also committed by any natural or legal person who participates as an accomplice, organizes or incites others to commit the aforementioned acts.
Knowledge or intent, as elements of the aforementioned activities, may be inferred from objective factual circumstances.

Section 2

Failure or delay in reporting suspicious transactions related to the financing of terrorism

Article 257-2

When factual circumstances lead to the inference that sums of money or transactions involving sums of money may originate from a money laundering offense as defined in Article 7 of the uniform law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of the same law must be made immediately.

The same applies to attempted suspicious transactions.

Article 257-3

Persons, managers and agents of natural or legal persons subject to reporting obligations in the area of combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism who have intentionally failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of said law, including in the context of attempted suspicious transactions, or made a late report, when the circumstances led to the inference that the sums of money could originate from a money laundering offense as defined in Article 7 of said law, are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of not less than 1,500,000 francs.

Persons, managers and agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism who have unintentionally:

1°) failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, including in the context of attempted suspicious transactions, or made a late report;

2°) violated the provisions of Articles 16, 18 to 40 and 79 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

are also punished by a fine of 750,000 francs.

Section 3: Refusal of any justification

Article 257-4

No consideration of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious nature or any other motive may be taken into account to justify the commission of the offense referred to in Article 257-1 of this Code.

Section 4: Criminal sanctions incurred by natural persons

Article 257-5

Natural persons guilty of an offense of financing of terrorism are punished by a term of imprisonment of ten years and a fine equal to at least five times the value of the property or funds that were the subject of the financing of terrorism operations.

The attempt to finance terrorism is punished by the same penalties.

Section 5: Aggravating circumstances

Article 257-6

The penalties provided for in Article 257-3 of this Code are doubled:

1° when the offense of financing of terrorism is committed habitually or by using the facilities provided by the exercise of a professional activity;

2°) when the perpetrator of the offense is in a state of recidivism. In this case, convictions pronounced abroad are taken into account to establish recidivism;

3°) when the offense of financing of terrorism is committed by an organized gang.

When the crime or offense from which the property or sums of money that were the subject of the offense of financing of terrorism originates is punished by a custodial sentence of a duration greater than that of the imprisonment incurred under Article 257-3 above, the financing of terrorism is punished by the penalties attached to the related offense of which its perpetrator had knowledge and, if this offense is accompanied by aggravating circumstances, by the penalties attached only to the circumstances of which he had knowledge.

Article 257-7

The following persons and directors or agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of the Uniform Act on the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism are punished by imprisonment of four years and a fine of 3,000,000 francs, when they have intentionally:

1°) made disclosures to the owner of the sums or to the perpetrator of the acts referred to in Article 8 of the said Act, concerning the declaration they are required to make or the action taken thereon, or failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of the said Act, including in the context of attempted suspicious transactions, or made a late declaration;

2°) destroyed or removed documents or records relating to the operations and transactions referred to in Articles 32, 33, 35 and 37 to 40 of the said Act;

3°) carried out or attempted to carry out under a false identity one of the operations referred to in the provisions of Articles 18 and 21, 26 to 34, 36, 38 to 40 and 50 to 58 of the said Act;

4°) informed, by any means, the person or persons subject to the investigation conducted for acts of financing of terrorism of which they became aware by reason of their profession or functions;

5°) made false declarations or communications when carrying out one of the operations referred to in the provisions of Articles 24 to 39 of the said Act;

6°) communicated information or documents to persons other than the judicial authorities, State agents responsible for the detection and prosecution of offences related to the financing of terrorism acting under a judicial mandate, supervisory authorities and the National Financial Intelligence Processing Unit (CENTIF);

7°) contravened the obligations to implement administrative freezing measures.

The following persons and directors or agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of the said Act are punished by a fine of 1,500,000 francs, when they have unintentionally:

1°) failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of the said Act;

2°) contravened the due diligence and suspicious transaction reporting obligations imposed on them by the provisions of this Title.

Section 6

Optional additional criminal sanctions incurred by natural persons

Article 257-8

Natural persons guilty of the offences defined in Articles 257-1 and 257-5 of this Title may also incur the following additional penalties:

1°) permanent ban from the national territory or for a period of seven years, pronounced against any convicted foreigner;

2°) residence ban, for a period of seven years, in certain administrative districts;

3°) prohibition from leaving the national territory and withdrawal of passport, for a period of five years;

4°) deprivation of civil and political rights, for a period of five years;

5°) prohibition from driving motorized land, sea and air vehicles and withdrawal of permits or licenses, for a period of ten years;

6°) permanent or ten-year prohibition from exercising the profession or activity in connection with which the offence was committed and prohibition from exercising a public function;

7°) prohibition from issuing cheques other than those which allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those which are certified, and prohibition from using payment cards for a period of five to ten years;

8°) prohibition from possessing or carrying a weapon subject to authorization for a period of ten years;

9°) confiscation of all or part of the convicted person's assets of lawful origin;

10°) confiscation of the property or thing which was used or intended to commit the offence or the thing which is the product thereof, with the exception of objects capable of restitution.

Article 257-9

No sanction pronounced for an offence of financing of terrorism may be accompanied by a suspended sentence.

Section 7: Criminal sanctions incurred by legal persons

Article 257-10

Legal persons other than the State, on whose account or for whose benefit an offence of financing of terrorism or one of the related offences has been committed by one of their organs or representatives, are punished by a fine at a rate equal to five times that incurred by natural persons, without prejudice to the conviction of the latter as perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts.

Legal persons other than the State may, in addition, be sentenced to one or more of the following penalties:

1°) exclusion from public contracts, permanently or for a period of up to ten years;

2°) confiscation of the property which was used or intended to commit the offence or the property which is the product thereof;

3°) placement under judicial supervision, for a period of up to five years;

4°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of up to ten years, from exercising directly or indirectly one or more professional or social activities in connection with which the offence was committed;

5°) permanent or up to ten-year closure of the establishments or one of the establishments of the enterprise which was used to commit the incriminated acts;

6°) dissolution, when they were created to commit the incriminated acts;

7°) posting of the decision pronounced or dissemination thereof, by the written press or by any audiovisual means of communication, at the expense of the convicted legal person.

The sanctions provided for in points 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the second paragraph of this Article are not applicable to financial institutions subject to a supervisory authority with disciplinary powers.

The competent supervisory authority, referred to by the public prosecutor of any prosecution initiated against a financial institution, may take appropriate sanctions, in accordance with the specific legislative and regulatory texts in force.

Section 8: Grounds for exemption from criminal sanctions

Article 257-11

Any person guilty, on the one hand, of participation in an association or agreement with a view to committing one of the offences provided for in this Chapter and, on the other hand, of aiding, inciting or advising a natural or legal person with a view to executing them or facilitating their execution, is exempted from criminal sanctions if, having disclosed the existence of this agreement, association, aid or advice to the judicial authority, they thereby enable, on the one hand, the identification of the other persons involved and, on the other hand, the prevention of the commission of the offences of money laundering and financing of terrorism.

Section 9: Grounds for mitigation of criminal sanctions

Article 257-12

The penalties incurred by any person, perpetrator or accomplice of one of the offences provided for in this Chapter who, before any prosecution, enables or facilitates the identification of the other guilty parties or, after the initiation of prosecution, enables or facilitates the arrest of the latter, are reduced by half. In addition, the said person is exempted from the fine and, where applicable, from accessory measures and optional additional penalties.

In matters of financing of terrorism, when the penalty incurred is life imprisonment, it is reduced to twenty years.

Section 10

Mandatory confiscation of funds and other financial resources related to the financing of terrorism

Article 257-13

In all cases of conviction for the offense of financing of terrorism or attempt, the courts shall order the confiscation for the benefit of the Public Treasury, of funds and other financial resources related to the offense as well as any movable or immovable property intended for or having served in the commission of said offense.

The State may allocate the funds and other financial resources as well as the property referred to in the first paragraph above, to a fund for combating organized crime or to the compensation of victims of the offenses provided for in Article 8 of the uniform law relating to the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism or their successors in title.

The decision ordering a confiscation shall identify and locate the funds, property and other financial resources concerned.

When the funds, property and other financial resources to be confiscated cannot be produced, their confiscation may be ordered by value.

Any person who claims to have a right over property or funds that have been the subject of a confiscation may, to be restored to their rights, seize the court that rendered the confiscation decision within a period of six months, from the notification of the decision.

The confiscation of illicit proceeds and property shall be pronounced even in the absence of a criminal conviction by reason of the extinction of the public prosecution or any other cause blocking the exercise of the public prosecution.

Section 11

Implementation of targeted financial sanctions in matters of financing of terrorism and financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Article 257-14

It is strictly prohibited for persons subject to obligations in matters of combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism and any person or entity located in Mali, to make available directly or indirectly, funds and other property, economic resources or financial services and other related services, directly or indirectly, wholly or jointly, for the benefit of designated persons or entities; and persons and entities acting on behalf of or on instructions from persons or entities designated pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolutions relating to terrorism, its financing or the financing of proliferation, except contrary authorization, in accordance with said Resolutions.

It is also strictly prohibited for the persons referred to in paragraph 1 above, to provide or continue to provide services to designated persons or entities, to persons and entities acting on behalf of or on instructions from designated persons or entities, or to use them for their benefit.

It is also prohibited for persons and entities to carry out or participate, intentionally, in operations having the purpose or effect of circumventing, directly or indirectly, the provisions of this article.

Article 257-15

Obligated persons and all persons or entities who receive an order from a client to execute on their behalf a transaction for the benefit of a person, body or entity subject to a freezing measure, shall suspend the execution of this order and inform, without delay, the competent authority.

The funds or financial instruments relating to this order shall be frozen, unless the competent authority authorizes the transaction.

Article 257-16

Persons and directors or agents of obligated natural or legal persons who act intentionally in violation of the prohibitions and suspension obligations referred to in Articles 257-14 and 257-15 above shall be punished by imprisonment of four years and a fine of 3,000,000 francs.

When they act unintentionally, the penalty is a fine of 1,500,000 francs.

LIVRE III

CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS TITLE I: INTERNATIONAL CRIMES
[Rome Statute of 17 July 1998]

Chapitre 1 : Du génocide

Article 311-1

The crime of genocide means any of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such:

a)	killing members of the group;

b)	causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group;

c)	deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part;

d)	imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;

e)	forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.

Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, upon a person in the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intent#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental,#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the#### Chapter 2: Crimes against humanity

Article 312-1

A crime against humanity means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

a)	murder;

b)	extermination;

c)	enslavement;

d)	deportation or forcible transfer of population;

e)	imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law;

f)	torture;

g)	rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;

h)	persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3, or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph;

i)	enforced disappearance of persons;

j)	the crime of apartheid;

k)	other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

2.	For the purpose of paragraph 1:

a)	"attack directed against any civilian population" means a course of conduct involving the multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph 1 against any civilian population, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational policy to commit such attack;

b)	"extermination" includes the intentional infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction of part of a population;

c)	"enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and children;

d)	"deportation or forcible transfer of population" means forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law;

e)	"torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain

Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dw#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bomb#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dw#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dw#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bomb#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are un#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dw#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives;

vi) killing or wounding a combatant who, having laid down his arms or having no longer means of defence, has surrendered at discretion;

vii) making improper use of a#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives;

vi) killing or wounding a combatant who, having laid down his arms or having no longer means of defence, has surrendered at discretion;

vii) making improper use of a#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are un#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bomb#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives;

vi) killing or wounding a combatant who, having laid down his arms or having no longer means of defence, has surrendered at discretion;

vii) making improper use of a#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives;

vi) killing or wounding a combatant who, having laid down his arms or having no longer means of defence, has surrendered at discretion;

vii) making improper use of a#### Chapter 3: War crimes

Articles 313-1: "War crimes" means:

a) the following offences:

j) wilful killing;

ii) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;

iii) wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health;

iv) extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly;

v) compelling a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power;

vi) wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or other protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial;

vii) unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;

viii) taking of hostages.

b) other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:

i) intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;

ii) intentionally directing attacks against civilian objects, that is to say, objects which are not military objectives;

iii) intentionally directing attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, as long as they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under the international law of armed conflict;

iv) intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;

v) attacking or bomb

Chapter 4: Common Provisions

Articles 314-1: All crimes provided for in this title are punishable by death. They are not subject to any statute of limitations and cannot be the subject of amnesty or pardon. Likewise, any sentence pronounced in punishment of these crimes is not subject to any statute of limitations and cannot be the subject of any amnesty or pardon.

Articles 314-2: By way of derogation from the provisions of Title II of Book 1 of this Code, a person is criminally responsible and may be punished for a crime provided for in this title if:

a) he or she commits such a crime, whether individually, jointly with another person or through another person, whether or not that other person is criminally responsible;

b) he or she orders, solicits or encourages the commission of such a crime, where there is commission or attempted commission of that crime;

c) for the purpose of facilitating the commission of such a crime, he or she aids, abets or otherwise assists in the commission or attempted commission of that crime, including by providing the means for its commission;

d) he or she in any other way contributes to the commission or attempted commission of such a crime by a group of persons acting with a common purpose. Such contribution shall be intentional and shall either:

i) be made with the aim of furthering the criminal activity or criminal purpose of the group, where such activity or purpose involves the commission of a crime within the Rome Statute; or

ii) be made in the knowledge of the intention of the group to commit the crime;

e) in respect of the crime of genocide, he or she directly and publicly incites others to commit it;

f) he or she attempts to commit such a crime by acts which, by their substantial character, constitute a commencement of execution but the crime is not completed due to circumstances independent of his or her will.

However, a person who abandons the effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevents its completion cannot be punished for the attempt if he or she has completely and voluntarily renounced the criminal purpose.

Article 314-3

A military commander or a person effectively acting as a military commander is criminally responsible for crimes provided for in this title committed by forces under his or her effective command and control, or effective authority and control, as the case may be, where he or she failed to exercise control properly over such forces in cases where:

a) that military commander or person either knew or, owing to the circumstances at the time, should have known that the forces were committing or about to commit such crimes; and

b) that military commander or person failed to take all necessary and reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent or repress their commission or to submit the matter to the competent authorities for investigation and prosecution.

Article 314-4

With respect to superior and subordinate relationships not described in the preceding article, a superior is criminally responsible for crimes committed by subordinates under his or her effective authority and control, where he or she failed to exercise control properly over such subordinates in cases where:

a) the superior either knew that the subordinates were committing or about to commit such crimes or consciously disregarded information which clearly indicated as much;

b) the crimes concerned activities that were within the effective responsibility and control of the superior; and

c) the superior failed to take all necessary and reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent or repress their commission or to submit the matter to the competent authorities for investigation and prosecution.

Articles 314-5: The fact that a crime provided for in this title was committed pursuant to an order of a Government or of a superior, whether military or civilian, shall not relieve the person who committed it of criminal responsibility, unless:

a) the person was under a legal obligation to obey orders of the Government or the superior in question;

b) the person did not know that the order was unlawful; and

c) the order was not manifestly unlawful.

For the purposes of this article, orders to commit genocide or a crime against humanity or a war crime are manifestly unlawful.

Articles 314-6: The prohibition on committing in any manner whatsoever a crime provided for in this title applies to all equally, without any distinction based on official capacity.

In particular, official capacity as Head of State or Government, member of a Government or parliament, elected representative or government official shall in no case exempt a person from criminal responsibility for a crime of genocide, crime against humanity or war crime, nor shall it constitute in itself a ground for reduction of sentence, notwithstanding any other law or any amnesty provision.

Chapter 5: Mercenarism

Articles 315-1: Shall be punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) any person, specially recruited to fight in an armed conflict and who is neither a national of a State party to the said armed conflict, nor a member of the armed forces of that State, nor sent on mission by a State other than one of those party to the conflict as a member of the armed forces of the said State, who takes or attempts to take a direct part in the hostilities for the purpose of obtaining personal advantage;

2°) any person, specially recruited to take part in a concerted act of violence aimed at overthrowing the institutions or undermining the territorial integrity of a State and who is neither a national of the State against which such act is directed, nor a member of the armed forces of the said State, nor sent on mission by a State, who takes or attempts to take part in such an act for the purpose of obtaining personal advantage.

Articles 315-2: Shall be punished by imprisonment of twenty years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, any person who directs or organizes a group whose purpose is the recruitment, employment, remuneration, equipment or military training of a person defined in the preceding article.

TITLE II: OFFENCES AGAINST THE HUMAN PERSON AND GENDER

Chapter 1: Offences against the physical or mental integrity of the person

Section 1: Homicides

Article 321-1: Homicide committed voluntarily is classified as murder

Any murder committed with premeditation or lying in wait within the meaning of articles 132-44 and 132-45 of this Code is classified as assassination.

The murder of legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or any other legitimate ascendant is classified as parricide.

Infanticide is the murder or assassination of a newborn child.

Feminicide is the murder or assassination of a woman by reason of her status as a woman.

Any attempt on the life of a person by means of substances that can cause death more or less promptly is classified as poisoning; in whatever manner such substances were used or administered and whatever the consequences.

Article 321-2

Any person guilty of assassination, parricide or poisoning is punished by death.

However, the mother, principal perpetrator or accomplice in the assassination or murder of her newborn child is punished by life imprisonment or imprisonment of twenty years, but this provision may not apply to her co-perpetrators or accomplices.

In all cases, the mother who reoffends is sentenced to death.

All wrongdoers, whatever their designation, who, in carrying out their crime, employ torture or commit acts of barbarity are punished as guilty of assassination.

Article 321-3

Murder carries the death penalty when it has preceded, accompanied or followed another crime or offence.

Murder also carries the death penalty when its purpose is to facilitate the escape or ensure the impunity of the perpetrators or accomplices of that crime or offence.

Similarly, murder carries the death penalty when it is committed for ritual or speculative purposes or when it is committed by immolation by fire.

In addition, a definitive prohibition from exercising the professional activity on the occasion of or in the exercise of which the offence was committed is pronounced against the person guilty of murder or assassination.

In all other cases, the person guilty of murder is punished by life imprisonment. A residence ban of twenty years may also be pronounced.

Article 321-4

Blows, injuries and intentional violence, exercised without intention to cause death, but having nevertheless caused it, are punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a residence ban of twenty years.

In case of premeditation or ambush, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 321-5

Involuntary homicide committed or caused by clumsiness, negligence, inattention or failure to observe regulations, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Section 2

Violation of tomb and sepulchre - removal and trafficking of organs or human bones

Article 321-6

Any individual who is guilty of violation of tomb or sepulchre or desecration of corpse, even buried, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

Article 321-7

When the violation of tomb, sepulchre or desecration of corpse has been followed by mutilation or removal of organ, the penalty is five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 321-8

Whoever engages in trafficking of human bones is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

If this trafficking concerns a human organ, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment without prejudice to more severe penalties in case of homicide.

Section 3

Blows and injuries, violence, torture Paragraph 1: Intentional blows and injuries

Article 321-9

Any individual who, intentionally, strikes blows or causes injuries or commits any other violence or assault, if these kinds of violence have resulted in illness or incapacity for personal work for more than twenty days, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

If there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment.

When the violence, injuries or blows are followed by mutilation, amputation, deprivation of the use of a limb or a sense, blindness, loss of an eye or other infirmities or illnesses, loss of a foetus, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment.

The same penalty is applicable if the violence, intentional blows and injuries, on a person reduced to slavery, result in incapacity of more than twenty days.

If there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty is twenty years' imprisonment.

When the blows, injuries or violence mentioned in this section were inflicted by the offender on the occasion of or in the exercise of his profession, a suspension of up to ten years from the exercise of that profession is pronounced in addition.

In the cases provided for in paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5, a residence ban of ten years may be pronounced.

Article 321-10

When the injuries, blows, violence or assaults have not caused any illness or incapacity for personal work of the kind mentioned in the preceding article, the offender is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

If there has been premeditation or ambush, the imprisonment is five years and the fine 150,000 francs.

Intentional violence, blows and injuries, on a person reduced to slavery, having resulted in incapacity of less than twenty days, are punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

A residence ban of ten years may in addition be pronounced.

Paragraph 2: Violence and intentional blows and injuries by reason of gender

Article 321-11

Whoever, by reason of gender, has intentionally struck blows not having caused injuries to another person is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 francs.

Whoever, by reason of gender, has intentionally struck blows having caused injuries to another person is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

In case of injury, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, if the victim is married civilly or before a minister of religion to the perpetrator, or if the perpetrator is an intimate partner of the victim, his or her ascendant or a close relative.

The penalty is ten years' imprisonment when the violence, injuries or blows by reason of gender have been followed by mutilation, amputation, deprivation of the use of a limb or a sense, blindness, loss of an eye or other infirmities or illnesses.

In the cases specified in paragraphs 3 and 4 above, if there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment.

In case of injury, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, if the victim is in a state of particular vulnerability by reason of gender, age, illness, physical or mental disability, or state of pregnancy.

If there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty is fifteen years' imprisonment.

The penalty is twenty years' imprisonment when the blows and injuries have resulted in negative consequences on the pregnancy, on the health or life of the foetus.

In the cases provided for in paragraphs 3, 6 and 8 above, a residence ban of ten years may be pronounced.

Paragraph 3: Hazing

Sub-paragraph 1: Incrimination

Article 321-12

Apart from cases of violence, threats or sexual assault, the act by a person of causing another, against his or her will or not, to undergo or commit humiliating or degrading acts or to consume alcohol or any other intoxicating substance excessively, during events or gatherings linked to school, sports and socio-educational environments is punished by the penalties provided for in the first paragraph of Article 321-11 above.

Article 321-13

The offence defined in Article 321-12 above is punished by ten years' imprisonment when it is committed on a person whose particular vulnerability, due to age, illness, infirmity, physical or mental deficiency or state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator.

Sub-paragraph 2: Criminal liability of legal persons

Article 321-14

Legal persons declared criminally liable, under the conditions provided for by Article 121-2 of this Code, for the offence defined in this paragraph incur, in addition to the fine according to the procedures provided for by Article 131-14 of this Code, the penalties provided for by Article 131-15 of this Code.

The prohibition mentioned in paragraph 2° of Article 131-15 of this Code relates to the activity in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of which the offence was committed.

Paragraphe 4 : Torture

Article 321-15

The term "torture" means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity. This term does not extend to pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.

Any act of torture is punished by imprisonment of five years.

If the violence has resulted in mutilation, amputation, deprivation of the use of a limb or a sense, blindness, loss of an eye or other infirmity or illness, the penalty is imprisonment of ten years.

If death has resulted, the death penalty is applicable.

Torture committed on a person reduced to slavery is punished by imprisonment of ten years.

If the violence on a person reduced to slavery has resulted in mutilation, amputation, deprivation of the use of a limb or a sense, blindness, loss of an eye, or other infirmity or illness, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty years.

When torture on a person reduced to slavery has been committed on a minor under fifteen years of age, on a pregnant woman, or if it has resulted in the death of the victim, the provisions of paragraph 4 are applicable.

Article 321-16

The order of a superior or a public authority cannot be invoked to justify torture.

Article 321-17

No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of armed conflict or threat of armed conflict, internal political instability or any other state of emergency, may be invoked to justify torture.

Paragraphe 5 : Involuntary injuries

Article 321-18

Anyone who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe regulations, has involuntarily inflicted blows, caused injuries, or occasioned illnesses to another, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 300,000 francs.
When the fault, even the clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe regulations of a health care worker has caused the death of a patient, caused involuntary injuries or damage of a severity resulting in dependency, the perpetrator, co-perpetrator and accomplice of the offence are punished by the penalties provided for in Articles 321-5 and in the first paragraph above.

Paragraphe 6 : Abortion

Article 321-19

Any abortion is prohibited which consists in the use of means or substances with a view to provoking the premature expulsion of the foetus, whatever the moment of the pregnancy at which this expulsion is performed for any reason other than the safeguarding of the life of the woman with the exception of incest, rape and the state of health of the mother.

Article 321-20

Except for abortions performed for therapeutic reasons or endangerment of the physical or psychological health of the mother or her life or that of the foetus, abortion voluntarily attempted or obtained in any manner whatsoever, whether by the woman or by a third party, even with her consent, is punished by imprisonment of five years, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

An aggravating circumstance is the act of imposing on a woman or girl to have an abortion by fraud, coercion or violence.

Anyone who is guilty of an abortion in the aforementioned aggravating circumstance is punished by imprisonment of ten years; if death ensues, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty years.

Article 321-21

Doctors, midwives, dental surgeons, pharmacists, as well as students or employees in pharmacy, herbalists, bandage makers, dealers in surgical instruments, nurses, masseurs, who have indicated, facilitated or practised the means of provoking abortion as defined in the preceding article, are sentenced to the penalties provided for in Article 321-20 above.

Suspension for at least five years or temporary or permanent prohibition from practising their profession may, in addition, be pronounced against the guilty parties.

Anyone who contravenes the prohibition from practising his profession pronounced pursuant to the preceding paragraph is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 1,200,000 francs.

Paragraphe 7 : Treatment of ordeals and other practices harmful to health

Sous-paragraphe 1: Administration of substances harmful to health

Article 321-22

Anyone who, without criminal intent, voluntarily administers to a person substances or engages in practices or manoeuvres on him, even with his consent, which have caused or could have caused an illness or incapacity for personal work equal to twenty-one days, is punished by imprisonment of three years, a fine of 2,000,000 francs and a residence ban of five years.

If it results in an illness or total incapacity for personal work exceeding twenty-one days, the penalty of imprisonment is five years and the fine 5,000,000 francs.

If it results in an illness appearing incurable or permanent incapacity, or the loss of use of an organ, the penalty is imprisonment of ten years. A residence ban of ten years may be pronounced.

If death ensues, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty years and a residence ban of ten years.
In all the cases provided for in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 above, the court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition from exercising family rights, the residence ban and the professional prohibition for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 321-23

When the acts specified in Article 321-22 above are committed by an ascendant, descendant, spouse or successor of the victim or a person having authority over him or having custody of him, the penalties are increased to:

1°) five years' imprisonment in the case provided for in paragraph 1; 2°) ten years' imprisonment in the case provided for in paragraph 2; 3°) twenty years' imprisonment in the case provided for in paragraph 3;
4°) thirty years' imprisonment in the case provided for in paragraph 4.

The court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition from exercising family rights for a period between five years and ten years.

Sous-paragraphe 2: Voluntary transmission of HIV

[Law No. 06-028 of 29 June 2006 establishing the rules relating to the prevention, care and control of HIV/AIDS]

I.	General provisions

1°) Test results

Article 321-24

Any person having a presence of HIV or anti-HIV antibodies in his body during the screening test is seropositive.

Article 321-25

Any screening test result is confidential and may only be given to the following persons:

1°) the person who has undergone the test;

2°) either parent of a minor child who has been tested;

3°) the guardian in the case of incapable persons or orphans who have undergone the test;

4°) the judicial authority having legally required the test.

2°) Disclosure to spouses and sexual partners

Article 321-26

Any person living with HIV is required to disclose their HIV serostatus to their spouse or sexual partner as soon as possible. This period may not exceed six full weeks from the date on which they learned of their HIV serostatus.

In the event that the person whose serostatus has just become known does not voluntarily comply with the disclosure obligation provided for in the first paragraph of this article within the prescribed period, the doctor or any other paramedical personnel of the health establishment, after having informed them, may make the disclosure to the spouse or sexual partner, without violating the provisions relating to confidentiality, provided for by the laws in force.

3°) Disclosure to minors and protected adults

Article 321-27

The minor is informed of their serostatus and of the acts and examinations necessary for their state of health, according to their age and their faculties of understanding. The doctor or any paramedical personnel shall ensure in particular that the disclosure is made and that the means implemented are adapted to any difficulties in communication and understanding of the minor.

The protected adult benefits from appropriate information. The members of their family are informed and the doctor or any paramedical personnel shall ensure in particular that the disclosure to the family is made and that the means implemented are adapted to any difficulties in communication and understanding of the family members.

The persons referred to in the preceding paragraph are bound by professional secrecy.

However, for legitimate and exceptional reasons, a seropositive minor or protected adult may be left in ignorance of their serostatus for as long as the doctor or paramedical personnel deem it necessary and this situation does not create a risk for the minor, the protected adult or for others.

4°) Discriminatory acts

Article 321-28

Any discrimination, in whatever form, against a person whose HIV seropositivity is real or supposed, particularly in matters of job application, hiring, promotion and retirement is prohibited.

Article 321-29

In addition, any discrimination is prohibited: 1°) in school and university establishments;
2°) in health establishments;

3°) relating to the right to travel and housing;

4°) relating to conditions of access to public and elective functions; 5°) relating to conditions of access to credit and insurance services.
II.	Penalties incurred by infected persons and practitioners

Article 321-30

Is punished by a fine of 1,000,000 francs, anyone who, having knowledge of their serostatus, refrains from informing their spouse or sexual partner.

Article 321-31

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, anyone who, having knowledge of their seropositive status, refrains from informing their spouse or sexual partner and contaminates them.
If death results from this contamination, the perpetrator is punished by imprisonment of thirty years.
If the contamination results from rape, the perpetrator is punished by imprisonment of thirty years.

Article 321-32

Anyone who, knowingly, transmits or attempts to transmit, by any means whatsoever, HIV to any other person, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

If this results in contamination of at least two persons, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 321-33

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 300,000 francs anyone who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or non-observance of regulations, including directives established in this matter, involuntarily infects another person with HIV in the course of practicing their profession.

Article 321-34

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 4,000,000 francs, any person who practices traditional medicine in matters of HIV/AIDS without prior approval.

Article 321-35

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs, any person guilty of violation of the confidentiality rules provided for in articles 321-26 and 321-27 of this Code.

Article 321-36

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any person guilty of one of the discriminatory acts provided for in articles 321-28 and 321-29 of this Code.

III.	Penalties incurred by legal persons

Article 321-37

If the perpetrator is a legal person, the fines provided for in articles 321-35 and 321-36 above are increased fivefold.

The Court may, in addition, order the suspension or revocation of the perpetrator's authorization to practice or the withdrawal of the establishment authorization when the responsibility of a health establishment is engaged.

Sub-paragraph 3: Violence against health care

Article 321-38: Without prejudice to the provisions of article 313.1

b) ix) c) iv, of this Code, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, anyone who in time of peace, armed conflict, or internal troubles and tensions exercises violence against health personnel, patients, medical structures, medical transport means.

Article 321-39

By violence against health personnel is meant the act of killing, injuring, abducting, harassing, threatening, intimidating and robbing persons because they are performing their medical tasks.

Article 321-40

By violence against patients is meant the act of killing, injuring, harassing or intimidating patients or persons attempting to have access to health care; blocking or delaying access to health care; deliberately failing in the duty to assist or refusing to provide assistance; practicing discrimination in access to health care or in the quality of care; and interrupting medical care.

Article 321-41

By violence against medical structures is meant bombardments, artillery and light weapons fire, looting, break-ins, encirclement maneuvers and any other act forcibly hindering the proper functioning of medical structures.

Article 321-42

By violence against medical transport means is meant the act of attacking and stealing medical vehicles, or hindering their movements.

Article 321-43

Health personnel includes: persons with professional training in health care, including doctors, nursing personnel, paramedical personnel, physiotherapists and pharmacists; persons who work in hospitals, dispensaries and first aid posts, ambulance drivers, hospital administrators or personnel who work in the community in a professional capacity; personnel and volunteers of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement contributing to the provision of health care; medical personnel of the armed forces; personnel of international and non-governmental organizations active in the field of health; first responders.

Article 321-44

The wounded and sick are all civilian or military persons who need medical assistance and who refrain from any act of hostility. Also included in this category are pregnant or parturient women, newborns and the infirm.

Article 321-45

Medical structures are hospitals, laboratories, dispensaries, first aid posts, blood transfusion centres, community health centres, reference health centres and faith-based centres as well as medical equipment depots and pharmacies of these establishments.

Article 321-46

Medical transport means are ambulances, medical ships or aircraft, whether civilian or military, and vehicles transporting the wounded and sick, health personnel and medical equipment or material. This term covers all vehicles used for medical purposes, even if they are not exclusively assigned to medical transport and under the control of a competent authority of a party to a conflict, including private cars used to transport the wounded and sick to a health structure, vehicles transporting medicines and medical equipment and vehicles transporting medical personnel to their place of work.

Sub-paragraph 4: Illicit supply of medical products

Article 321-47

Whoever engages in the supply or offer of supply, including brokerage, trafficking, including storage, importation or exportation of counterfeit medical products, active substances, excipients, elements, materials and accessories is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 50,000,000 Francs.

Article 321-48

Natural or legal persons guilty of the offence of supply, offer of supply, including brokerage, trafficking, storage, importation, exportation of counterfeit medical products, active substances, excipients, elements, materials and accessories also incur the additional penalty of prohibition from engaging in commercial activity, brokerage or trading in the medical field for a period not exceeding five years.

Sub-paragraph 5: Illegal practice of health professions

Article 321-49: Illegally practices the health professions

1.	any person who habitually takes part or by continued direction, even in the presence of a practitioner, in the practice of medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, midwifery, nursing by consultation, personal act or any other processes, whatever they may be, without holding a diploma or other equivalent title required for the practice of the profession concerned or without fulfilling the other conditions set by the laws establishing the relevant professional Orders;

2.	any person who, even holding a regular title, goes beyond the powers conferred upon them by law, that is to say who exceeds the limits of their competences and reserved acts not falling within their profession;

3.	any practitioner who practices their profession during the period of a temporary or permanent prohibition from practicing it and without fulfilling the conditions or satisfying the obligations provided for by the directives of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) relating to free movement;

4.	any person who practices the health professions without satisfying the legal conditions for practice:
who makes a diagnosis or treats an illness or performs a professional medical, paramedical or pharmacy act, habitually or by continued direction, without having a diploma and authorization to practice it;
who exceeds their competences and performs acts reserved to the doctor, pharmacist, dental surgeon, midwife and nurse, notably beauty professionals, herbalists and others in the context of so-called parallel medicines;	who falsely claims to be a doctor: usurpers of titles
; and	who engages in untimely and misleading advertising to attract or increase clientele.

Article 321-50

The Orders of doctors, pharmacists, dental surgeons, midwives and nurses, interested associations and unions may bring matters before the courts by way of direct summons with regard to the illegal practice of their professions but may also constitute themselves as civil parties in any prosecution initiated by the Public Prosecutor.

Article 321-51

The illegal practice of the professions of doctors, pharmacists, dental surgeons, midwives and nurses is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.
In all cases, the confiscation of equipment or any other products or objects having enabled the illegal practice is ordered. Medicines or products seized and confiscated may be destroyed by the competent services.

Section 4: Justifications, excuses

Article 321-52

If the murder and violence of the kind defined by Article 321-4, and paragraphs 2, 3 and 5 of Article 321-9 of this Code were provoked by serious violence against persons, the penalty is that of the first paragraph of said Article 321-9.

Article 321-53

The crimes mentioned in the preceding article are excusable and punished by the penalties provided for in the first paragraph of Article 321-9 of this Code, if they were committed in repelling, during the day, intrusion into a dwelling or its outbuildings, notably by scaling or breaking through walls, fences or entrances.

Article 321-54: Parricide is never excusable

Article 321-55

A person who commits homicide, inflicts injuries, strikes blows or exercises violence is not criminally liable when these were commanded by present necessity or legitimate defence of oneself or others.

Article 321-56

Included in the case of present necessity of defence are the following two cases:

1°) if the homicide was committed, if the injuries were inflicted and the blows were struck or if the violence was exercised in repelling, during the night, intrusion into a dwelling or its outbuildings, notably by scaling or breaking through fences, walls or enclosures.

2°) if the act took place in defending oneself against the perpetrators of thefts or pillaging carried out with violence.

Section 5: Threats, blackmail

Article 321-57

Whoever, by words, writings, gestures or conventional signs, threatens another with an attack against their person which would be punishable by the death penalty or imprisonment, is punished by imprisonment of three years.

If the threats are made with an order or under condition, or by reason of gender, the penalty is imprisonment of five years and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Whoever, by words, writings, gestures or conventional signs, threatens another with blows, injuries, violence or voluntary assault other than those provided for in paragraphs 2, 3, 5 and 6 of Article 321-9 of this Code, if the threat is made with an order or under condition, is punished by imprisonment of three months.

Article 321-58: Constitute aggravating circumstances the fact

1°) for the victim to be in a state of particular vulnerability by reason of their age, an illness, a physical or psychological disability or their state of pregnancy;

2°) for the perpetrator to be an ascendant, a close relative, a spouse, an intimate partner or a person having authority over the victim;

3°) for the perpetrator to abuse the authority conferred upon them by their functions;

4°) that the threat is uttered by several persons;

5°) that the threat is uttered with use or threat of a weapon.

Whoever is guilty of threat with one of the aforementioned aggravating circumstances is punished by imprisonment of seven years.

This excerpt sits under: Soixante-cinquième Année SPECIAL N°21 13 Décembre 2024 > LIVRE III > TITRE II : DES ATTEINTES A LA PERSONNE HUMAINE ET AU GENRE > Chapitre 1 : Des atteintes à l'intégrité physique ou psychique de la personne > Section 3

Article 321-59

Blackmail is the act of obtaining, by threatening to reveal or impute facts likely to harm the honour or reputation, either a signature, a commitment or a waiver, or the disclosure of a secret, or the handing over of funds, securities or any property.

Blackmail is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Article 321-60

Blackmail committed on the basis of gender is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 500,000 francs.

The following constitute aggravating circumstances:

1°) where the victim is in a state of particular vulnerability due to their age, illness, physical or mental disability or pregnancy;

2°) where the perpetrator is an ascendant, close relative, spouse, intimate partner or person having authority over the victim;

3°) where the perpetrator abuses the authority conferred by their functions;

4°) where the blackmail is committed by several persons;

5°) where the blackmail is committed with the use or threat of a weapon.

Whoever is guilty of blackmail with one of the aforementioned aggravating circumstances is punished by seven years' imprisonment.

Section 6: Moral harassment

Article 321-61

The act of harassing another person through repeated words or behaviour having the object or effect of degrading working conditions likely to harm their rights and dignity, impair their physical or mental health or compromise their professional future, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 321-62

The act of harassing a person through repeated words or behaviour having the object or effect of degrading their living conditions resulting in impairment of their physical or mental health is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 500,000 francs.

The offence is also constituted:

a) when such words or behaviour are imposed on the same victim by several persons, in a concerted manner or at the instigation of one of them, even though each of these persons has not acted repeatedly;

b) when such words or behaviour are imposed on the same victim, successively, by several persons who, even in the absence of concertation, know that such words or behaviour constitute repetition.

The following acts also constitute moral harassment, when committed in the following cases:

1°) when they have caused total incapacity for work exceeding twenty-one days;

2°) when they have been committed against a minor under fifteen years of age;

3°) when they have been committed against a person whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, illness, infirmity, physical or mental deficiency or pregnancy, is apparent or known to the perpetrator;

4°) when they have been committed through the use of an online public communication service or by means of digital or electronic media;

5°) when a minor was present and witnessed them.

The acts mentioned in the first to third paragraphs are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs when they are committed in two of the circumstances mentioned in points 1 to 5.

Article 321-63

The penalties are increased to imprisonment of five years and the fine to 1,000,000 francs when the harassment has led the victim to commit suicide or attempt suicide.

Section 7: Incitement to suicide

Article 321-64

The act of provoking or assisting the suicide of another person is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, when the provocation has been followed by suicide or attempted suicide.

Article 321-65

The penalty of imprisonment is five years and the fine 3,000,000 francs when the victim of the offence defined in the preceding article is a minor of fifteen years or less.

Article 321-66

Natural or legal persons guilty of the offence provided for in this article also incur the additional penalty of prohibition from carrying on the activity of vocational training provider within the meaning of the Labour Code for a period not exceeding five years.

Article 321-67

Propaganda or advertising, whatever the mode, in favour of products, objects or methods recommended as means of causing one's own death is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Section 8: False accusation

Article 321-68

Whoever makes verbally or in writing to a public authority a false accusation against one or more individuals is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 300,000 francs.

An accusation is false when it is an intentionally mendacious denunciation of a false fact, likely to expose the person who is the subject of it to an administrative sanction or judicial proceedings.

Section 9: Witchcraft, magic, charlatanism

Article 321-69

Whoever engages in practices of witchcraft, magic or charlatanism, likely to disturb public order or harm persons or their property, is punished by imprisonment of two years without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties for fraud.

Article 321-70

Whoever is guilty of moral or psychological violence related to allegations of witchcraft, magic or charlatanism is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Chapter 2

Violations of personal privacy Section 1: Violation of domicile

Article 322-1

Whoever enters without right and by means of threats or violence into the domicile of a citizen is punished by imprisonment of three months.

If the offender is a public official within the meaning of this Code acting outside the cases provided for by law, the penalty is one year's imprisonment.

The Judges may, in addition, impose a fine of 120,000 francs.

Violence is not necessary if the perpetrator of the violation enters another person's home with the intention of provoking them.

Section 2: Disclosure of secrets

Article 322-2

All those who, being depositaries by status or profession or by reason of a function or temporary mission of secrets entrusted to them, except in cases where the law requires them to act as informers, disclose such secrets, are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 150,000 francs.

The same penalties apply, in particular, to members of all courts guilty of having violated the secrecy of deliberations.

Section 3: Suppression of letters or opening of letters

Article 322-3

The total or partial suppression or opening of letters, cards, telegrams or packages entrusted to the postal service, except in cases provided for by law, is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 240,000 francs.

If the offender is a public official or agent of the administration, they are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 240,000 francs. The offender is further prohibited from any public function or employment for ten years.

Outside the cases provided for above, any suppression, any opening of correspondence addressed to third parties, done in bad faith, is punished by the same penalties.

The attempt of this offence is punished as the offence itself.

Section 4: Other violations of personal privacy

Paragraph 1: Violations of freedom of expression and image

Article 322-4

Any person who, outside the authorization of the law or the judge, willfully violates the privacy of a citizen's private life by listening to, recording or transmitting by means of any device words spoken in a private place by a person without that person's consent, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 300,000 francs.

Article 322-5

Any person who violates personal privacy by capturing, transmitting by means of any device, the image of a person in a private place without that person's consent, is punished by the same penalties.

When the acts denounced in the preceding paragraph have been accomplished during a meeting in the sight and knowledge of its participants, their consent is presumed.

Article 322-6

Any person who knowingly retains, willfully brings or allows to be brought to the knowledge of the public or a third party any of the acts provided for in the same article, is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 322-4 above.

In case of publication, prosecutions are brought against the persons listed by the law governing the press regime and press offenses under the conditions set by that article, if the offense is committed through the press and against the persons responsible for the broadcast or, failing that, the heads of establishment, directors or managers of the enterprises having proceeded with the dissemination or having profited from it, if the offense is committed by any other means without prejudice to the application of the provisions of Articles 121-6 and 121-7 of this Code on complicity.

The offense is constituted as soon as the publication is made, received or perceived in Mali.

Article 322-7

Any person who knowingly publishes by any means whatsoever, a montage made with the words or images of a person without that person's consent, if it does not appear evident that it is a montage or if it is not expressly mentioned, is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 322-4 above.

Article 322-8

For all the offenses provided for in Articles 322-4, 322-5, 322-6 and 322-7 above, the attempt of the offense is punished as the offense itself.

In the cases provided for in Articles 322-4 and 322-6 above, the Court may order the confiscation of the equipment used to commit the offense.

In the cases referred to in Articles 322-4, 322-5 and 322-7 above, it may also order the confiscation of any recording, document, or medium of the montage obtained by means of the acts provided for in Articles 322-4 and 322-5 above.

In the cases referred to in Article 322-7 above, it may order the confiscation of the medium of the montage.

Paragraph 2

Specific violations of personal rights with regard to the processing of personal data

[Law No. 2013-015 of May 21, 2013 on the protection of personal data in the Republic of Mali].

Article 322-9: The following are understood as

1°) personal data or personal information: information existing in various forms and allowing direct or indirect identification of a person, by reference to a registration number or to one or more elements specific to their physical, physiological, biometric, genetic, mental, cultural, social or economic identity.

Personal data may be universal identifiers allowing the connection of several files constituting databases, or the carrying out of their interconnection;

2°) processing of personal data: any operation or set of operations carried out using automated or non-automated processes and applied to data, such as collection, exploitation, recording, organization, storage, adaptation, modification, extraction, backup, copying, consultation, use, communication by transmission, dissemination or any other form of making available, comparison or interconnection, as well as locking, encryption, erasure or destruction of personal data.

Article 322-10

Any person who, even through negligence, carries out or causes to be carried out processing of personal data without having complied with the formalities prior to their implementation provided for by the law on personal data, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-11

Any person who, even through negligence, carries out or causes to be carried out processing that has been subject to an injunction to stop processing or withdrawal of authorization provided for by the provisions of the law on the protection of personal data, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-12

The failure to comply, including through negligence, with the simplified or exemption standards established for this purpose by the Personal Data Protection Authority, in the context of processing of personal data, which has been subject either to a simplified standard or to an exemption standard, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-13

Any person who, outside the cases where the processing has been authorized under the conditions provided for by legislative and regulatory texts, carries out or causes to be carried out processing of personal data including, among the data on which it relates, the National Identification Number of natural persons, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-14

Any person who carries out or causes to be carried out processing of personal data without implementing the security and confidentiality measures prescribed by the provisions of the law on the protection of personal data, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-15

The failure by a provider of electronic communications services or by a data controller to notify a personal data breach to the Personal Data Protection Authority or to the data subject, in disregard of the standards set by legislative and regulatory texts, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

The failure by a processor to notify this breach to the data controller is punished by the same penalties.

Article 322-16

Any person who collects and processes personal data by fraudulent, unfair or illicit means is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-17

Any person who carries out or causes to be carried out processing of personal data concerning a natural person despite the opposition of that person in accordance with the provisions of the law on personal data, when this processing is for prospecting purposes, in particular commercial, or when this opposition is based on legitimate grounds, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-18

Anyone who, except in cases provided for by law, stores or keeps on computer media or memory, without the express consent of the person concerned, personal data which, directly or indirectly, reveal racial or ethnic origin, political, philosophical or religious opinions, or trade union membership, or which relate to the health or sexual life of that person, as well as data relating to offences, convictions or security measures concerning him or her, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-19

In the case of processing of personal data for the purpose of research in the field of health, anyone who carries out processing is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) without having previously informed the persons concerned individually of their right of access, rectification and opposition, of the nature of the data transmitted and the recipients thereof, as well as the provisions made for their processing, storage and protection;

2°) despite the opposition of the person concerned or, where provided for by law, in the absence of the informed and express consent of the person, or if it concerns a deceased person, despite the refusal expressed by that person during his or her lifetime.

Article 322-20

The act of keeping personal data beyond the period provided for by law or regulation, by the request for authorization or opinion, or by the prior declaration sent to the Personal Data Protection Authority, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, unless such storage is carried out for historical, statistical or scientific purposes under the conditions provided for by law.

The act of processing, except in cases provided for by law, for purposes other than historical, statistical or scientific, personal data kept beyond the period mentioned in the first paragraph is punished by the same penalties.

Article 322-21

Anyone who, holding personal data on the occasion of their recording, classification, transmission or any form of processing, diverts such information from their purpose as defined by the legislative provision, the regulatory act or the decision of the Personal Data Protection Authority authorizing the processing, or by the prior declarations for the implementation of such processing, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-22

Anyone who collects, on the occasion of their recording, classification, transmission or another form of processing, personal data whose disclosure would have the effect of damaging the reputation of the person concerned or the privacy of his or her private life, brings, without authorization from the person concerned, such data to the knowledge of a third party who is not qualified to receive them, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Where the disclosure provided for in the preceding paragraph of this article was committed through carelessness or negligence, the person responsible is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

In the cases provided for in the two paragraphs of this article, prosecution may only be brought upon complaint by the victim, his or her legal representative or his or her successors in title.

Article 322-23

The act of carrying out or having carried out processing of personal data subject to or intended to be subject to transfer to a State not appearing on the list of States having an adequate level of personal data protection, drawn up by the Personal Data Protection Authority, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 322-24

Anyone who obstructs the action of the Personal Data Protection Authority is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 120,000 francs:

1°) either by opposing the exercise of the missions entrusted to its members or to authorized agents pursuant to the law on personal data;

2°) either by refusing to communicate to its members or to authorized agents pursuant to the law on personal data, information and documents useful to their mission, or by concealing said documents or information, or by causing them to disappear;

3°) either by communicating information which does not conform to the content of the records as it was at the time the request was made or which does not present such content in a directly accessible form.

Article 322-25

In the cases provided for in articles 322-10 to 322-23 above, the erasure of all or part of the personal data subject to the processing which gave rise to the offence may be ordered. The commissioners and agents of the Personal Data Protection Authority are authorized to verify the erasure of such data.

Article 322-26

Where such information is required by law, the following acts by the person responsible for automated processing of personal data are punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 120,000 francs:

1°) failing to inform the person from whom personal data concerning him or her are collected:

a)	of the identity of the person responsible for the processing and, where applicable, that of his or her representative;

b)	of the purpose pursued by the processing for which the data are intended;

c)	of the mandatory or optional nature of the responses;

d)	of the possible consequences for him or her of a failure to respond;

e)	of the recipients or categories of recipients of the data;

f)	of his or her rights of opposition, inquiry, access and rectification;

g)	where applicable, of the transfers of personal data envisaged to a State not appearing on the list of countries having an adequate level of personal data protection;

2°) where the data are collected by means of a questionnaire, failing to include on the questionnaire the information relating to:

a)	the identity of the person responsible for the processing and, where applicable, that of his or her representative;

b)	the purpose pursued by the processing for which the data are intended;

c)	the mandatory or optional nature of the responses;

d)	the rights of opposition, inquiry, access and rectification of the persons from whom the data are collected;

3°) failing to inform clearly and precisely any person using electronic communications networks:

a)	of the purpose of any action tending to access, by electronic transmission, information stored in his or her terminal connection equipment or to record, by the same means, information in his or her terminal connection equipment;

b)	of the means at his or her disposal to oppose it;

4°) failing to provide to the person concerned, where the personal data have not been collected from him or her, the information listed in 1° and 2° from the time of recording the data or, if communication of the data to third parties is envisaged, at the latest at the time of the first communication of the data.

Article 322-27

Is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 120,000 francs, the act by the person responsible for automated processing of personal data, of failing to respond to requests from a natural person proving their identity which have as their object:

1°) confirmation that personal data concerning them is or is not the subject of this processing;

2°) information relating to the purposes of the processing, the categories of personal data processed and the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the data are communicated;

3°) where applicable, information relating to transfers of personal data envisaged to a third country;

4°) the communication, in an accessible form, of the personal data concerning them as well as any available information as to the origin thereof;

5°) information making it possible to know and contest the logic underlying the automated processing in the event of a decision taken on the basis thereof and producing legal effects with regard to the person concerned.

Is punished by the same penalty the act of refusing to deliver, at the request of the person concerned, a copy of the personal data concerning them, where applicable, against payment of a sum which may not exceed the cost of reproduction.

The offences provided for by this article are not however constituted if the refusal to respond is authorised by law either in order not to infringe copyright, or because they are manifestly abusive requests, in particular by their number, their repetitive or systematic nature, or because the personal data are kept in a form manifestly excluding any risk of infringement of the privacy of the persons concerned and for a period not exceeding that necessary for the sole purposes of establishing statistics or scientific or historical research.

Article 322-28

Is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 120,000 francs, the act, by the person responsible for automated processing of personal data, of failing to carry out, free of charge for the applicant, the operations requested by a natural person proving their identity and who requires that personal data concerning them or concerning the deceased person of whom they are the heir be rectified, completed, updated, locked or erased, when such data are inaccurate, incomplete, ambiguous, out of date, or when their collection, use, communication or storage is prohibited.

Article 322-29

Legal persons declared criminally responsible for the offences defined in this paragraph incur the penalties provided for by Article 431-8 of this Code.

The prohibition mentioned in 2° of Article 431-8 relates to the activity in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of which the offence was committed.

Article 322-30

The Public Prosecutor notifies the President of the Personal Data Protection Authority of all prosecutions relating to offences concerning personal data contained in this Code and the action taken thereon. He informs them of the date and subject of the trial hearing by registered letter sent at least fifteen days before that date. The investigating or trial court may call upon the President of the Authority or their representative to submit their observations or to develop them orally at the hearing.

Chapter 3

Endangering the person Section 1: Risks caused to others

Article 323-1

The act of directly exposing another person to an immediate risk of death or injury of a nature to cause mutilation or permanent disability by the manifestly deliberate violation of a particular obligation of prudence or safety imposed by law or regulation is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 2: Abandonment of a vulnerable person

Article 323-2

Whoever voluntarily abandons, in conditions such that their safety depends on chance, a child or a person incapable of protecting themselves, or who voluntarily interrupts the provision of food or care owed to them, is, if it results in mutilation, disability or permanent illness, punished by imprisonment of ten years.

When the abandonment causes death, the action is considered as murder and punished as such.

If the abandonment results in an illness or incapacity of more than twenty days, the penalty is imprisonment of five years.

In other cases, the penalty is imprisonment of three years.

Section 3: Failure to assist a person in danger

Article 323-3

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, whoever voluntarily refrains from providing assistance to a person in danger which, without risk to themselves or to third parties, they can provide either by their personal action or by calling for help.

Article 323-4

When the offence of failure to assist a person in danger as specified in the preceding article is the result of a serious violation of the obligations imposed by the function, profession or occupation of the perpetrator, the penalties of the preceding article may be doubled.

In any event, the penalty imposed may not be less than imprisonment of one month.

Chapter 4: Infringements of personal freedoms

Section 1

Unlawful arrests and confinement of persons, hostage-taking

Paragraph 1: Unlawful arrests and confinement of persons

Article 324-1

Are punished by imprisonment of twenty years and prohibition of residence for ten years:

1°) those who, without order from the public authorities and outside the cases where the law orders the seizure of suspects, accused or defendants, in particular cases of crime or flagrant offence, arrest, detain or confine any person;

2°) those who, knowingly, provide a place to carry out the detention or confinement.

The guilty parties incur the death penalty, if the persons arrested, detained or confined are subjected to bodily torture.

If the confinement is accompanied either by violence not having the character of bodily torture, or by death threats, the penalty is that of life imprisonment.

Article 324-2

Whoever is guilty of confinement, within the meaning of Article 324-1 above, of a person by reason of gender is punished by criminal imprisonment of twenty years and prohibition of residence for ten years.

If the confined person is in a state of particular vulnerability by reason of their age, an illness, a physical or psychological disability, their state of pregnancy, the judge may in no case impose a penalty below twenty years and prohibition of residence for ten years.

Paragraph 2: Hostage-taking

Article 324-3

Is punished by life imprisonment whoever seizes a person or detains them and threatens to kill them, injure them or continue to detain them in order to compel a third party, namely a State, an international organisation, a population, a natural or legal person or a group of persons, to perform any act or to refrain from doing so as an explicit or implicit condition for the release of the hostage.

If the above facts result in injuries or illnesses, the penalty is imprisonment of thirty years.

If death has resulted therefrom, the death penalty is imposed.

Article 324-4

If the person arrested, detained or sequestered is held as a hostage either to prepare or facilitate the commission of a crime or an offence, or to favour the flight or ensure the impunity of the perpetrators or accomplices of a crime or an offence, or in a secret place, to respond to the execution of an order or a condition, the guilty parties are punished by life imprisonment.

However, the penalty is twenty years' imprisonment if the person arrested, detained, or sequestered as a hostage to respond to the execution of an order or a condition is released voluntarily before the fifth day completed from that of the arrest, detention or sequestration without the order or condition having been executed.

The penalty of life imprisonment is pronounced:

a)	if the arrest is carried out with a false costume, under a false name or on a false order of the public authority;

b)	if the individual arrested, detained or sequestered is threatened with death.

The death penalty is pronounced if the person arrested, detained or sequestered is subjected to bodily torture.

Article 324-5

In the cases referred to in articles 324-1 and 324-2 above, those who, knowingly, have provided a place to carry out the detention or sequestration are punished with the same penalties as the perpetrators of that detention or sequestration.

Section 2 : De l'enlèvement de personnes

Article 324-6

Whoever by fraud, violence or threats, abducts an individual from the place where he has been placed by those to whose authority he is subject or entrusted, is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a ten-year residence ban.

Article 324-7

When the abduction of persons, referred to in the preceding article, is committed without fraud, violence or threats, or if it is committed with a view to marrying a woman without her consent, the guilty party is punished by five years' imprisonment and a twenty-year residence ban.

When the abduction referred to in the preceding article is committed without fraud, violence or threats, on the person of a child under fifteen years of age, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a ten-year residence ban.

Section 3 : Des conventions portant atteinte à la liberté

Article 324-8

Whoever concludes an agreement having as its object the alienation, either gratuitously or for consideration, of the freedom of a third person, is punished by ten years' imprisonment.

Money, goods and other objects of value received in execution of the agreement or as a deposit for an agreement to be concluded, are confiscated.

Article 324-9

The act of introducing into the Republic of Mali individuals intended to be the subject of the aforementioned agreement, or of removing or attempting to remove individuals from the Republic, with a view to the said agreement to be concluded abroad, is punished by the same penalty.

However, the penalty of imprisonment may be increased to twenty years if the person who was the subject thereof, either inside or outside Mali, is a child under fifteen years of age.

Article 324-10

In the cases provided for in article 324-9 above, the Court may in addition pronounce the deprivation of the rights provided for in article 131-6 of this Code.

A ten-year residence ban may also be pronounced.

Section 4 : De l'esclavage et des pratiques assimilées

Article 324-11 : L'esclavage et les pratiques assimilées sont interdits

Paragraphe 1 : De l'esclavage

Article 324-12

Slavery is the status or condition of an individual over whom are exercised attributes comparable to those of the right of ownership, or some of them.

The slave is the person who is not free and finds himself under the absolute dependence of a master in the conditions defined in the preceding paragraph.

The slave trade includes any act of capture, acquisition or transfer of an individual with a view to reducing him to slavery, any act of acquiring a slave with a view to selling or exchanging him, any act of transfer by sale or exchange of a slave acquired with a view to being sold or exchanged, as well as any act of trade or transport of slaves.

Article 324-13

Slavery and the slave trade are punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Du délit d'esclavage sexuel

Article 324-14

The offence of sexual slavery is constituted by the act of compelling a person, over whom the perpetrator exercises a power associated with the right of ownership either by having purchased, lent or bartered that person, and imposes on that person acts of a sexual nature.
Whoever is guilty of sexual slavery is punished by twenty years' imprisonment, a fine of 5,000,000 francs and a ten-year residence ban.

A state of particular vulnerability of the victim constitutes an aggravating circumstance related to:

1°) his or her age;

2°) an illness;

3°) a physical or mental disability; 4°) his or her state of pregnancy.
In the case of one of the aforementioned aggravating circumstances, the penalty incurred is twenty years' imprisonment, a fine of 10,000,000 francs and a fifteen-year residence ban.

Paragraphe 3 : Des pratiques assimilées à l'esclavage

Article 324-15

Practices similar to slavery are placement, serfdom and debt bondage.

Article 324-16 : Le placement est une pratique en vertu de laquelle

1°) a woman is, without her having the right to refuse, promised or given in marriage in return for a consideration in cash or in kind paid to her parents, guardian, family or to any other person or group of persons;

2°) the husband of a woman or his family transfers her for consideration to a third party or otherwise;

3°) a woman is transmitted by succession, upon the death of her husband, to another person;

4°) a child is handed over, either by his parents or by one of them, or by his guardian, to a third party, with or without payment, with a view to exploiting him or subjecting him to labour.

Placement, whatever its form, is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 324-17

Serfdom is the condition of anyone who is required by law, custom or agreement, to live and work on land belonging to another person and to provide to that person, for remuneration or free of charge, certain specified services, without being able to change his condition.

Serfdom is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 324-18

Debt bondage is the status or condition resulting from the fact that a debtor has undertaken to provide, as security for a debt, his personal services or those of someone over whom he has authority, if the equitable value of those services is not applied to the liquidation of the debt or if the duration of those services is not limited nor their nature defined.

Debt bondage is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 324-19

The act of marrying, having married, or preventing from marrying, a woman reduced to a state of slavery, against her will, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Any sexual intercourse committed during a marriage that occurred in the conditions described in paragraph 1 is deemed to be rape; and the provisions of paragraph 4 of article 325-3 of this Code are applicable.

Article 324-20

The deprivation of a widow of the enjoyment of her period of widowhood, or its reduction, on grounds of slavery, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 324-21

Depriving a child of access to education, because of the slave status of his or her parents or of himself or herself, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 324-22

Depriving an entitled person of his or her right to inheritance because of a state of slavery is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

The property of which the victim has been deprived shall be restored to him or her.

Article 324-23

Any discrimination based on slave status is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 250,000 francs.

Article 324-24

Any private or public statement or writing, any private or public act, likely to approve, encourage, or facilitate slavery, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 250,000 francs.

The penalty is doubled when the perpetrator of the offence is a public official.

The destruction of the media used to commit the offence shall be ordered.

Article 324-25

Public insults uttered against a person in a state of slavery and referring to that state are punishable by five years' imprisonment.

Article 324-26

Any public official informed, in the course of his or her duties, of practices likely to be classified as slavery or related practices has the obligation to refer the matter to the territorially competent public prosecutor.

Any public official who, having witnessed it, refrained from intervening to prevent its perpetration or who, having become aware of it, refrained from reporting the perpetrators or accomplices is guilty of passive complicity in the crime of slavery.

Article 324-27

The attempt and complicity in slavery and related practices are punished in the same manner as these offences.

Article 324-28

The temporary deprivation of civil rights is, in addition, pronounced against persons convicted of the offences of slavery and related practices.

Section 5

Human trafficking Paragraph 1: The offence

Article 324-29

The offence of human trafficking is constituted by the act of recruiting, transporting, transferring, harbouring or receiving persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, by abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of authority or of a position of vulnerability or by the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation.

Exploitation includes, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, the exploitation of the begging of others, the exploitation of forced labour or services, including enlistment in an armed conflict, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude and the removal of organs.

The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a minor for the purpose of exploitation is considered to be human trafficking even if it does not involve any of the means set forth in the first paragraph.

Whoever commits the offence of human trafficking is punishable by ten years' criminal imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

A ten-year residence ban may, in addition, be pronounced.

Paragraph 2: Absence of effect of consent

Article 324-30

When the constituent elements of the offences referred to in this section are met, the perpetrator of the acts may in no case invoke the consent of the victim to evade prosecution.

Similarly, the perpetrator of the acts may not invoke the consent of the parents or any other person having legal authority over a minor to evade prosecution.

Paragraph 3: Proof of the victim's age

Article 324-31

In the case where no reliable official document can determine the age of the victim, proof of the victim's age must be provided by medical examination or any other legal means.

Paragraph 4: Inadmissibility of the victim's prior sexual conduct

Article 324-32

In the context of prosecutions of perpetrators of human trafficking offences or any other offence referred to in this chapter, the victim's prior sexual conduct is irrelevant in the gathering of evidence and in the search for the manifestation of truth.

Paragraph 5: Adoption for the purpose of exploitation

Article 324-33

Whoever, in violation of national and international laws on adoption, vitiates the consent of the parents or any other person having legal authority over a child, with a view to having the child adopted for the commission of the offences referred to in this section is punishable by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Paragraph 6: Offences relating to travel or identity documents

Article 324-34

Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, makes, obtains, procures, conceals, retains, removes, falsifies or destroys any travel document of a person or any document that may establish or is purported to establish the identity or immigrant status of a person, or any other official identification document whether authentic or not, national or foreign, is punishable by ten years' criminal imprisonment and a ten-year residence ban.

Paragraph 7

Obligations and sanctions of carriers in case of failure to comply with their obligations

Article 324-35

Without prejudice to international conventions on the matter to which Mali is a party, transport companies and any owner or operator of a means of transport are required to ensure that passengers possess the documents, whatever they may be, required to enter Mali, transit through it or leave it.

This obligation applies to companies and their employees who sell, issue, collect, verify travel tickets, boarding passes or any other document authorizing transport.

The carrier who intentionally fails to comply with the obligation imposed upon him or her commits an offence punishable by a fine of 500,000 francs.

In case of recidivism, the perpetrator is punishable by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs; the suspension or withdrawal of the carrier's licence may be pronounced.

In addition, the costs relating to the detention, escort and repatriation of the passenger not having the required documents are borne by the carrier.

Paragraph 8: Exemption from criminal liability of carriers

Article 324-36: The carrier is not criminally liable in the case where

1°) the person was in possession of the required documents at the time of boarding to enter Mali;

2°) entry into Mali occurred only in circumstances beyond the will and control of the carrier or in a case of force majeure.

Paragraph 9: Money laundering

Article 324-37

The laundering of proceeds from the offences referred to in this section is punishable in accordance with the provisions relating to the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

Paragraph 10: Corruption

Article 324-38

Corruption with a view to committing the offences referred to in this section is provided for and punished in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

Paragraph 11: Obstruction of the functioning of investigation and enforcement services

Article 324-39

Any obstruction of the exercise of the activities of investigation and enforcement services, or any refusal to submit to an investigation or a legal obligation, is punishable by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

Paragraphe 12 : Confidentiality of information relating to victims and witnesses

Article 324-40

Anyone who knowingly discloses, directly or indirectly, information deemed confidential, relating in particular to the location of a victim or witness and their identity, commits an offence punishable by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs without prejudice to the provisions set out in Article 243-92 of this Code.

Paragraphe 13 : Aggravating circumstances

Article 324-41

Where one of the offences referred to in this section is committed with one of the circumstances listed below, the penalties incurred are:

1°) imprisonment for fifteen years in the case of intentional assault and battery;

2°) double the maximum penalty incurred:

a)	if the perpetrator has absconded from justice;

b)	if the perpetrator is in a state of recidivism;

c)	if the perpetrator has participated in other offences definitively judged to have facilitated the offence of trafficking;

d)	if there is a concurrence of offences referred to in this section;

e)	if the perpetrator exercised public authority functions and the offence was committed in the exercise of those functions;

3°) imprisonment for twenty years:

a)	if the offence is committed against a minor;

b)	in the case of a relationship of trust between the victim and the perpetrator, particularly where the perpetrator has abused their hierarchical position;

c)	if the perpetrator is the spouse of the victim;

d)	if the perpetrator is vested with moral authority over the victim, particularly their legal representative, a social worker responsible for the victim;

4°) life imprisonment:

a)	in the case of sexual abuse or rape;

b)	in the case of intentional assault and battery resulting in amputation, mutilation or deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness, loss of an eye or other permanent infirmities;

c)	if the victim is particularly vulnerable;

d)	if the offence was committed by an organized group as part of systematic criminal activity or over a long period or on a large scale, involving in particular multiple victims;

e)	if weapons or prohibited drugs were used.

5°) life imprisonment in the case of death of the victim.

In all cases, the provisions relating to mitigating circumstances and suspended sentences may not be applied.

Paragraphe 14 : Criminal liability of legal persons

Article 324-42

The criminal liability of legal persons is engaged for the offences provided for in this section.

Where one of the offences referred to in this section is committed by a legal person, on its behalf, by its organs or representatives, with the exception of the State, it is punishable by a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

The criminal liability of legal persons does not exclude that of natural persons who are perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts.

The competent court may also seize the assets and any property of a legal person and order their confiscation for the benefit of the State.

The above provisions are applicable in matters of illicit trafficking in migrants.

Paragraphe 15 : Criminal immunity of victims

Article 324-43

Victims of the offences referred to in this section may not be prosecuted or convicted for the offences:

1°) of illegal entry into Mali;

2°) of residence in an illegal situation in Mali;

3°) of possession of illegal travel or identity documents obtained or received with a view to illegal entry into Mali.

Furthermore, the victim is not held criminally or administratively liable for having committed offences when they were reduced to doing so by their condition as a victim of trafficking.

The provisions of this article do not apply where the offence committed is a serious crime.

Section 6

Illicit trafficking in migrants Paragraphe 1: The offence

Article 324-44

Any person who, intentionally and in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial advantage or other material benefit, procures the illegal entry into a State Party of a person who is neither a national nor a permanent resident of that State, commits an offence punishable by imprisonment for twenty years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Fraudulent travel or identity documents

Article 324-45

Any person who, intentionally and in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial advantage or other material benefit, produces, procures, provides or possesses a fraudulent travel or identity document in order to enable the illicit trafficking in migrants, commits an offence punishable by imprisonment for ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3 : Facilitation of illegal residence

Article 324-46

Any person who, intentionally and in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial advantage or other material benefit, uses illegal means to enable a person who is neither a national nor a permanent resident to remain in the State, without satisfying the conditions necessary for legal residence in the said State, commits an offence punishable by imprisonment for ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 4 : Aggravating circumstances

Article 324-47

Where one of the offences referred to in this section has been committed with one of the circumstances listed below, the penalties incurred are:

1°) imprisonment for twenty years if:

a)	the offence endangers or is likely to endanger the life or safety of the smuggled migrant;

b)	the offence entails inhuman or degrading treatment of the smuggled migrant;

c)	the offence entails the exploitation of the smuggled migrant;

d)	the perpetrator of the offence uses or threatens to use any form of violence against the smuggled migrant or their family;

e)	the offence is committed against a minor;

f)	the smuggled migrant is a pregnant woman;

g)	the smuggled migrant has an intellectual or physical disability;

h)	the perpetrator of the offence takes advantage of the particular vulnerability or dependence of the smuggled migrant in order to obtain a financial advantage or other material benefit;

i)	the perpetrator of the offence uses a child as an accomplice or participant in the criminal act;

j)	the perpetrator of the offence uses drugs or psychotropic substances, medicines, weapons to facilitate the commission of the offence;

k)	the perpetrator exercised public authority functions and the offence was committed, including by omission, in the exercise of those functions;

l)	the perpetrator of the offence confiscates, destroys or attempts to destroy the travel or identity documents of the smuggled migrant;

m)	the perpetrator absconds from justice;

n)	the perpetrator is in a state of recidivism;

o)	the perpetrator has participated in other offences that have facilitated the offence of illicit trafficking;

p)	the offence is committed within the framework of the activities of an organized criminal group.

2°) life imprisonment:

a)	in the case of intentional assault and battery resulting in amputation, mutilation or deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness, loss of an eye or other permanent infirmities;

b)	in the case of sexual abuse or rape;

c)	if the offence results in the death of the smuggled migrant or a third party, including death by suicide.

Paragraph 5: Complementary penalties

Article 324-48

When a person has been found guilty of an offence under this section, the competent court may, in addition to any sanction imposed under this section and without limitation of its other powers, order the following measures:

a) confiscation of assets, proceeds of crime and instruments of the offence;

b) publication of the judicial decision;

c) prohibition from exercising, directly or indirectly, one or more social or professional activities, permanently or for a minimum period of five years;

d) temporary or permanent closure of any business or establishment that was used to commit the offence;

e) exclusion from the right to public benefits or assistance;

f) temporary or permanent prohibition from participating in public procurement;

g) temporary or permanent prohibition from engaging in other commercial activities and/or from creating another legal person;

h) any other appropriate non-custodial measure provided for by law.

Paragraph 6: Criminal non-liability of migrants who are the object of trafficking

Article 324-49

Without prejudice to the applicability of other laws establishing criminal offences, migrants are not liable to criminal prosecution under this section by reason of having been the object of the acts set out in this chapter.

Paragraph 7

Obligations of commercial carriers and offences committed by them

Article 324-50

On pain of the sanctions provided for below, commercial carriers are subject to the following obligations:

1°) Any commercial carrier who fails to verify that each passenger is in possession of the identity and/or travel documents required for entry into the State of destination and into any transit State, commits an offence punishable by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

In case of recidivism, the offender is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

In addition, the carrier's licence may be suspended or withdrawn.

2°) Any commercial carrier who fails to notify the competent authorities that a person has attempted to travel or has travelled using its services without the identity and travel documents required for entry into the State of destination or into any transit State, when it has knowledge of the fact that that person was a trafficked migrant or when it demonstrates culpable negligence in that regard, commits an offence and is liable to three months' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

The provisions of this article apply equally to the driver, the escort and the lessee.

3°) A commercial carrier does not commit an offence under this article if:

a) there were reasonable grounds to believe that the documents the passenger had in his or her possession were the documents required to enter Mali legally;

b) the passenger was in possession of regular travel documents when he or she boarded or last boarded the means of transport bound for or departing from Mali;

c) entry into or exit from Mali took place only by reason of circumstances beyond the control of the commercial carrier;

4°) A commercial carrier is not liable under this article when the persons it was transporting were granted protection against refoulement and/or access to the asylum system by the competent authorities.

Paragraph 8: Attempt

Article 324-51

Any attempt to commit the offences provided for by this section and by the preceding section, manifested by a commencement of execution and suspended or having failed to have its effect only by reason of circumstances independent of the will of its perpetrator, is considered as the offence itself.

Section 7: Child trafficking

Article 324-52

Child trafficking is the entire process by which a child is moved, within or outside a country under conditions that transform him or her into a commodity for at least one of the persons involved, and whatever the purpose of the child's movement:

1°) any act involving the recruitment, transport, harbouring or sale of a child;

2°) any act that results in the movement of the child within or outside a country.

Any person convicted of child trafficking is punished by twenty years' criminal imprisonment.

Section 8: Enforced disappearance

Article 324-53

Constitutes an enforced disappearance, the arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of liberty of a person, under conditions removing him or her from the protection of the law, by one or more agents of the State or by a person or group of persons acting with the authorization, support or acquiescence of the State authorities, when such acts are followed by his or her disappearance and accompanied either by denial of recognition of the deprivation of liberty, or by concealment of the fate reserved for him or her or of the place where he or she is located.

Article 324-54: Enforced disappearance is punished by life criminal imprisonment

The Court may, in addition, impose one or more of the complementary penalties mentioned in Article 131-6 of this Code.

Article 324-55: Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 121

6 and 121-7 of this Code, is considered as an accomplice to the crime of enforced disappearance mentioned in the preceding article committed by subordinates placed under his or her authority and effective control, the superior who knew, or deliberately disregarded information which clearly indicated that his or her subordinates were committing or were going to commit a crime of enforced disappearance and who did not take all necessary and reasonable measures within his or her power to prevent or repress its execution or to refer the matter to the competent authorities for the purposes of investigation and prosecution, when that crime was related to activities falling within his or her responsibility and effective control.

Chapter 5

Offences against public morals Section 1: Public indecency

Article 325-1

Any act performed publicly, offending decency and the moral sentiment of individuals who are involuntary witnesses thereto and likely to disturb public order and cause manifest social harm, is public indecency.

Also constitutes public indecency, any sexual act against nature performed publicly with an individual of the same sex.

Indecency, committed publicly and intentionally is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

Section 2: Indecent assault

Article 325-2

Any act of a sexual nature contrary to morals intentionally and directly committed against a person constitutes an indecent assault.

Also constitutes an indecent assault, any act of an unnatural sexual nature committed with an individual of the same sex.

Any statement, image, public or private writing, any public or private act, likely to approve, encourage, promote or facilitate the indecent assault provided for in the preceding paragraph and in Article 325-1 above is punishable by seven years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Any indecent assault, consummated or attempted without violence against a child of either sex, under the age of fifteen years, is punishable by ten years' imprisonment and a twenty-year residence ban.

Is punishable by the same penalties, indecent assault, consummated or attempted with violence, against individuals of either sex, over the age of fifteen years or committed against adults in a state of slavery.

If the crime provided for in the 4th paragraph of this article is committed against a child under fifteen years of age, the offender is punishable by twenty years' imprisonment and a twenty-year residence ban.

If the assault is committed with the help of a third party or several persons, or against minors in a state of slavery, the penalty is twenty years' imprisonment with the possibility of applying a residence ban for the same duration in the cases provided for in paragraphs 2 and 4 of this article, and life imprisonment, in the cases provided for in paragraph 4 above.

Those guilty of assault committed without violence against a minor over fifteen years and under eighteen years of age, if they are ascendants of the person against whom the assault was committed, if they are among those who have authority over that person, or if they are responsible for that person's education, supervision or if they are employees of the persons designated above, are punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 325-1 of this Code.

Section 3: Rape

Article 325-3

Constitutes rape, any act of vaginal, anal, oral penetration or of any nature whatsoever for sexual purposes, imposed on another person without their consent by using a part of the human body or an object, by violence, threat, coercion or surprise.

Also constitutes rape, any act of vaginal, anal, oral penetration or of any nature whatsoever for sexual purposes committed against a minor of fifteen years even with their consent.

Rape is punishable by twenty years' imprisonment and a five-year residence ban.

If the rape is committed with the help of several persons or against a child under sixteen years of age, or against a person reduced to slavery, the offender is punishable by twenty years' imprisonment, a ten-year residence ban and the Judges may not reduce the sentence below five years' imprisonment.

Also constitute aggravating circumstances, the fact that the victim is pregnant at the time of the acts, the fact that the perpetrator is an ascendant or close relative of the victim, the fact that the acts result in a pregnancy of the raped person, or an injury or lesion, the fact that the perpetrator abuses the authority conferred by their functions, the fact that the perpetrator commits the rape with use or threat of a weapon or a psychotropic or alcoholic substance.

If the rape has resulted in mutilation or permanent disability or the death of the victim or was committed with two of the aggravating circumstances provided for in the preceding paragraph, the penalty is life imprisonment.

If the offenders are ascendants of the person against whom the rape is committed, if they are among those who have authority over that person, or if they are responsible for that person's education, supervision or if they are employees of the persons designated above, no suspension of the execution of the sentence may be pronounced.

Section 4: Customary coitus

Article 325-4

The individual who performs or attempts to perform the sexual act customarily authorized on a girl under the age of fifteen years, is punishable by five years' imprisonment without prejudice to the penalties incurred for crimes or offences committed on the occasion of the performance of this act.

Are punished as accomplices the persons, including parents who, knowingly provoke the acts referred to in this article, or, with knowledge, aid or assist the perpetrator in the acts that prepare or facilitate them.

Section 5: Paedophilia

Article 325-5

Constitutes the crime of paedophilia and punishable by twenty years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, any act of sexual penetration or sexual touching of any nature whatsoever, committed against a minor under thirteen years of age, or any exposure or exploitation for commercial or tourist purposes of photographs, films or drawings of a pornographic nature featuring one or more minors under thirteen years of age.

If the offenders are ascendants of the person against whom the crime was committed, if they are among those who have authority over that person, or if they are responsible for that person's education, supervision or if they are employees of the persons designated above, or if the crime is committed with the help of several persons, the penalty is life imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs. However, the above crime is not constituted if the age difference between the perpetrator and the victim does not exceed five years.

Section 6

Incitement to debauchery-Forced prostitution-Procuring-Soliciting

Paragraphe 1: Incitement to debauchery

Article 325-6

Whoever, either habitually incites, favours or facilitates the debauchery or corruption of youth of either sex, or, to satisfy the passions of another, leads or diverts, even with their consent, a person with a view to debauchery, or detains against their will a person in a house of debauchery, or compels them to engage in prostitution, is punishable by three years' imprisonment, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a ten-year residence ban.

Paragraphe 2: Forced prostitution

Article 325-7

Constitutes forced prostitution, the act of causing a person to provide sexual services, for profit, by any form of coercion, threat, deception or false promises.

Prostitution involving a child is assimilated to forced prostitution.

Whoever forces a person to engage in prostitution is punishable by ten years' imprisonment, a fine of 5,000,000 francs and a ten-year residence ban.

When the victim is in a state of particular vulnerability due to their age, illness, physical or mental disability, their state of pregnancy, the applicable penalty is fifteen years' imprisonment, a fine of 10,000,000 francs and a ten-year residence ban.

Paragraph 3: Procuring

Article 325-8

The offense of procuring is constituted by the act, by any person, in any manner whatsoever:

1°) of aiding, assisting or protecting the prostitution of another person;

2°) of profiting from the prostitution of another person, or sharing the proceeds thereof;

3°) of recruiting, enticing or diverting a person for the purpose of prostitution or exerting pressure on that person to engage in prostitution.

Any person guilty of procuring is punished by five years' imprisonment, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Where the person is in a state of particular vulnerability by reason of age, illness, physical or mental disability, or pregnancy, the applicable penalty is twenty years' imprisonment, a fine of 5,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Paragraph 4: Soliciting

Article 325-9

The act, by any means, including by an attitude even if passive, of publicly soliciting another person with a view to inciting that person to sexual relations in exchange for remuneration or a promise of remuneration is punished by two months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Section 7: Incest

Article 325-10

The offense of incest is constituted and punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, by the act of having sexual relations with one's ascendants or descendants without limitation of degree or with a full, consanguineous or uterine brother or sister.

Incest committed between persons of the same sex constitutes an aggravating circumstance and is punished by seven years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Except in cases of notorious cohabitation or incestuous marriage, prosecution may only be initiated upon complaint by a relative and only against the person or persons designated in the complaint.

Chapter 6

Offenses against the family Section 1: Bigamy

Article 326-1

Any woman who, being bound by the ties of marriage, contracts another marriage before the dissolution of the previous one is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,200,000 francs.

The same applies to a monogamous man who contracts a second marriage or to one who, having four lawful wives, contracts a fifth union.

The public officer who knowingly lends his ministry to such marriages is punished by the same penalties.

Section 2: Adultery

Article 326-2

Adultery is the act of having consensual sexual intercourse with a person other than one's spouse.

Article 326-3

Adultery by a wife may only be reported by the husband. Adultery by a husband may only be reported by the lawful wife or wives.

Article 326-4

A spouse convicted of adultery is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs. The accomplice is punished as the adulterous spouse.

Section 3

Abandonment of the marital home - Abandonment of the household or child and failure to produce a child

Article 326-5

A wife who abandons the marital home without serious cause or a spouse who abandons his or her spouse or child and refuses to provide for their maintenance is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 120,000 francs.

Article 326-6

The act of wrongfully refusing to produce a minor child to the person who has the right to claim that child is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Article 326-7

Any person who refuses to comply with a child custody order is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 4: Repudiation

Article 326-8

Repudiation is the expressed and unequivocal will of a spouse to unilaterally break the conjugal bond.

Any spouse convicted of repudiation is punished by the penalties set out in Article 326-5 above.

Article 326-9

In the cases provided for in Articles 326-4, 326-5 and 326-8 above, prosecution may only be brought upon complaint by the husband, the wife or the person responsible for the custody of the child. They remain free to discontinue proceedings or to discontinue the effect of the conviction. Such withdrawal benefits the accomplice.

Section 5: Overbidding of the dowry - Exchange of women

Article 326-10

Any person who, by overbidding the dowry, promises, gifts, any means of persuasion or corruption, obtains or attempts to obtain in marriage a woman or girl already promised to another man, is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 400,000 francs. Confiscation of the means of corruption is ordered.

Persons, including relatives, who have knowingly incited, aided or assisted the perpetrator in accomplishing the above-mentioned acts are punished by the same penalties.

These penalties are also applicable to individuals who have been guilty of exchanging women as well as to their accomplices.

Chapter 7

Offenses against gender Section 1: Gender

Article 327-1

Gender means the set of socially and culturally constructed relationships that determine the roles, behaviors, attitudes, rights and duties associated with men, women, boys and girls respectively.

Section 2: Sexual assault and other gender-based violence

Article 327-2

Sexual assault is constituted by any sexual violation committed with violence, threat or surprise upon a person without that person's consent.

Any person guilty of sexual assault is punished by two years' imprisonment, a fine of 500,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Aggravating circumstances are constituted by the fact that the assault results in injury or lesion, the fact that the person sexually assaulted is a child, the fact that the perpetrator is an ascendant or a person having authority over the person sexually assaulted, the fact that the perpetrator abuses the authority conferred by his or her functions, the fact that the perpetrator commits the sexual assault with other persons, whether perpetrators or accomplices, the fact that the perpetrator commits the sexual assault with use or threat of a weapon, administration of psychotropic or alcoholic substances.

Any person guilty of sexual assault in one or more of the aforementioned aggravating circumstances is punished by ten years' imprisonment, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Section 3: Castration

Article 327-3

Castration is the voluntary ablation or amputation of an organ necessary for reproduction.

Outside of any medical prescription, any person guilty of the crime of castration is punished by thirty years' imprisonment.

If death has resulted therefrom, the perpetrator is punished by life imprisonment.

Section 4: Sexual harassment

Article 327-4

Sexual harassment is constituted by the act of giving orders, using words, gestures, writings, messages and this, repeatedly, uttering threats, imposing constraints, exerting pressure or using any other means for the purpose of obtaining from a person in a situation of vulnerability or subordination, favors of a sexual nature for one's own benefit or for the benefit of a third party against the will of the harassed person.

The situation of vulnerability of the victim may result from age, social and economic status as well as physical or mental condition or any other related situation left to the judge's discretion.

Article 327-5

Any person guilty of sexual harassment is punished by three years' imprisonment.

Article 327-6 : The following constitute aggravating circumstances:

1°) the harassed person being a minor child;

2°) the perpetrator being an ascendant or a person having authority over the sexually harassed person;

3°) the perpetrator abusing the authority conferred by their functions;

4°) the perpetrator committing the act of sexual harassment with other persons, whether as perpetrators or accomplices;

5°) the perpetrator committing the act of sexual harassment with use or threat of a weapon.

Whoever is guilty of sexual harassment in one or more of the aforementioned aggravating circumstances is punished by imprisonment of five years.

If it has resulted, for the sexually harassed person, in an illness, an incapacity for personal work for more than twenty days, the loss of employment or the abandonment of studies, the applicable penalty is ten years' imprisonment.

Section 5 : Forced pornography

Article 327-7 : The following constitutes the offence of forced pornography

1°) the act of producing, being in possession of or disseminating any photographic, filmed, video, sound recording or other representation, featuring either a person engaging in explicit sexual activity without their consent, or the sexual organs or anal region of the person without their consent;

2°) the act of producing, being in possession of or disseminating any writing, photographic, filmed, video or other representation or any sound recording that encourages sexual activity with a person without their consent;

3°) the act of producing, being in possession of or disseminating any writing whose dominant characteristic is the description, for a sexual purpose, of sexual activity with a person without their consent.

Pornography involving a child is assimilated to forced pornography.

Whoever is guilty of forced pornography is punished by imprisonment of ten years, a fine of 5,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

The following constitutes an aggravating circumstance of the offence: the act of producing, being in possession of or disseminating pornography featuring a child or a person with a disability incapable of formulating consent.

Whoever is guilty of forced pornography in one of the aggravating circumstances provided for in the preceding paragraph is punished by imprisonment of twenty years, a fine of 10,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Section 6 : Sex tourism involving children

Article 327-8

The following constitutes the offence of sex tourism involving children: any travel whose essential purpose is the intention to facilitate or to have sexual relations with a child, the sale of children for this same purpose, the prostitution of children or any other illegal sexual practice involving a child.

Whoever is guilty of sex tourism involving children is punished by imprisonment of ten years, a fine of 5,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Section 7 : The offence of forced sterilisation

Article 327-9

Forced sterilisation constitutes any act, of a nature to deprive of the biological capacity of reproduction, committed on a person without their consent and not justified by a therapeutic necessity.

Whoever is guilty of forced sterilisation is punished by imprisonment of twenty years, a fine of 1,000,000 francs and a residence ban of ten years.

Article 327-10

The offences provided for by articles 327-8, 327-9 and 327-11 of this Code are excluded from the scope of mediation or any amicable settlement.

Section 8 : Forced marriage

Article 327-11

Forced marriage constitutes the union between a man and a woman, celebrated by a civil registrar or a minister of religion, of which at least one has not given their free and full consent to the marriage.

Whoever celebrates, forces, facilitates or is an accomplice to a forced marriage is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Any agreement by which the hand of a person is granted without their consent is assimilated to forced marriage.

Section 9 : Child marriage

Article 327-12

Child marriage constitutes the union between a man and a woman, celebrated by a civil registrar or a minister of religion, of which at least one is under sixteen years of age.

Any unofficial union involving at least one person under sixteen years of age is assimilated to child marriage.

Whoever celebrates, forces or facilitates a child marriage is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Any agreement by which the hand of a person under sixteen years of age is granted is assimilated to child marriage.

Section 10 : Forced levirate

Article 327-13

Forced levirate constitutes the forced union of a widow with a relative of her deceased husband.

Whoever by coercion, threat or blackmail celebrates or is an accomplice to a forced levirate is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 11 : Forced sororate

Article 327-14

Forced sororate constitutes the forced union of a widower with a relative of his deceased wife.

Whoever by coercion, threat or blackmail celebrates or is an accomplice to a forced sororate is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 12 : Gender-based insult

Article 327-15

Gender-based insult constitutes any invective, vulgar or contemptuous expression, not preceded by provocation, said or written by one person to another in private or in public, which imputes no specific fact to the insulted person and which is uttered against a person by reason of gender. Whoever is guilty of an insult against a person by reason of gender is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 250,000 francs.

Section 13 : Economic discrimination in the workplace

Article 327-16

Economic discrimination in the workplace constitutes any discrimination related to gender and having in particular the purpose of hindering the normal exercise of any economic activity by a person, of refusing to hire a person, of not giving them equal pay or of not allowing them access to training and promotion opportunities, of sanctioning them in their workplace or of dismissing them.

Whoever is guilty of economic discrimination in the workplace against a person by reason of gender is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 14 : Refusal to assume a duty associated with parental authority

Article 327-17

Any refusal to assume a duty of parental authority for reasons of gender is prohibited, in particular to protect the child in their safety, health, full development or morality, to ensure their custody, supervision or education, or to ensure the costs of maintenance or education of the child.

Whoever is guilty of a refusal to assume a duty associated with parental authority is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 15

Denial of resources, services or opportunities with regard to a person

Article 327-18

Denial of resources, services or opportunities means any prevention of legitimate access to resources, economic assets, services or opportunities with regard to a person, and in particular:
1°) preventing a person from receiving their share of inheritance on the basis of gender;
2°) preventing a person from having access to land on the basis of gender;
3°) a person having their income confiscated, in particular by a member of their family, on the basis of gender;

4°) preventing a person from accessing basic social services, in particular education and health, on the basis of gender;

5°) preventing a person from engaging in a professional activity, on the basis of gender.

Whoever commits a denial of resources, services or opportunities is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 16 : Du refus d'exercer ses obligations suite à une rupture

Article 327-19

It constitutes an offence for a person not to execute a judicial decision or an approved judicial agreement imposing obligations upon them for the benefit of their former spouse and their children. These obligations may be imposed on the former spouse, whether the marriage was celebrated before the civil registrar or before a minister of religion.

Proof of a marriage celebrated before a minister of religion may be provided by any means.

Whoever refuses to perform their obligations following a separation is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 17 : De l'imposition d'un interdit alimentaire

Article 327-20

Whoever imposes a dietary prohibition negatively affecting the health of the mother, foetus or infant in the event of pregnancy or childbirth is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 francs.

Section 18 : Du gavage

Article 327-21

Force-feeding means any act aimed at forcing a person to ingest an excessive quantity of food in relation to their needs.

Whoever is guilty of force-feeding is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 francs.

LIVRE IV

DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA PROPRIETE TITRE I: DES APPROPRIATIONS FRAUDULEUSES

Chapitre 1

Des atteintes à la propriété intellectuelle-brevets d'invention- modèles d'utilité-marques de produits ou de services-dessins ou modèles industriels-œuvres littéraires et artistiques

[Loi n°2017-012 du 1er juin 2017 fixant le régime de la propriété littéraire et artistique]

Article 411-1

Any infringement of the rights of a patent holder, holder of a utility model or creator of an industrial design or model, whether by manufacture of a product or by use of means that are the subject of the patent, public utility model, industrial design or model constitutes the offence of counterfeiting punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Article 411-2

Receivers and those who sell or introduce into the national territory one or more counterfeit objects are punished by the same penalties as counterfeiters.

In the event of a repeat offence, in addition to the fine referred to in the preceding article, a term of imprisonment of six months may be imposed.

Article 411-3

Any edition of a writing, musical composition, drawing, painting or any other production printed or engraved in whole or in part in disregard of the laws and regulations relating to the property of authors, constitutes the offence of counterfeiting punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Article 411-4

Counterfeiting of a trademark, use of a counterfeit trademark and fraudulent affixing of a trademark belonging to another person, constitute infringements of the rights of the owner of the trademark and are punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

The Court may also order the confiscation, repackaging or destruction of the seized counterfeit products.

Chapitre 2 : Des vols

Article 412-1

Whoever fraudulently misappropriates a thing that does not belong to them is guilty of theft.

Section 1 : Des vols qualifiés

Article 412-2

Any individual guilty of theft committed in a gang or with a weapon is punished by death.

The same penalty applies in the event of theft committed with the use of violence, with or without carrying a weapon, or with the use of intoxicating or anaesthetic substances.

Article 412-3

Any individual guilty of theft committed at night, with one of the following circumstances, is punished by life imprisonment:

1°) in an inhabited dwelling;

2°) with the use of breaking and entering, scaling or false keys within the meaning of articles 132-46 and 132-47 of this Code;

3°) by two or more persons.

Article 412-4

Any individual guilty of theft to the detriment of the army committed in a barracks, quarters, premises, depot, on board a ship, aircraft or any vehicle or in any other military establishment is punished by the penalty provided for in the preceding article.

Article 412-5

Any individual guilty of theft committed at night is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a ten-year residence ban.

The same penalties apply in the event of theft committed during the day, with one of the following circumstances:

1°) with the use of breaking and entering, scaling or false keys within the meaning of articles 132-46 and 132-47 of this Code;

2°) by two or more persons;

3°) if the theft relates to livestock;

4°) if the thief is a domestic servant or employee, even when they commit the theft against persons they do not serve, but who are either in the house of their employer, or in the house to which they accompany them, or if they are a worker or apprentice, in the house, workshop, shop or agricultural operation of their employer, or an individual working in the dwelling where they stole.

5°) if the theft is committed by the employer to the detriment of their domestic servant, hired servant, worker or apprentice.

Article 412-6

For the purposes of this Code, an inhabited dwelling means any building, lodging, hut, cabin even if mobile, tent which, without being currently inhabited, is intended for habitation.

Section 2 : Des vols simples-des grivèleries

Article 412-7

All other thefts not specified in this section, petty thefts and pilfering, as well as attempts at these same offences, are punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,800,000 francs.

The guilty parties may, in addition, be deprived of the rights mentioned in article 131-6 of this Code for ten years, from the day they have served their sentence.

They may also be subject to a residence ban for ten years.

Article 412-8

Whoever, knowing that they are in absolute impossibility of paying, has drinks or food served to them or consumed by a third party in establishments intended for that purpose, has themselves or a third party lodged or transported, is punished by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Article 412-9

Whoever uses a vehicle against the will or without the consent of its owner is punished by the penalties set out in article 412-7 above.

Chapitre 3 : Des fraudes

Section 1 : Des fraudes et autres pratiques illicites

Article 413-1

Any act performed with the intention of evading a provision of any nature relating to the examination system in schools, institutes and faculties constitutes the offence of examination fraud.

Any act performed with the intention of evading a provision of any nature relating to any recruitment process aimed at the designation, by a panel following an appropriate test, of the candidate or candidates, constitutes the offence of competitive examination fraud.

Article 413-2

The following are notably considered as fraud in an examination or competitive examination, all practices tending to:

1°) transmit, communicate, disseminate or sell examination papers, their answer keys or their solutions;

2°) substitute said examination papers, results or lists of candidates;

3°) modify by addition or removal of marks or names of candidates from lists relating to said examinations or competitive examinations;

4°) communicate a code or any sign to certain candidates, with a view to identifying them and attributing to them an undeserved mark;

5°) corrupt an examiner, an invigilator, a supervisor, a jury president, a candidate or any person participating in the organisation of the competitive examination or examination;

6°) carry out any blackmail against an examiner, an invigilator, a supervisor, a jury president, a candidate or any person participating in the organisation of the competitive examination or examination;

7°) fraudulently use any means of communication.

Article 413-3

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 3,000,000 francs, anyone who, by any means and in any form whatsoever, commits fraud in or on the occasion of an examination or public competitive examination having as its object entry into a public administration or the obtaining of an official diploma.

Article 413-4

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, anyone who through carelessness, negligence or non-observance of regulations facilitates fraud in an examination or competitive examination.

Article 413-5

The imprisonment is three years and the fine 1,000,000 francs, when the fraud is committed on the occasion of an examination or competitive examination other than public.

Article 413-6

Anyone who commits an offence of this nature, notably by delivering to a third party or by knowingly communicating, before or during the examination or competitive examination, to any of the interested parties the text or subject of the test or by making use of false documents, such as diplomas, certificates, birth extracts or others, or by substituting a third person for the true candidates or by carrying out one of the acts provided for in article 413-2 above is punished by the penalties provided for in article 413-3 above.

Section 2: Unlawful retention

Article 413-7

Is punished by the penalties provided for in article 413-3 above, anyone who voluntarily retains in their possession information, documents, copies of tests, examinations or competitive examinations, tools or any other documents, whatever their form or medium, belonging to another.

Article 413-8

The attempt of the offences provided for in this chapter is punished as the offences themselves.

Article 413-9: The same penalties are pronounced against accomplices to the offences

Article 413-10

Public prosecution does not preclude disciplinary action in all cases where the law has provided for the latter.

Chapter 4

Extortion-Fraudulent dispossession-Disposal of another's property

Section 1: Extortion-fraudulent dispossession

Article 414-1

Anyone who extorts by force, violence or constraint, the signature or delivery of a writing, an act, a title, any document whatsoever, containing or effecting an obligation, disposition or discharge, is punished by criminal imprisonment of twenty years and prohibition of residence of twenty years.

Anyone who, by means of written or verbal threats, revelations or defamatory imputations, extorts or attempts to extort, either the delivery of funds or securities, or the signature or delivery of the writings enumerated in the preceding paragraph, is punished by imprisonment of five years.

Prohibition of residence of ten years and incapacity to ever hold public employment may be pronounced.

The person subject to seizure who destroys, misappropriates or attempts to destroy or misappropriate objects seized from them, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 300,000 francs.

These penalties are equally applicable to any debtor, borrower or third party pledgor, who destroys, misappropriates or attempts to destroy or misappropriate objects given by them as pledges.

Article 414-2

Anyone who, by force or by fraudulent means, dispossesses another of immovable property, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 300,000 francs without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties incurred for armed assembly, violence and assault, threats, fraud and other offences.

The attempt is punished as the offence itself.

Article 414-3

The provisions of article 414-2 above apply to provisional titles capable of being registered.

Section 2: Disposal of another's property

Article 414-4

The sale or pledging of another's property consented to in bad faith is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,800,000 francs.

Chapter 5

Fraud and other related offences Section 1: Fraud

Article 415-1

Anyone who, either by using false names, false titles, or false qualities, or by abuse of a true quality, or by employing fraudulent manoeuvres, characterised lies, to persuade of the existence of false enterprises, of an imaginary power or credit, or to create hope or fear of a success or an accident or any other chimerical event, causes or attempts to cause the delivery to them of funds, titles, objects or movable effects and, by one of these means, defrauds or attempts to defraud all or part of another's fortune, obtains or attempts to obtain services, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,200,000 francs.

These penalties are applicable to any person who gives or attempts to give in marriage a girl already married or promised or a girl over whom custom confers no right upon them and who receives or attempts to receive all or part of the dowry.

Section 2: Stellionate

Article 415-2

Constitutes the offence of stellionate, any manoeuvre consisting in selling property which one knows one does not own, selling the same property to several persons, presenting as unencumbered property that is mortgaged or understating the mortgages that burden property.

Article 415-3: Is deemed a stellionataire

1°) anyone who causes a real right to be registered on a title which they know does not belong to them and anyone who knowingly accepts a certificate of registration thus established;

2°) anyone who, knowingly, transfers a title of ownership which they know does not belong to them and anyone who knowingly accepts this transfer, in this case, the penalty is doubled, without prejudice to damages;

3°) anyone who, obliged to register a legal mortgage on property subject to registration or a forced mortgage on registered property, grants a conventional mortgage on the property that should have been charged;

4°) anyone who, in bad faith, has caused to be registered by the State and transferred to their benefit an immovable.

Ministerial officers and public officials or agents within the meaning of article 241-14 of this Code having participated in the drafting of acts tainted with stellionate are prosecuted as accomplices.

Stellionate is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 4,000,000 francs.

Article 415-4

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs whoever:

1°) converts a provisional title into a definitive title, as manager of the land ownership system without observing all the required procedures incumbent upon them;

2°) as manager of the land ownership system, abusively cancels a clause encumbering a property;

3°) in the capacity of granting authority, allocates to the same person, by subdivision of surface area, lands from the private immovable domain of the State on the same site;

4°) makes false declarations in the context of the adversarial boundary demarcation procedure or the determination of customary land rights;

5°) refuses to comply with the summons of the manager of the land ownership system;

6°) alienates a portion of the public domain without prior declassification;

7°) violates the rules relating to the policing, conservation and use of the public domain, traffic policing, as well as the exercise of military easements and public utility easements;

8°) issues several sale agreements, or relocation notifications to different persons on the same parcel;

9°) signs, as mayor, neighborhood or village chief, any agreement relating to an immovable property that has not been the subject of confirmation of land rights;

10°) in bad faith illegally occupies or develops an immovable property without the prior consent of the owner or holder of the land right by a natural or legal person;

11°) carries out an urbanization operation on a domain that has not been the subject of allocation;

12°) by coercion, threat or any other pressure, compels an official of the administration of the Land Registry and Cadastre services to create, to transfer a land title, or to register real rights on a land title, to abusively cancel a resolutory clause, or to act in violation of the provisions of the Land and Property Code;

13°) acts in land matters in a domain where the law denies them any competence.

Article 415-5: Complicity in the above acts is punished as the offense itself

Article 415-6

Constitutes the offense of forgery in land and property matters and punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) the fraudulent alteration of land registers as well as the intentional use of said documents;

2°) the total or partial destruction of land registers;

3°) physical alterations intentionally caused with the aim of making the use or exploitation of land registers impossible.

Article 415-7

The offense of forgery indicated above is covered by the ten-year limitation period which begins to run from the commission of the acts.

Article 415-8

Constitutes the offense of criminal breach of trust and punished by the penalties of article 416-1 in fine of this Code, the act by a representative of the public authority of disposing without allocation or without granted competence, of lands from the private immovable domain of the State.

Article 415-9

The discovery of an act or transfer subject to the provisions of this Code not presented to the land registry office for publication within the prescribed time limits is sanctioned by the application of a double fee in addition without this fee being less than double the fixed fees relating thereto.

Article 415-10

The voluntary presentation, outside the time limits, of acts subject to the formality of publication is liable to an additional fee, without this fee being less than the amount of the fixed fees relating thereto.

Article 415-11

The person or parties who should have the formality of publication carried out bear the penalties.

Section 3

Offenses in matters of checks, bank cards and other electronic payment instruments and processes

[Law No. 10-020 of 31 May 2010 establishing uniform law relating to offenses in matters of checks, bank cards and other electronic payment instruments and processes]

Paragraph 1: Repression of offenses related to the use of checks

Article 415-12

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs:

1°) the drawer or agent who, knowingly, issues a check domiciled on a closed account;

2°) the drawer who, after issuing a check, withdraws all or part of the provision, by transfer, wire transfer or any means whatsoever, with the intention of infringing the rights of others;

3°) the drawer who issues one or more checks in defiance of the injunction addressed to them pursuant to article 115 of the Regulation relating to payment systems in the Member States of the West African Economic and Monetary Union;

4°) the agent who, knowingly, issues one or more checks whose issuance is prohibited to their principal, pursuant to article 115 of the Regulation referred to above;

5°) any person who prohibits the drawee from paying outside the cases provided for by article 84 paragraph 3 of the Regulation referred to above;

6°) any person who agrees to receive or endorse, knowingly, a check without provision;

7°) any person who, knowingly, makes use of a stolen check.

The attempt of the offenses listed above is punished as the completed offense.
The fine referred to in paragraph 1 may be increased to 5,000,000 francs if the drawer is a merchant or repeat offender.

Article 415-13

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:
1°) any person who counterfeits, falsifies or attempts to counterfeit or falsify a check;
2°) any person who knowingly, makes use or attempts to make use of a counterfeited or falsified check;
3°) any person who, knowingly, agrees to receive a counterfeited or falsified check.

Article 415-14

Is punished by imprisonment of seven years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs whoever knowingly, manufactures, acquires, possesses, transfers, offers or makes available materials, machines, apparatus, equipment, instruments, computer programs or any data designed or specially adapted to commit the offenses provided for in point 1 of article 415-13 above.
The attempt of the offenses listed above is punished as the completed offense.

Article 415-15

The confiscation, for purposes of destruction, of counterfeited or falsified checks, is mandatory in the cases provided for in articles 415-12 to 415-14 above.
Also mandatory is the confiscation of materials, machines, apparatus, equipment, instruments, computer programs or any data that serve or are intended to serve in the manufacture of said checks, except when they are used without the knowledge of the owner.

Article 415-16

In all cases provided for in Articles 415-12 and 415-13 above, the competent court pursuant to Article 113 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above, shall prohibit the convicted person, for a period of five years, from issuing cheques other than those which exclusively permit the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those which are certified.

This prohibition may be declared provisionally enforceable. It is accompanied by an injunction addressed to the convicted person to return to the bankers who had issued them the cheque forms in his possession and in that of his agents.

The competent court may order, at the expense of the convicted person, the publication of the extract of the decision imposing the prohibition in the newspapers it designates and according to the procedures it determines.

Any banker informed of the prohibition by the Central Bank in accordance with Articles 127 and 129 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above, must refrain from issuing to the convicted person and his agents cheque forms other than those mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article.

When the conviction is pronounced following a payment incident noted on a joint account with or without joint and several liability, the prohibition provided for in paragraph 2 of this article is, by operation of law, applicable to the other holders with regard to said account.

Article 415-17

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, pursuant to Article 415-16 paragraph 1 above:

1°) the drawer who issues one or more cheques in violation of the prohibition imposed;

2°) the agent who, knowingly, issues one or more cheques the issuance of which is prohibited to his principal.

Article 415-18

The acts referred to in Articles 415-12 and 415-13 above, are considered, for the application of provisions concerning recidivism, as constituting an offence of the same nature. In case of recidivism, double the fine provided for in the aforementioned articles is imposed.

Article 415-19

On the occasion of criminal proceedings brought against the drawer, the holder who has joined as a civil party is entitled to claim before the competent criminal court a sum equal to the amount of the cheque, without prejudice, where applicable, to all damages. He may, nevertheless, if he prefers, bring an action for payment of his claim before the civil or commercial court.

Article 415-20

Is punished by a fine of 3,000,000 francs the drawee who, outside the cases mentioned in Article 84 paragraph 3 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above, refuses payment of a cheque on the ground that the drawer has placed a stop payment on it.

Article 415-21 : Is punished by a fine of 3,000,000 francs

1°) the drawee who indicates a provision lower than the existing and available provision;

2°) the drawee who rejects a cheque for insufficiency or unavailability of the provision without indicating, when such is the case, that the cheque was issued in defiance of an injunction addressed pursuant to Article 115 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above or in violation of a prohibition imposed pursuant to Article 6 paragraph 1 of Law No. 10-020 of 31 May 2010 enacting the uniform law on offences relating to cheques, bank cards and other electronic payment instruments and processes;

3°) the drawee who has not declared, under the conditions provided for in Article 127 of the Regulation referred to above, payment incidents as well as the offences provided for by Articles 415-12 (a) to (g), 415-13 and 415-17 above;

4°) the drawee who contravenes the provisions of Articles 113, 115, 123 of the Regulation referred to above and of Article 415-16 paragraph 2 above;

5°) the drawee who contravenes the provisions of Articles 43 and 45 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above.

In the cases referred to in points 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, the drawee legal person may be brought by the victim before the court seized of the public action for unpaid cheque, for compensation for the damage related to the faults indicated above.

Article 415-22

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, anyone who uses for purposes other than those provided for by the provisions of the Regulation, the information centralized by the Central Bank pursuant to Articles 127 to 130 of said Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above.

Article 415-23

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, anyone who ensures, in place of the Central Bank, without express authorization from the BCEAO, the centralization of information provided for by Articles 127 to 130 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above.

Article 415-24

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs anyone who disseminates without the prior authorization of the Central Bank, information obtained pursuant to Article 129 paragraph 7 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above.

Paragraphe 2

Prosecution of offences relating to bank cards and other electronic payment instruments and processes

Article 415-25 : Is punished by a fine of 2,000,000 francs

1°) any issuer who issues a payment card in violation of Article 139 paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Regulation referred to in Article 415-12 above. The competent court orders the withdrawal of the card;

2°) any issuer who fails to inform the Central Bank within the required time limits of the existence of an abuse noted in the use of the payment card or who does not comply with the provisions of Article 140 of the Regulation referred to above.

Article 415-26

Are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs:
1°) those who counterfeit, falsify or attempt to counterfeit or falsify a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument;
2°) those who, knowingly, make use or attempt to make use of a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument counterfeited, falsified or fraudulently obtained;
3°) those who, knowingly, agree to receive a payment by means of a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument counterfeited, falsified or fraudulently obtained;

4°) those who possess, knowingly, a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument counterfeited, falsified or fraudulently obtained.

Article 415-27

Is punished by imprisonment of seven years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, anyone who, knowingly, manufactures, acquires, possesses, transfers, offers or makes available equipment, instruments, computer programs or any data designed or specially adapted to commit the offences provided for in Article 415-26 point 1 of this section.

The attempt of the offences listed above is punished as the completed offence.

Article 415-28

Are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs those who:

a) use without authorization and, knowingly, identification data for the initiation or processing of an electronic payment transaction;

b) use, knowingly, fictitious identification data for the initiation or processing of an electronic payment transaction;

c) manipulate data or information relating to accounts or other identification data, with a view to the initiation or processing of an electronic payment transaction;

d) transmit without authorization identification data with a view to the initiation or processing of an electronic payment transaction;

e) manufacture, handle, possess or use without authorization specific equipment, with a view to:
the manufacture or alteration of a bank card, an electronic purse or part thereof; the initiation or processing of an electronic payment transaction; the modification or alteration of any information or data relating to any electronic payment instrument or transaction.
f) possess without authorization and, knowingly, an element or part of a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument.

The attempt of the offences listed above is punished as the completed offence.

The same penalties are applied to any person involved, as an accomplice by aid or instigation, with the perpetrators of the above-mentioned offences and involving criminal intent or who obtains, knowingly, values or pecuniary advantages arising from said offences.

Article 415-29

Are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs those who knowingly use a bank card or any other electronic payment instrument and process after:
the expiration of its period of validity, with fraudulent intent; opposition for loss, theft, fraudulent use or opening of collective proceedings against the beneficiary.

Are punished by the same penalties, those who, despite the injunction to return received, continue to use the bank card or any other electronic payment instrument and process irregularly held.

Article 415-30

Are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs those who carry out, knowingly, or cause to be carried out, attempt to carry out or cause to be carried out a transfer of money or monetary value, with the aim of obtaining an illegal economic advantage or obtaining it for another person by:

a) introducing, altering, erasing or deleting computer data;

b) disrupting the operation of software or a computer system.

Article 415-31

Are punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs those who, knowingly, manufacture, receive, obtain, sell, transfer, possess or attempt to manufacture, receive, obtain, sell, transfer or possess illegally:

a) equipment, instruments, articles, software or any other means specially adapted to commit the offences referred to in Article 415-30 of this section;

b) equipment, instruments, articles, software or any other means specially adapted to commit the offences referred to in point e) of Article 415-23 of this Code;

c) software intended for the commission of the offences referred to in Article 415-30 of this Code.

Article 415-32

The confiscation, for purposes of destruction of counterfeit or falsified payment or withdrawal cards, is mandatory in the cases provided for in Articles 415-26 to 415-29 and 415-31 of this section.
Also mandatory is the confiscation of materials, machines, apparatus, instruments, computer programs or any data which serve or are intended for the manufacture of said objects, except when they are used without the knowledge of the owner.

Article 415-33: The offences provided for in this section constitute offences

The decisions pronounced on civil interests are enforceable provisionally, on minute and before registration.
The decisions rendered in application of this section are notified without delay to the Central Bank at the diligence of the Public Prosecutor.
The Central Bank is required to disseminate to issuing institutions all judicial decisions, according to procedures it defines.

Section 4: Abuse of blank signature

Article 415-34

Whoever, abusing a blank signature which has been entrusted to him, fraudulently writes thereon an obligation or discharge or any other act which may compromise the person or fortune of the signatory, is punished by the penalties set forth in Article 415-12 of this Code.
In the case where the blank signature has not been entrusted to him, he is prosecuted as a forger and punished as such.

Section 5: Illegal speculation

Article 415-35

Those who, either in order to obtain a gain which would not be the result of free competition in trade or the natural play of the law of supply and demand, or with any other immoral intention or contrary to the general interest by any means whatsoever, directly or through an intermediary, operate or attempt to operate the artificial increase or decrease of the price of foodstuffs or goods or public or private securities, are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 100,000,000 francs.

The fine provided for in the preceding paragraph may be increased to 10% of the turnover achieved during the last financial year closed at the date of the decision by each of the enterprises having participated in the offence.

Section 6: Misleading advertising

Article 415-36

Any merchant, industrialist, artisan or service provider who carries out misleading advertising is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

In addition the Court may order the publication of a corrective notice at the expense of the convicted person. In all cases, the department in charge of Trade, Consumption and Competition may, as a precautionary measure, order the cessation of the advertising.

Is misleading, any advertising containing:

1°) in any form whatsoever, allegations, indications, presentations that are false or likely to mislead when these relate to one or more of the following elements of the good or product:
the existence, nature, quality, species, origin, composition, method and date of manufacture, substantial qualities, prices and conditions of sale, conditions of use;
the results expected from the use of the product, the reason or method of sale;
compliance with safety standards when the product is subject thereto, the identity, qualities or aptitudes of the manufacturer, reseller, service providers, promoters and the quality of commitments made by the latter.

2°) the indication of price reductions or any advantages whatsoever which are not actually granted to any purchaser under the conditions stated by the advertising.

3°) indications to the consumer concerning articles which are not available for sale or services which cannot be provided during the period to which this advertising relates.

Article 415-37: In the cases referred to in Articles 415-35 and 415

36 above, without prejudice to the right of prosecution of the administration of Trade, Consumption and Competition, any consumer or any approved consumer association who is a victim may refer the matter to the competent authority.

Chapter 6: Breach of trust and other related offences

Section 1: Breach of trust

Article 416-1

Breach of trust is the fraudulent misappropriation, committed to the detriment of the owner or holder of a sum of money, a document or any movable object whatsoever, which would have been entrusted for whatever reason by said owner or holder to the perpetrator of the misappropriation, on the condition that the latter return it or produce it.

Any person guilty of breach of trust is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,220,000 francs.

If the breach of trust provided for above is committed by a domestic servant, pupil, clerk, employee, worker or apprentice, to the detriment of his master, the penalty is five years' imprisonment.

If the breach of trust is committed by a ministerial officer, a public official within the meaning of Article 241-14 of this Code, acting in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his duties, the penalty is ten years' imprisonment and a fine which may not exceed 6,000,000 francs.

Section 2: Usury

Article 416-2

Any loan or any agreement concealing a loan of money granted, in any matter, at an effective overall rate exceeding, on the date of stipulation, the usury rate constitutes a usurious loan.

The usury rate is determined by the Council of Ministers of the West African Monetary Union. It is published in the Official Journal or in a legal notices newspaper on the initiative of the Minister responsible for Finance.

Article 416-3

The effective overall rate is freely negotiated between the borrower and the lender subject to compliance with the ceiling set in Article 416-2 above.

Article 416-4

The effective overall rate of conventional interest is the interest rate calculated taking into account the amortization of the debt and to which are added fees, remuneration of any kind, including those paid to intermediaries involved in any manner whatsoever in the granting of the loan.

However, taxes and duties paid on the occasion of the conclusion or performance of the contract are not included in the calculation of the effective overall interest rate.

Article 416-5

The ceiling rate as defined in Article 416-2 above and beyond which the offence of usury is constituted, may be increased, for certain categories of transactions which, by reason of their nature, involve high fixed costs, by flat-rate charges the amount of which is fixed by the Council of Ministers of the West African Monetary Union, on the proposal of the Central Bank of West African States.

Article 416-6

Credits granted on the occasion of instalment sales are, for the application of these provisions, assimilated to conventional loans and as such, subject to the requirements of Article 416-2 above.

Article 416-7

In the case of loans on foodstuffs or other movable things and in credit sale or barter transactions, the value of the things delivered or the price paid by the debtor, in principal and accessories, may not exceed the value of the things received by an amount greater than that corresponding to the maximum interest rate set in Article 416-2 above.

Article 416-8

Any person who grants a usurious loan to another or knowingly provides, in whatever capacity and in whatever manner, directly or indirectly, his assistance in obtaining or granting a usurious loan is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

In the event of a repeat offence, the penalty may be increased to five years' imprisonment and the fine to 15,000,000 francs.

Article 416-9: In addition to the penalties set in the preceding article, the Court may order

1°) the publication of its decision at the expense of the convicted person in the newspapers it designates, as well as in any other form it deems appropriate;

2°) the provisional or permanent closure of the enterprise which has engaged or whose managers have engaged in usurious transactions, together with the appointment of an administrator or liquidator.

In the event of provisional closure, the offender or the enterprise must continue to pay its staff the salaries and allowances of any kind to which they are entitled. This period may not exceed three months.

In the event of a repeat offence, permanent closure is ordered.

Article 416-10: Those who, responsible in any capacity for the management or administration of an enterprise, company, association, cooperative, or other legal person, knowingly allow any person subject to their authority or control to contravene the provisions of this section are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 416

8 above and possibly by the measures set in Article 416-
9 above.

Article 416-11

When a loan is usurious, the excessive charges are automatically applied to the interest calculated under the conditions set in Article 416-4 above, then due and for the surplus, if applicable, to the capital of the debt.

If the debt is extinguished in capital and interest, the sums unduly received are returned with legal interest from the day they were paid.

Article 416-12

The limitation period for the offence of usury runs from the day of the last receipt, either of interest or of capital, or of the last delivery of a thing relating to the usurious transaction.

Article 416-13

The legal interest rate is, in all matters, fixed for the duration of the calendar year. It is, for the year in question, equal to the weighted average of the discount rate applied by the Central Bank of West African States during the preceding calendar year.

It is published in the Official Journal, on the initiative of the Minister responsible for Finance.

Article 416-14

In the event of conviction to pay interest at the legal interest rate, the latter is increased by half upon expiry of a period of two months from the day on which the court decision became enforceable, even provisionally.

Article 416-15

The provisions of Articles 416-2 to 416-14 above are not applicable to current contracts having a certain date.

Section 3: Removal of procedural documents

Article 416-16

Any person who, after having produced in a legal dispute any title, document or memorandum, removes it in any manner whatsoever, or refuses to produce it, is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

Section 4: Obstruction of freedom of bidding

Article 416-17

Those who, in auctions for the ownership, usufruct or lease of movable or immovable property, an enterprise, a supply, an operation or any service, obstruct or disturb the freedom of bids or offers, by acts of violence, violence, threats or disturbances, either before or during the bids or offers, are punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

The same penalty is imposed on those who, by gifts, promises or any fraudulent manoeuvres, drive away bidders.

Section 5: Clandestine transport of passengers

Article 416-18

Any person who, piloting or ensuring the custody of a vehicle, not specially intended for the transport of passengers, without the express authorization of his employer, transports or attempts to transport one or more persons free of charge or for remuneration, is punished by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

TITLE II

OFFENCES PROVIDED FOR BY THE UNIFORM ACTS OF THE ORGANISATION FOR THE HARMONISATION OF BUSINESS LAW IN AFRICA (OHADA)

Chapter 1

Offences provided for in the Uniform Act of 15 December 2010 on general commercial law

Article 421-1

In application of articles 69 and 140 of the Uniform Act on general commercial law, any person required to complete one of the formalities prescribed in that uniform act who fails to do so, or who carries out a formality by fraud, is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.
If necessary, the competent court pronouncing the conviction orders the registration or rectification of inaccurate entries.

Chapter 2

Offences contained in the Uniform Act of 15 December 2010 on the organization of security interests

Article 422-1

In application of article 65 of the Uniform Act on the organization of security interests, any person who registers a movable security interest either by fraud or by entering inaccurate information or data in bad faith is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

If necessary, the competent court pronouncing the conviction orders the registration or rectification of inaccurate entries.

Article 422-2

In application of article 184 of the Uniform Act on the organization of security interests, the lessee or any person who, by fraudulent maneuvers, deprives the lessor of his privilege totally or partially is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Chapter 3

Offences contained in the Uniform Act of 30 January 2014 on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings

Section 1: Offences relating to the formation of companies

Article 423-1

In application of article 886 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, the founders, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager of a public limited company who issue shares before registration or at any time when registration is obtained by fraud or the company is irregularly formed are punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423-2

In application of article 887 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, those who are punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

a)	knowingly affirm as true and accurate subscriptions which they know to be fictitious or declare that funds which have not been placed entirely at the disposal of the company have been actually paid;

b)	deliver to the notary or depositary a list of shareholders or subscription and payment forms mentioning fictitious subscriptions or payments of funds which have not been placed definitively at the disposal of the company;

c)	knowingly, by simulating subscription or payment or by publishing payment which does not exist or any other false facts, obtain or attempt to obtain subscriptions or payments;

d)	knowingly, to induce subscriptions or payments, publish the names of persons designated contrary to the truth as being or to be connected with the company in any capacity whatsoever;

e)	fraudulently, cause a contribution in kind to be assigned a valuation higher than its actual value.

Article 423-3

In application of article 888 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, those who knowingly negotiate are punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

a)	shares not fully paid up;

b)	cash shares for which payment of one quarter of the nominal value has not been made.

Section 2

Offences relating to the management, administration and direction of companies

Article 423-4

In application of article 889 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, company directors who, in the absence of an inventory or by means of fraudulent inventories, knowingly distribute fictitious dividends among the shareholders or members are punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Article 423-5

In application of article 890 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, company directors who knowingly, even in the absence of any distribution of dividends, publish or present to shareholders or members, with a view to concealing the true situation of the company, summary financial statements not giving, for each financial year, a true picture of the operations of the financial year, the financial situation and that of the company's assets at the end of that period are punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Incur the same penalties, in application of article 890-1 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, company directors who have not filed the summary financial statements within one month following their approval.

Article 423-6

In application of article 891 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, the manager of the limited liability company, the chairman of the simplified joint-stock company, the directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager who, in bad faith, make use of the company's assets or credit in a manner which they know to be contrary to the interests of the company, for personal purposes, material or moral, or to favor another legal entity in which they have an interest, directly or indirectly, are punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Incur the same penalties, in application of article 891-1 of the Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, company directors who, knowingly:
do not include the company name on acts and documents emanating from the company and intended for third parties;
do not precede or immediately follow the company name with the indication, in legible characters, of the form of the company, the amount of its share capital, the address of its registered office and the mention of its registration in the Trade and Movable Credit Register.

Incur the same penalties, in application of article 891-2 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, the company directors of a foreign company or the foreign natural person whose branch, beyond a period of two years, has been neither contributed to a pre-existing or to be created company under the law of one of the States Parties, nor struck off under the conditions laid down by article 120 of the said text.

Section 3: Offences relating to general meetings

Article 423-7

In application of article 891-3 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, those who knowingly prevent a shareholder or member from participating in a general meeting are punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 423-8

In application of article 892 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings, company directors who, knowingly, do not draw up the minutes of general meetings in the forms required by this Uniform Act are punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 4

Offences relating to changes in the capital of public limited companies

Paragraphe 1 : De l'augmentation de capital

Article 423-9

In application of Article 893 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the directors, the chairman of the board of directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager of a public limited company who, during a capital increase, issue shares or share certificates are punished by imprisonment for three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs:

a)	before the depositary's certificate is drawn up;
b)	without the formalities prior to the capital increase being duly completed;
c)	without the previously subscribed capital of the company being fully paid up;
d)	without the new shares contributed in kind being fully paid up before the amendment registration in the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register;
e)	without the new shares being paid up by at least one quarter of their nominal value at the time of subscription;
f)	where applicable, without the entire share premium being paid up at the time of subscription.
Are punished by the same penalties, in application of Article 893-1 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the managers of a limited liability company who, during a capital increase, have issued shares without these new shares having been paid up by at least half of their nominal value at the time of subscription.

Article 423-10

In application of Article 894 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who, during a capital increase, are punished by imprisonment for three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs:	do not grant shareholders, in proportion to the amount of their shares, a preferential right to subscribe for cash shares when this right is not removed by the general meeting and the shareholders have not waived it;
do not reserve for shareholders a period of at least twenty days from the opening of the subscription, except when this period is closed early;
do not allocate the shares made available, for lack of a sufficient number of subscriptions on a non-reducible basis, to shareholders who have subscribed on a reducible basis for a number of shares greater than that which they could subscribe for on a non-reducible basis, in proportion to the rights they hold;
do not reserve the rights of holders of subscription warrants.

Article 423-11

In application of Article 895 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who knowingly give or confirm inaccurate information in the reports presented to the general meeting called to decide on the removal of the preferential subscription right are punished by imprisonment for three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : De la réduction du capital

Article 423-12

In application of Article 896 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the deputy general manager who knowingly proceed with a capital reduction are punished by imprisonment for three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs:
without respecting the equality of shareholders;
without communicating the capital reduction project to the statutory auditors forty-five days before the holding of the general meeting called to rule on the capital reduction.

Section 5 : Des infractions relatives au contrôle des sociétés

Article 423-13

In application of Article 897 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who do not initiate the appointment of the company's statutory auditors or do not summon them to general meetings are punished by imprisonment for five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423-14

In application of Article 898 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, any person who, either in their own name or as a partner of a statutory auditors' firm, accepts, exercises or retains, knowingly, the functions of statutory auditor, notwithstanding legal incompatibilities, is punished by imprisonment for five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423-15

In application of Article 899 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, any statutory auditor who, either in their own name or as a partner of a statutory auditors' firm, knowingly gives or confirms false information about the situation of the company or who does not disclose to the Public Prosecutor criminal acts of which they have knowledge is punished by imprisonment for five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423- 16

In application of Article 900 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors or any persons in the service of the company who knowingly obstruct the verifications or control of the statutory auditors or who refuse the communication, on site, of all documents useful for the exercise of their mission and in particular of all contracts, books, accounting documents and minutes registers are punished by imprisonment for five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Section 6 : Des infractions relatives à la dissolution des sociétés

Article 423-17

In application of Article 901 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who knowingly, when the company's equity becomes less than half of the share capital due to losses recorded in the summary financial statements, are punished by imprisonment for five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:
do not convene, within four months following the approval of the summary financial statements that revealed these losses, the extraordinary general meeting for the purpose of deciding, if necessary, on the early dissolution of the company;
do not file at the registry of the Court responsible for commercial matters, do not have registered in the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register and do not publish, in a newspaper authorized to receive legal notices, the early dissolution of the company.

Section 7: Offences relating to the liquidation of companies

Article 423-18

In application of Article 902 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, a liquidator of a company who knowingly:
within one month from his appointment, does not publish in a journal authorized to receive legal notices of the place of the registered office, the act appointing him liquidator and deposit with the Trade and Personal Property Credit Register the decisions pronouncing the dissolution;	does not convene the members, at the end of the liquidation, to decide on the final account of the liquidation, on the discharge of his management and the release of his mandate and to record the closure of the liquidation;	in the case provided for by Article 219 of the Uniform Act, does not deposit his final accounts at the registry of the Court responsible for commercial matters of the place of the registered office, nor request judicial approval thereof.

shall be punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423-19

In application of Article 903 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, when the liquidation occurs by judicial decision, a liquidator who knowingly:
within six months of the closure of his appointment, does not present a report on the assets and liabilities of the company in liquidation and on the continuation of liquidation operations, nor request the necessary authorizations to complete them;
within three months of the closure of each financial year, does not prepare the summary financial statements in view of the inventory and a written report in which he accounts for the liquidation operations during the past financial year;	does not allow the members to exercise, during the liquidation period, their right to access company documents under the same conditions as previously;	does not convene the members, at least once a year, to report to them on the summary financial statements in case of continuation of the company's operations;	does not deposit in an account opened in a bank in the name of the company in liquidation, within fifteen days from the distribution decision, the sums allocated to distributions among the members and creditors;	does not deposit, in a consignment account opened in the books of the Public Treasury, within one year from the closure of the liquidation, the sums allocated to creditors or members and not claimed by them.

shall be punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 423-20

In application of Article 904 of the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, a liquidator who, in bad faith:
makes use of the assets or credit of the company in liquidation in a manner he knows to be contrary to the interest of the company, for personal purposes or to favor another legal entity in which he has an interest, directly or indirectly;
transfers all or part of the assets of the company in liquidation to a person having in the company the capacity of general partner, limited partner, manager, member of the board of directors, general administrator or auditor, without having obtained the unanimous consent of the members or, failing that, the authorization of the competent court.

shall be punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Section 8

Offences relating to the failure to disclose information on the beneficial owners of legal entities and other legal arrangements

Article 423-21

In application of legislative and regulatory provisions on the obligation to disclose the beneficial owners of legal entities, shareholders and designated directors, managers and administrators of fiducies, trusts and other similar legal arrangements, as well as their directors, shareholders and designated directors, managers and administrators of fiducies, trusts and other similar legal arrangements who, knowingly:
fail to maintain and preserve adequate, accurate and up-to-date information on their own beneficial owners;
do not file with the competent authorities the declaration of their beneficial owners or fail to update said declaration;
do not make available to the competent authorities and reporting entities, without hindrance, in a timely manner, the above information;
do not keep for ten years the registers of beneficial owners;
do not disclose their status as designated director or candidate for such status;
perform belatedly or provide false declarations on beneficial owners.
Shall be punished by the penalties provided for by the uniform law on the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism with regard to the identification of beneficial owners.

Article 423-22

The above criminal sanction applies without prejudice to the specific fines provided for by the texts establishing this obligation.

Chapter 4

Offences contained in the Uniform Act of 10 September 2015 on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities

Section 1: Bankruptcy and related offences

Article 424-1

In application of Article 227 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, the provisions of this section apply to traders, natural persons, and to members of commercial companies who have the capacity of trader.

Paragraph 1: Bankruptcy

Article 424-2

In application of Article 228 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, any trader, natural person, in a state of cessation of payments, who:
contracts without receiving values in exchange, commitments deemed too large in view of his situation when he contracts them with the intention of delaying the finding of the cessation of his payments, makes purchases with a view to resale below the market price or if, with the same intention, employs ruinous means to procure funds;
without legitimate excuse, does not make at the registry of the competent court, the declaration of his state of cessation of payments within thirty days;
keeps incomplete or irregular accounts or does not keep them in accordance with accounting rules and recognized practices in the profession having regard to the size of the enterprise.

shall be declared guilty of simple bankruptcy and punished by two years' imprisonment.

The trader, natural person, is also guilty of bankruptcy and punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above when, after having been declared three times in a state of cessation of payments within five years, these proceedings have been closed for insufficiency of assets.

Article 424-3

In application of Article 229 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, any natural person who, in the event of cessation of payments, is declared guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy and punished by ten years' imprisonment:
conceals their accounting records;
misappropriates or dissipates all or part of their assets;
fraudulently acknowledges being a debtor of sums they did not owe either in their records, or by public deeds or private written commitments, or in their balance sheet;
exercises the commercial profession in violation of a prohibition provided for by the Uniform Acts or by law;
after cessation of payments, pays a creditor to the detriment of the estate;
stipulates with a creditor particular advantages by reason of their vote in the deliberations of the estate, or makes with a creditor a particular agreement from which results for the latter, an advantage at the expense of the debtor's assets from the day of the opening decision.

Any natural person trader who, on the occasion of a preventive settlement, judicial reorganization and liquidation of assets procedure, is also declared guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy and punished by the same penalty:
in bad faith, presents or causes to be presented an income statement, a balance sheet, a statement of receivables or debts or an active and passive statement of privileges and securities, that is inaccurate or incomplete;
without authorization from the president of the competent court, performs one of the acts prohibited by Article 11 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities.

Paragraphe 2 : Des infractions assimilées aux banqueroutes

Article 424-4

In application of Article 230 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, these provisions and those of Articles 424-5 and 424-6 below are applicable to natural persons who are directors of legal persons subject to collective proceedings and to their permanent representatives.

The directors referred to in this article mean all directors de jure or de facto and in general, any person having directly or through an intermediary, administered, managed or liquidated the legal person under cover of or in place of its legal representatives.

Article 424-5

In application of Article 231 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, the directors referred to in Article 424-4 above who, in that capacity and in bad faith, are punished by two years' imprisonment:
consume sums belonging to the legal person by making purely speculative transactions or fictitious transactions;
make purchases with a view to resale below market price or use ruinous means to procure funds with the intention of delaying the finding of cessation of payments of the legal person;
pay or cause to be paid a creditor to the detriment of the estate after cessation of payments of the legal person;
cause the legal person to contract on behalf of others, without receiving assets in exchange, commitments deemed too significant having regard to its situation when these were contracted;
keep, cause to be kept or allow to be kept irregular or incomplete accounting records of the legal person under the conditions provided for in Article 424-2 above;
fail to make at the registry of the competent court, within thirty days, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments of the legal person.

Article 424-6

In application of Article 232 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, the legal or de facto representatives of legal persons comprising partners indefinitely and jointly liable for the debts thereof who, without legitimate excuse, do not make at the registry of the competent court, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments within thirty days or if this declaration does not include the list of jointly liable partners with indication of their first names, surname and domicile, are declared guilty of simple bankruptcy and punished by two years' imprisonment.

Article 424-7

In application of Article 233 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, the directors referred to in Article 424-6 above who fraudulently are punished by ten years' imprisonment:
misappropriate or conceal, attempt to misappropriate or conceal part of their assets or fraudulently acknowledge being debtors of sums they do not owe in order to remove all or part of their patrimony from the pursuit of the legal person in a state of cessation of payments or from those of the partners or creditors of the legal person in a state of cessation of payments;
conceal the books of the legal person;
misappropriate or conceal part of its assets;
acknowledge the legal person as debtor of sums it does not owe, either in the records, or by public deeds or private written commitments, or in the balance sheet;
exercise the profession of director contrary to a prohibition provided for by the uniform acts or by law;	stipulate with a creditor, in the name of the legal person, particular advantages by reason of their vote in the deliberations of the estate or who conclude with a creditor, a particular agreement from which results for the latter, an advantage at the expense of the assets of the legal person from the day of the decision declaring cessation of payments.
The directors referred to in Article 424-6 above, on the occasion of a collective proceeding, who are also punished by the same penalty:	in bad faith, present or cause to be presented an income statement, a balance sheet, a statement of receivables or debts or an active and passive statement, of privileges and securities, that is inaccurate or incomplete;	without authorization from the president of the competent court, perform one of the acts prohibited by Article 11 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities.

Section 2 : Des autres infractions

Article 424-8

In application of Article 240 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, are punished by ten years' imprisonment:	persons convicted of having, in the interest of the debtor, removed, concealed or hidden all or part of the movable or immovable property, without prejudice to the application of criminal provisions relating to complicity;
persons convicted of having fraudulently submitted in the collective proceeding, either in their own name, or through an intermediary or impersonation, fictitious claims;
persons who, conducting business under the name of another or under a fictitious name, in bad faith, misappropriate, conceal, attempt to misappropriate or conceal part of their assets.

Article 424-9

In application of Article 241 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, the spouse, descendants, ascendants or collaterals of the debtor or their relatives by marriage who, without the debtor's knowledge, misappropriate, divert or conceal assets belonging to the assets of the debtor in a state of cessation of payments, are punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Article 424-10

In application of Article 242 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, even if there is an acquittal in the cases provided for in Articles 424-6 and 424-7 above, the court seized shall rule on damages and on the reintegration, into the debtor's patrimony, of assets, rights or actions misappropriated.

Article 424-11

In application of Article 243 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, is punishable by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, any receiver of collective proceedings who:
carries on a personal activity under the cover of the debtor's enterprise concealing his actions;
disposes of the debtor's credit or assets as his own property;
dissipates the debtor's assets;
abusively and in bad faith pursues, in his personal interest, either directly or indirectly, a loss-making operation of the debtor's enterprise;
acquires for his own account, directly or indirectly, assets of the debtor in violation of Article 51 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities.

Article 424-12

In application of Article 244 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, is punishable by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,500,000 francs, the creditor who:	stipulates with the debtor or with any person, particular advantages by reason of his vote in the deliberations of the body of creditors;	concludes a particular agreement from which results in his favor, an advantage at the expense of the debtor's assets from the day of the decision to open collective proceedings.

Article 424-13

The agreements provided for in Article 424-12 above are furthermore declared null by the criminal court with regard to all persons, including the debtor.
The judgment furthermore orders the creditor to return, to the rightful party, the sums or values that he received under the annulled agreements.

Article 424-14

In application of Article 246 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities, without prejudice to the provisions relating to the criminal record, all conviction decisions rendered by virtue of the provisions of this chapter shall be, at the expense of those convicted, posted and published in a legal notices journal as well as by summary extract, in the Official Journal mentioning the number of the legal notices journal where the first insertion is published.

Chapter 5

Offences contained in the Uniform Act of 17 October 2023 on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods

Article 425-1

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the debtor subject to seizure or the third party holder in whose hands the seizure was effected, who does not produce the seized objects when he is deemed to be the custodian thereof.

Article 425-2

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the debtor or third party who, in the case of a conservatory seizure:
alienates or moves an asset, without justifying a legitimate cause making such movement or alienation necessary;
does not inform the creditor beforehand of the movement or alienation of the seized asset, except in case of absolute urgency;
does not indicate to the creditor, in case of movement, the place where the asset is located.

Article 425-3

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the custodian who alienates or moves an asset subject to a seizure-sale, without justifying a legitimate cause making such movement or alienation necessary

Article 425-4

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs:
the custodian who, in the context of an amicable sale procedure, moves, except in case of absolute urgency, an asset before the consignment of the sale price in the hands of the bailiff-commissioner of justice or the enforcement agent or at the registry, at the choice of the seizing creditor;
the debtor who, without complying with the procedure provided for the amicable sale, alienates the assets subject to the seizure-sale.

Article 425-5

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the bailiff-commissioner of justice or any other auxiliary of justice responsible for the sale who receives a sum above the bid.

Article 425-6

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the holder who, outside the case provided for by said uniform act, alienates or moves an asset subject to a seizure-revendication.

Article 425-7

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the owner of the business goodwill subject to a seizure who, in violation of the prohibition imposed on him, from the service of the act of seizure, to alienate it or encumber it with rights or charges or to alienate or encumber the elements that compose it, transfers said goodwill or consents to a real right or charge thereon.

Article 425-8

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the debtor or third party holder who, in violation of his obligation to inform the bailiff-commissioner of justice or the authority responsible for enforcement, alienates or moves an asset subject to a conservatory seizure of livestock.

Article 425-9

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the debtor or custodian who alienates or moves, except for pasturing, the livestock subject to a seizure, without notifying the bailiff-commissioner of justice or the authority responsible for enforcement.

Article 425-10

In application of the Uniform Act on the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods, is punishable by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs the bailiff-commissioner of justice or the authority responsible for enforcement who diverts from their purpose information communicated concerning the composition of the debtor's patrimony, his address, the identity and address of his employer and photographs.

Chapter 6

Offence contained in the Uniform Act relating to accounting law and financial information of 26 January 2017

Article 426-1

Are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, the directors of entities subject to the provisions of the Uniform Act on general commercial law, the Uniform Act on the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups and the Uniform Act on the law of cooperative societies as well as those of public, parapublic, and mixed economy entities who:
have not, for each financial year, prepared the inventory and established the annual, consolidated or combined financial statements as well as the management report and, where applicable, the social balance sheet;
have, knowingly, prepared and communicated financial statements that do not give a true and fair view of the assets, financial position and results of the financial year.

Chapitre 7

Offence contained in the Uniform Act of 15 December 2010 on the law of cooperative societies

Article 427-1

Is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, any person who, without being authorized in accordance with the legal and regulatory provisions applicable to this type of grouping, improperly uses the expressions cooperative societies, union of cooperative societies, federation of cooperative societies or confederations of cooperative societies, accompanied by any qualifier, as well as all designations likely to suggest that it is one of the groupings cited in this article.

Chapitre 8

Offences contained in the Uniform Act on the accounting system for non-profit entities of 22 December 2022

Article 428-1

Are punished by a fine of 5,000,000 francs, the directors of non-profit entities who:
have not, for each financial year, prepared the inventory and established the annual financial statements, as well as the activity report;
have knowingly prepared and communicated financial statements that do not give a true and fair view of the assets, financial position and results of the financial year;
have not kept and updated the register of donors.

Article 428-2

Are punished by a fine of 2,500,000 francs, the directors of non-profit entities who have not initiated the appointment of the entity's auditor or have not convened them to the general assembly or the body acting in its place ruling on the entity's accounts.

Article 428-3

Are punished by a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the directors of non-profit entities or any person in the service of the entity who, knowingly, have obstructed the auditor's verifications or control or have refused the communication, on site, of all documents useful for the exercise of their mission and in particular of all contracts, books, accounting documents and registers.

TITRE III : DES AUTRES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA PROPRIETE

Chapitre 1 : Du blanchiment de capitaux

[Loi n°008 du 17 mars 2016 relative à la lutte contre le blanchiment de capitaux et le financement du terrorisme]

Section 1 : Incrimination du blanchiment de capitaux

Article 431-1

Are considered as money laundering, the acts listed below, committed intentionally:

a)	the conversion or transfer of property, by any person who knows or should have known that such property is derived from a crime or offence or from participation in a crime or offence, for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of said property, or of assisting any person involved in this activity to escape the legal consequences of their acts;

b)	the concealment or disguise of the nature, origin, location, disposition, movement or actual ownership of property or rights relating thereto, by any person who knows or should have known that such property is derived from a crime or offence or from participation in a crime or offence;

c)	the acquisition, possession or use of property, by one who knows or should have known, at the time of receiving it, that such property is derived from a crime or offence or from participation in a crime or offence;

d)	participation in one of the acts referred to in points a), b) and c), the act of associating to commit it, attempting to commit it, aiding or inciting someone to commit it or advising to that effect, or facilitating the execution of such an act.

There is money laundering, even if this act is committed by the perpetrator of the offence that procured the property to be laundered.

There is also money laundering, even if the activities that are the origin of the property to be laundered are carried out in the territory of another Member State of the West African Economic and Monetary Union or that of a third State.

Except in the case where the underlying offence has been the subject of an amnesty law, there is money laundering even:
if the perpetrator of the crimes or offences has been neither prosecuted nor convicted;
if a condition for legal action is missing following the commission of said crimes or offences.

Knowledge or intent, as elements of the aforementioned activities, may be inferred from objective factual circumstances.

Article 431-1

bis: No consideration of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious nature nor any other motive may be taken into account to justify the commission of the offence referred to in Article 431-1 of this Code.

Section 1

bis: Du défaut ou du retard de déclaration d'opérations suspectes (DOS) en matière de blanchiment de capitaux

Article 431-1

ter: When factual circumstances lead to the inference that sums of money or transactions involving sums of money may originate from a money laundering offence as defined in Article 7 of the uniform law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, the suspicious transaction report, provided for in Article 79 of the same law, must be made immediately.
The same applies to attempted suspicious transactions.

Article 431-1

quater: Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine that cannot be less than 1,500,000 francs, the persons, directors and agents of natural or legal persons subject to reporting obligations in matters of combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism when the latter have intentionally failed to make the suspicious transaction report, provided for in Article 79 of said law, including in the context of attempted suspicious transactions or made a late report, when the circumstances led to the inference that the sums of money could originate from a money laundering offence as defined in Article 7 of said law.

Are also punished by a fine of 750,000 francs, the persons, directors and agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, when the latter have unintentionally:

1°) failed to make the suspicious transaction report, provided for in Article 79 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, including in the context of attempted suspicious transactions or made a late report;

2°) contravened the provisions of Articles 16, 18 to 40 and 79 of the law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism.

Section 2: Criminal sanctions applicable to natural persons

Article 431-2

Natural persons guilty of a money laundering offence shall be punished by seven years' imprisonment and a fine equal to three times the value of the property or funds that were the subject of the laundering operations.

Attempted money laundering shall be punished by the same penalties.

Section 3

Criminal sanctions applicable to conspiracy, association, complicity with a view to money laundering

Article 431-3

Conspiracy or participation in an association with a view to committing an act constituting money laundering, association to commit said act, aiding, inciting or advising a natural or legal person with a view to executing it or facilitating its execution shall be punished by the same penalties provided for in Article 431-2 above.

Section 4: Aggravating circumstances

Article 431-4: The penalties provided for in Article 431-2 above shall be doubled

1°) where the money laundering offence is committed habitually or by using facilities provided by the exercise of a professional activity;

2°) where the perpetrator of the offence is a repeat offender. In this case, convictions pronounced abroad shall be taken into account to establish recidivism;

3°) where the money laundering offence is committed by an organised gang.

Where the crime or offence from which the property or sums of money that were the subject of the money laundering offence originates is punishable by a custodial sentence of a duration greater than that of the imprisonment incurred under Article 431-2 above, money laundering shall be punished by the penalties attached to the original offence of which its perpetrator had knowledge and, if that offence is accompanied by aggravating circumstances, by the penalties attached only to the circumstances of which he had knowledge.

Section 5: Criminal sanctions for certain acts related to money laundering

Article 431-5

Persons and directors or agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of the uniform law on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism shall be punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs where they have intentionally:

1°) made disclosures to the owner of the sums or to the perpetrator of the operations referred to in Article 431-1 above concerning the declaration they are required to make or the action taken thereon;

2°) destroyed or removed documents or papers relating to the identification obligations referred to in Articles 26 to 31 whose retention is provided for by Article 35 of said law;
3°) carried out or attempted to carry out under a false identity one of the operations referred to in Articles 32, 33 and 39 to 45 and 53 of said law;

4°) informed by any means the person or persons covered by the investigation conducted for money laundering offences of which they have become aware by reason of their profession or functions;

5°) communicated to the judicial authorities or to the officials competent to establish the original and subsequent offences acts and documents referred to in Article 89 of said law which they know to be falsified or erroneous;

6°) communicated information or documents to persons other than those referred to in Article 36 of said law;

7°) failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of said law, when the circumstances led to the conclusion that the sums of money could originate from a money laundering offence as defined in Article 7 of said law.

Persons and directors or agents of natural or legal persons referred to in Articles 5 and 6 of said law shall be punished by a fine of 750,000 francs where they have unintentionally:
failed to make the suspicious transaction report provided for in Article 79 of said law;
contravened the provisions of Articles 16, 18 to 40 and 79 of said law.

Section 6

Optional additional criminal sanctions applicable to natural persons

Article 431-6

Natural persons guilty of the offences defined in Articles 431-1 to 431-5 above may also incur the following additional penalties:

1°) prohibition from residing in the national territory for a period of five years, pronounced against any convicted foreigner;

2°) prohibition from residing for a period of five years in one or more administrative districts;

3°) prohibition from leaving the national territory and withdrawal of passport for a period of three years;

4°) prohibition from exercising civil and political rights for a period of three years;

5°) prohibition from driving motorised land, sea and air vehicles and withdrawal of driving permits or licences for a period of six years;

6°) permanent or six-year prohibition from exercising the profession or activity in connection with which the offence was committed and prohibition from exercising a public function;

7°) prohibition from issuing cheques other than those which allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those which are certified and prohibition from using payment cards for six years;

8°) prohibition from holding or carrying a weapon subject to authorisation for six years;

9°) confiscation of all or part of the convicted person's property of lawful origin;

10°) confiscation of the property or thing which was used or intended to commit the offence or of the thing which is the product thereof, with the exception of objects capable of restitution.

Section 7: Exclusion of benefit of suspended sentence

Article 431-7

No criminal sanction pronounced for a money laundering offence may be accompanied by a suspended sentence.

Section 8: Criminal sanctions applicable to legal persons

Article 431-8

Legal persons other than the State, on whose account or for whose benefit a money laundering offence or one of the related offences has been committed by one of their organs or representatives, are punishable by a fine at a rate equal to five times that incurred by natural persons, without prejudice to the conviction of the latter as perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts.

Legal persons, other than the State, may, in addition, be sentenced to one or more of the following penalties:

1°) exclusion from public procurement, permanently or for a period of five years;

2°) confiscation of the property that was used or intended to be used to commit the offence or of the property that is the proceeds thereof;

3°) placement under judicial supervision for a period of five years;

4°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of five years, from directly or indirectly engaging in one or more professional or social activities in connection with which the offence was committed;

5°) permanent closure or closure for a period of five years, of the establishments or one of the establishments of the enterprise that was used to commit the incriminated acts;

6°) dissolution, when they were created to commit the incriminated acts;

7°) posting of the decision rendered or dissemination thereof by the written press or by any audiovisual means of communication, at the expense of the convicted legal person.

The sanctions provided for in points 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the second paragraph of this article are not applicable to financial institutions subject to a supervisory authority with disciplinary powers.

The competent supervisory authority, referred to by the Public Prosecutor of any prosecution initiated against a financial institution, may take appropriate sanctions, in accordance with the specific legislative and regulatory texts in force.

Section 9: Grounds for exemption from criminal sanctions

Article 431-9

Any person guilty, on the one hand, of participation in an association or agreement with a view to committing one of the offences provided for in this chapter and, on the other hand, of aiding, inciting or advising a natural or legal person with a view to executing them or facilitating their execution, is exempted from criminal sanctions if, having disclosed the existence of this agreement, association, aid or advice to the judicial authority, they thereby enable, on the one hand, the identification of the other persons involved and, on the other hand, the prevention of the commission of money laundering offences.

Section 10: Grounds for mitigation of criminal sanctions

Article 431-10

The penalties incurred by any person, perpetrator or accomplice of one of the offences provided for in this chapter who, before any prosecution, enables or facilitates the identification of the other guilty parties or after the initiation of prosecution, enables or facilitates the arrest of the latter, are reduced by half. In addition, said person is exempted from the fine and, where applicable, from accessory measures and optional complementary penalties.

In matters of terrorist financing, when the penalty incurred is life imprisonment, it is reduced to twenty years.

Section 11: Mandatory complementary penalties

Article 431-11

In all cases of conviction for a money laundering offence or attempt, the courts order the confiscation for the benefit of the State, of property that was used or intended to be used to commit the offence, of the proceeds of the offence, of movable or immovable property into which these proceeds are transformed or converted and, up to their value, of legitimately acquired property with which said proceeds are mixed as well as income and other benefits derived from these proceeds, property into which they are transformed or invested or property with which they are mixed to whomever these proceeds and property belong, unless their owner establishes that they are unaware of their fraudulent origin.

The confiscation of illicit income and property is pronounced even in the absence of a criminal conviction due to the extinction of the public prosecution or any other cause blocking the public prosecution.

Chapter 2: Offences against the transparency of the WAEMU financial market

[Decision No. CM/07 709/2021 adopting the uniform law on stock market offences on the regional financial market]

Section 1

General provisions Subsection 1: Purpose

Article 432-1: The following provisions have as their purpose

1°) to define the rules and practices likely to guarantee the transparency and security of transactions on the regional financial market;

2°) to incriminate fraudulent actions and practices that compromise the transparency and security of transactions on the regional financial market;

3°) to set the penalties applicable to perpetrators and accomplices of the offences thus defined;

4°) to deal with cooperation between the Financial Markets Authority of UMOA and the judicial authorities within the framework of criminal procedure with a view to the repression of stock market offences.

Subsection 2: Scope of application

Article 432-2: The following provisions apply

1°) to transactions that take place on the regional financial market regardless of their place of trading;

2°) to conduct relating to reference indices. However, they do not apply to:
a)	transactions in own shares carried out within the framework of "buyback" programmes;

b)	stabilisation measures for a financial instrument;

c)	transactions, orders or conduct that occur within the framework of the implementation of monetary, exchange rate or public debt management policy and emanating from a public administration of a UMOA member State, an agency or an ad hoc entity of one or more member States or a person acting on behalf and in the interest of the latter.

Subsection 3: Attempt, association and agreement

Article 432-3

In the cases of offences provided for in this chapter, the attempt is punishable as the completed offence. The same applies to the agreement or association formed with a view to committing one of these offences.

Subsection 4: Complicity

Article 432-4

Complicity by providing, knowingly, means, advice or by assistance or aid for the commission of one of the offences provided for in this chapter, is punishable by the same penalties as the commission of the offence.

Subsection 5: Suspicious transactions

Paragraph 1: Declaration of suspicious transactions

Article 432-5

Any market participant or market management structure approved or authorised in accordance with the Annex is required to declare without delay to the Financial Markets Authority of UMOA, in writing and in the forms provided for by the regulations, any transaction carried out on its own account or on behalf of a third party, in an asset or product traded on a financial market, which it has reason to suspect could constitute an offence within the meaning of this Code.

Paragraphe 2 : Means of detecting suspicious transactions

Article 432-6

Any person subject to the declaration provided for in Article 432-5 above shall establish internal procedures the purpose of which is, in particular, to establish and update a typology of transactions in order to detect those that must be declared.

It shall also establish, for the benefit of its personnel, a training and awareness program regarding the detection and declaration of suspicious transactions.

Sous-section 6 : Insider information

Paragraphe 1 : Declaration of insider information

Article 432-7

Any entity making a public offering shall be required, without delay, to bring to the attention of the Financial Markets Authority and the public any insider information which directly concerns it.

Paragraphe 2 : Conditions for deferring the declaration of insider information

Article 432-8

An entity making a public offering may defer the publication of insider information in order not to prejudice its legitimate interests, provided that the failure to publish does not mislead the public and that the entity is in a position to ensure its confidentiality by controlling access, in particular by:

1°) establishing effective internal procedures preventing access to such information to persons other than those who need it in the course of their duties within the entity making a public offering;
2°) taking the necessary measures to ensure that any person having access to such information is aware of the obligations related to such access and is warned of the penalties provided for in the event of improper use or dissemination of such information;
3°) establishing arrangements allowing for immediate publication of the insider information in the event that it is unable to ensure its confidentiality.

Paragraphe 3 : Legitimate interests

Article 432-9

The legitimate interests mentioned in Article 432-8 above may in particular concern the following situations:
1°) where making the insider information public would be likely to affect the outcome or normal course of negotiations in progress, in particular in the event of serious and imminent danger threatening the financial viability of the entity making a public offering;

2°) where the information relates to a decision taken or a contract entered into by the management body of the entity making a public offering, requiring, where appropriate, the approval of another body of that entity to become effective, if the publication of the information, combined with the simultaneous announcement that such approval has not yet been given, is likely to distort their correct assessment by the public.

Paragraphe 4 : Dissemination of insider information

Article 432-10

Where an entity making a public offering or a person acting on behalf and for the account of that entity, communicates insider information to a third party in the normal exercise of its activities, profession or duties, it shall ensure dissemination thereof in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 432-7 above, either simultaneously in the case of intentional communication, or as soon as possible in the case of unintentional communication.

The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not apply where the person receiving the information is bound by an obligation of confidentiality, whether the basis thereof is legislative, regulatory, statutory or contractual.

Paragraphe 5 : Integrity of insider information

Article 432-11

An entity making a public offering shall refrain from combining, in a manner likely to mislead the public, the provision of insider information and advertising or commercial elements relating to its activities.

Paragraphe 6 : Disclosure of changes relating to insider information

Article 432-12

Any significant change concerning insider information already made public shall be disclosed in the same manner as that used during its initial dissemination.

Sous-section 7 : Communication of stock exchange transactions

Paragraphe 1 : Obligation to declare stock exchange transactions

Article 432-13

All information relating to any acquisition, disposal, subscription or exchange of assets or products issued by an entity making a public offering, traded on a financial market, shall be communicated to the Regional Council within five trading days following the completion of the transaction concerned, where such transaction is carried out by:

1°) the chairman and chief executive officer, chairman of the board of directors, chief executive officer, general manager, director, deputy chief executive officer or any other legal representative;

2°) any other person who has, on the one hand, within the entity mentioned in this article, the power to make management decisions concerning the development and strategy thereof and, on the other hand, regular access to insider information directly or indirectly concerning that entity;

3°) any person having, with any person mentioned in points 1 and 2, close personal ties of spouse not legally separated, kinship or affinity resulting in a common residence for at least one year on the date of the transaction concerned;

4°) any legal person or entity whose direction, administration or management is provided by one of the persons mentioned in points 1 and 2 or by one of the persons mentioned in point 3 acting in the interest of one or more persons mentioned in points 1 and 2;

5°) any legal person or entity controlled, directly or indirectly, by one of the persons mentioned in points 1, 2 and 3;

6°) any legal person or entity which is established for the benefit of one of the persons mentioned in points 1, 2 and 3;

7°) any legal person or entity for which one of the persons mentioned in points 1, 2 or 3 receives at least the majority of the economic benefits.

Paragraphe 2 : Obligation to provide a copy of the communication

Article 432-14

The declaration obligation provided for in Article 432-13 above rests on the persons mentioned in points 1 to 6 of the said article who are required, when communicating to the Financial Markets Authority, to provide to the entity making a public offering, referred to in the same article, a copy of such communication.

Paragraphe 3 : Persons having access to inside information

Article 432-15

Any entity making a public offering which has issued assets or products traded on a financial market, or for which an application for admission to trading on such a market has been submitted, is required to establish, update, and communicate to the Financial Markets Authority, upon its request, and without delay, a list of persons working within it and having access to inside information directly concerning that entity.

The entity shall establish, update and communicate to the Financial Markets Authority, under the same conditions, the list of third parties acting in its name or on its behalf having access to inside information in the context of their professional relations with it.

Under the same conditions, any third party acting in the name and on behalf of any entity making a public offering is required to establish, update and, upon its request, communicate to the Financial Markets Authority a list of persons working within it and having access to inside information directly or indirectly concerning the entity making a public offering mentioned in the first paragraph, as well as a list of persons acting in its name or on its behalf, having access to the same information in the context of their professional relations with it.

Paragraphe 4 : Content of the list

Article 432-16: The lists mentioned in Article 432-15 above include

1°) the name or corporate name of the persons to appear therein;
2°) the reason for registration of the persons to appear therein;
3°) the legal relationship between these persons and the entity making the declaration.

Paragraphe 5 : Information of persons appearing on the list

Article 432-17

Any person or entity required to establish the list provided for in Article 432-15 above shall inform, in writing and as soon as possible, the persons appearing on it. This information shall include mention of their registration on the list, a reminder of the rules applicable to the holding, communication and exploitation of inside information as well as the sanctions attached to their violation.

Section 2 : Repression of offences against market transparency

Sous-section 1

Repression of stock exchange offences Paragraphe 1: Violation of the disclosure obligation

Article 432-18

Any person who knowingly contravenes any disclosure obligation incumbent upon them under the terms of the preceding subsection, of whatever nature, shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Failure to declare stock exchange transactions

Article 432-19

Any person referred to in Article 432-13 above who knowingly contravenes the disclosure obligation incumbent upon them under the terms of said article shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3 : Failure to publish inside information

Article 432-20

Any entity making a public offering which knowingly contravenes the disclosure obligation incumbent upon it under the terms of Article 8 of the uniform law relating to stock exchange offences on the regional financial market shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 4 : Failure to declare threshold crossing

Article 432-21

Any natural or legal person who fails to fulfill the information obligations to which they are subject, pursuant to the provisions of the General Regulations relating to declarations of threshold crossing, shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 5 : Insider trading offence

Article 432-22

Any insider holding inside information on the situation of an issuer or the prospects for evolution of the securities of the issuer and who, knowingly, carries out or enables to be carried out, directly or indirectly, one or more transactions on a financial market before the information is accessible to the public, shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

In case of recidivism, the maximum fine shall be imposed, whether or not the perpetrator has derived a profit from the offence.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the insider trading offence shall be punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

By way of derogation, the Financial Markets Authority may, on an ad hoc and specific basis, authorize the following practices, at the request of the entity making a public offering which has issued the assets or products traded on a financial market to which the inside information relates:

1°) purchases and sales of securities in the context of the operation of a liquidity contract;

2°) purchases and sales carried out in the context of a program with a precise schedule.

Paragraphe 6 : Incitement or recommendation of inside information

Article 432-23

Any insider holding inside information who, intentionally, recommends to a third party to acquire or dispose of, or to have acquired or disposed of by another person, the asset or assets or products traded on a financial market to which this information relates, or incites the carrying out of such transactions on the basis of this inside information, shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the offence of incitement or recommendation to a third party of inside information shall be punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

In case of recidivism, the maximum fine shall be imposed, whether or not the perpetrator has derived a profit from the offence.

Paragraphe 7 : Communication of inside information

Article 432-24

Any insider who knowingly communicates inside information to a third party outside the normal course of their profession or functions shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the offence of communication of inside information shall be punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the advantage derived from the offence, without the fine being less than that advantage.

In case of recidivism, the maximum fine shall be imposed, whether or not the perpetrator has derived a profit from the offence.

Paragraphe 8 : Dissemination of false or misleading information

Article 432-25

Any person who knowingly disseminates to the public by any means false or misleading information concerning the prospects or situation of an entity making a public offering or concerning the prospects for the evolution of an asset or product traded on a financial market, likely to affect prices, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the offence of dissemination of false or misleading information are punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit. In case of recidivism, the maximum fine is imposed, depending on whether or not the perpetrator derived a profit from the offence.

Paragraphe 9 : Market manipulation

Article 432-26

Any person who knowingly, acting alone or in concert with one or more other persons, exercises directly or through an intermediary, a manoeuvre having the object of hindering the regular functioning of a financial market by misleading others, in the sense that it is likely to induce one or more third parties to acquire or dispose of an asset or product traded on a financial market, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the offence of market manipulation are punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit.

In case of recidivism, the maximum fine is imposed, whether or not the perpetrator derived a profit from the offence.

Paragraphe 10 : Manipulation of benchmark

Article 432-27

Any person who knowingly, acting alone or in concert with one or more other persons, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit:

1°) provides or transmits false or misleading information used to calculate a benchmark or information likely to distort the price of a financial instrument or asset to which such a benchmark is linked;

2°) adopts conduct leading to the manipulation of the calculation of such a benchmark.

Legal persons declared criminally liable for the offence of manipulation of benchmark are punished by a fine of 250,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased up to ten times the amount of the benefit derived from the offence, without the fine being able to be less than that benefit.

In case of recidivism, the maximum fine is imposed, depending on whether or not the perpetrator derived a profit from the offence.

Sous-section 2 : Sanction for illegal exercise of a regulated activity

Paragraphe 1 : Illegal exercise of a regulated activity

Article 432-28

Any person who knowingly is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased to five times the benefit derived from the offence:

1°) exercises a regulated activity on the regional financial market without prior authorization from the Regional Council;

2°) does not comply with the restriction, suspension, or prohibition of professional activity notified to him by the Financial Markets Authority.

Paragraphe 2 : Fraudulent public offering made by directors

Article 432-29

Any director of an entity who knowingly makes a public offering without being authorized to do so is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs, this amount being able to be increased to five times the benefit derived from the offence.

Paragraphe 3 : Fraudulent public offering made by an entity

Article 432-30

Any entity that knowingly makes a public offering without prior authorization from the Financial Markets Authority, under the conditions of its General Regulations, is punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs, without prejudice to prosecution against natural persons.

Paragraphe 4 : Extension of the sanction to foreign entities

Article 432-31

Article 432-30 above also applies to non-resident entities making a public offering on the regional market in violation of the provisions of the General Regulations.

Paragraphe 5

Failure to communicate truthful and accurate information or a written contract

Article 432-32

Any authorized intermediary is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs:

1°) having not communicated to its clients truthful and accurate information on the contemplated transactions;

2°) executing a transaction on behalf of a client without having, beforehand, concluded a written contract with the latter.

If it is a legal person, only the fine is applied.

Paragraphe 6 : Violation of the monopoly of trading on the Stock Exchange

Article 432-33

Any person who violates the monopolies of trading on the stock exchange and securities account keeping vested in management and intermediation companies is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs. If it is a legal person, only the fine is applied.

With regard to securities account keeping, the provisions of the preceding paragraph do not apply to banks authorized by the Financial Markets Authority to exercise the functions of securities account keeping and custody.

Paragraphe 7

Violation of public information formalities upon issuance of securities

Article 432-34

Any chairman, director, general manager of a company who has issued securities offered to the public without is punished by imprisonment of twelve months and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) a notice being inserted in a newspaper authorized to receive legal notices, prior to any publicity measure;

2°) the prospectuses and circulars reproducing the statements of the notice provided for in paragraph 1 of this article, and containing the mention of the insertion of this notice in the newspaper authorized to receive legal notices with reference to the issue in which it was published;

3°) the posters and announcements in newspapers reproducing the same statements, or at least an extract of these statements with reference to the said notice, and indications of the issue number of the newspaper authorized to receive legal notices in which it was published;

4°) the posters, prospectuses and circulars mentioning the signature of the person or representative of the company from which the offer emanates and specifying whether the securities offered are listed or not and, if so, on which stock exchange.

The same penalties are applicable to persons who have served as intermediaries on the occasion of the transfer of securities in violation of the requirements of this article.

Subsection 3: Sanctions for Breaches of Collective Management

Paragraph 1: Fraudulent Subscription of Shares

Article 432-35

Any director of an open-ended investment company, of a management company of a Mutual Fund, or of any other collective investment undertaking, who carries out subscription and issuance activities of units or shares of Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities, without prior approval from the Financial Markets Authority, or without obtaining the visa of the Financial Markets Authority on the information note or the distribution thereof to the public, shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs, which, in case of recidivism, may be increased to 50,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 2: Violation of Irregular Borrowing Operations

Article 432-36

Any director of an open-ended investment company (SICAV), of a management company of a Mutual Fund or of any other collective investment undertaking who:

1°) borrows sums of money on behalf of an Undertaking for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities, under conditions other than those provided for in the General Regulations of the Financial Markets Authority, of UMOA;

2°) in the name of the SICAV or the Mutual Fund, engages in operations other than those provided for in the General Regulations of the Financial Markets Authority, of UMOA.

shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 3: Collection of Commission Beyond the Threshold

Article 432-37

Any director of a SICAV, of a management company of a Mutual Fund, or of any other collective investment undertaking who has, knowingly, allowed the collection of commissions or management fees exceeding the levels indicated in the information note approved by the Financial Markets Authority, shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 4: Failure to Appoint an Auditor

Article 432-38

Any director of a SICAV or of a management company of a Mutual Fund or of any other form of collective investment undertaking who, knowingly, has not proceeded with the appointment of an auditor approved by the Financial Markets Authority, or has not convened him to the general meetings of the SICAV or of the management company of a Mutual Fund, shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 5: Obstruction of the Auditor's Operations

Article 432-39

Any director of an open-ended investment company or of a management company of a Mutual Fund or of any other collective investment undertaking and of the depositary institution of a Mutual Fund of a SICAV or any other market participant as well as all persons under his authority, who has knowingly obstructed the verifications or controls of the auditor, or who has refused him on-site access to all documents useful for the exercise of his mission, shall be punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Subsection 4: Sanctions for Breaches of Discretionary Management

Paragraph 1: Abuse Against Clients

Article 432-40

Any member of the administrative, management or executive bodies or of the staff of a Management and Intermediation Company or of an Asset Management Company who, knowingly, carries out operations to the detriment of the clients' interest, shall be punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 2: Execution of Related Operations

Article 432-41

Any member of the administrative, management or executive bodies or of the staff of an Asset Management Company or of a Management and Intermediation Company who, knowingly, carries out or causes to be carried out off-market operations between managed clients and companies with which that person maintains direct or indirect legal ties, shall be punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Paragraph 3

Obstruction of Investigation or Control Missions of the Financial Markets Authority, of UMOA

Article 432-42

Any person who has knowingly prevented a control or investigation mission of the Financial Markets Authority, or who has communicated inaccurate information to it, shall be punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs.

Section 3: Procedure

Paragraph 1: Territorial Jurisdiction

Article 432-43

For the purposes of this Code, the public prosecutor of the place where the offences were committed has jurisdiction to prosecute the offences.

The public prosecutor is seized upon report from the Financial Markets Authority, upon complaint from a market participant, or upon denunciation.

He may also seize himself when he becomes aware of the commission of one of the offences provided for by this Code.

In all cases of seizure other than upon report from the Financial Markets Authority, including the case of self-seizure, the prosecutor seizes the Financial Markets Authority, for the purposes of investigation.

The Financial Markets Authority prepares a report to which are annexed all information, minutes and related documents, which it transmits to the Prosecutor, who initiates public prosecution, if appropriate.

Paragraph 2

Seizure of the Public Prosecutor's Office Upon Investigation Report from the Financial Markets Authority

Article 432-44

When, in the course of its duties, the Financial Markets Authority becomes aware of facts likely to constitute an offence provided for by this Code, it conducts an investigation and prepares a report which it transmits to the competent public prosecutor's office for the purposes of judicial prosecution. All information, minutes and related documents are annexed to the report.
When seized by the Financial Markets Authority, the public prosecutor, without delay, initiates public prosecution.

Paragraph 3: Initiation of Public Prosecution by the Victim

Article 432-45

Any market participant who considers himself injured by an act falling within the offences provided for by this Code, may directly initiate public prosecution, according to the procedures provided for by the law of the State where the offence was committed.

Paragraph 4

Constitution as Civil Party by the Financial Markets Authority

Article 432-46

When criminal proceedings are initiated on the basis of this Code, the Financial Markets Authority may exercise the rights of the civil party.

Paragraph 5: Seizure of the Financial Markets Authority, for Opinion

Article 432-47

The judicial authorities seized on the basis of this Code may, at any stage of the proceedings, request the Financial Markets Authority, for a simple opinion, on any question falling within its field of competence.

Paragraph 6: Powers of the Financial Markets Authority

Article 432-48

In all cases, the Financial Markets Authority retains the power to implement the administrative and disciplinary sanctions provided for by the WAEMU Treaty as amended on 12 July 2019.

At any time, the Financial Markets Authority may take any interim measures it deems appropriate, when the facts subject to prosecution present a real threat to the integrity of the system, the protection of investors or the stability of the market, until a final decision is made on the public action or on the proceedings it has initiated on the basis of the Annex.

Paragraph 7: Limitation of public action

Article 432-49

Public action for the prosecution of offences in stock exchange matters is time-barred after three full years if, during that period, no act of prosecution or investigation has been carried out.

If any such act has been carried out during that period, it is only time-barred after three full years from the last act. This applies even to persons who are not involved in that act of investigation or prosecution.

The limitation period is suspended by any legal or factual obstacle preventing the exercise of public action.

It is also suspended by the notification of charges by the Financial Markets Authority.

The limitation period provided for in paragraph 1 runs from the day the offence was discovered.

Paragraph 8: Settlement

Article 432-50

Public action is also extinguished by a settlement reached between the Regional Council and the person prosecuted and, where applicable, with the victim of the offence.

The victim who has not reached a settlement with the person prosecuted retains the right to compensation before the civil courts.

In the event of a settlement with a person prosecuted, the Financial Markets Authority informs the Public Prosecutor.

Chapter 3: Illicit enrichment

[Law No. 2014-015 of 27 May 2014 on the prevention and punishment of illicit enrichment]

Section 1: General provisions

Article 433-1

Illicit enrichment is constituted either by the substantial increase in the assets of any person referred to in Article 433-2 below that such person cannot justify in relation to their legitimate income, or by a lifestyle led by that person that is inconsistent with their legitimate income.

Article 433-2

Subject to the provisions of this chapter are any natural person, civilian or military, holder of public authority, responsible for public service even occasionally, or vested with an elective mandate; any agent or employee of the State, public authorities, State Companies and Enterprises, Public Establishments, cooperative organisations, unions, associations or federations of such organisations, Associations recognised as being of Public Utility, Professional Orders, organisations of an industrial or commercial nature in which the State or a public authority holds a fraction of the share capital, and in general, any person acting in the name of or on behalf of the public authority and/or with the means or resources thereof.

The provisions of this chapter also apply to any legal person that has participated in the commission of the offence.

Article 433-3

Any person who has intentionally permitted or facilitated acts of illicit enrichment is an accomplice to the commission of the offence.

The same applies to any person who, knowing that the property in their possession comes from illicit enrichment, nevertheless agrees to keep it or conceal it by assisting the perpetrator of the offence.

However, a person who, before the opening of an investigation for illicit enrichment, has disclosed to the judicial authorities the facts constituting such an offence shall not be prosecuted as an accomplice.

For the establishment of complicity, personal knowledge, intention or motivation may be inferred from objective factual circumstances.

Article 433-4

Illicit enrichment is a continuing offence. The limitation period runs only from the day of discovery of the constituent elements of the offence. Illicit enrichment is deemed to be consummated by the mere continuation of its effects.

Section 2: Penalties

Paragraph 1: Common provisions

Article 433-5

When the offence of illicit enrichment is committed through a third party who is a natural person, that person is prosecuted for complicity in illicit enrichment without prejudice to the sanctions specifically provided for in the event of refusal or false declaration.

When the offence is committed through a third party who is a legal person, criminal liability lies with the natural person who committed the offence.

However, the legal person in question is sentenced, jointly and severally with the physical perpetrator(s), to pay all or part of the fines, costs and expenses to the State, as well as civil damages.

Paragraph 2: Penalties applicable to natural persons

Article 433-6

When the value of the property deemed illicit is less than or equal to 50,000,000 francs, the penalty is three years' imprisonment and a fine equal to that value.

When the value of the property deemed illicit exceeds 50,000,000 francs, the penalty is five years' imprisonment and a fine equal to twice the value of such property.

Accomplices incur the same penalties as the principal perpetrator.

In all cases, a suspended sentence may only be imposed when the amount illicitly acquired has been fully repaid.

Article 433-7

A natural person convicted of illicit enrichment also incurs the following additional penalties:
1°) confiscation of all or part of their property;
2°) permanent or six-year prohibition from exercising the profession or activity in connection with which the offence was committed and prohibition from exercising any public function;
3°) temporary deprivation of civil and political rights not exceeding ten years.

Paragraph 3: Penalties and sanctions applicable to legal persons

Article 433-8

Any legal person, other than the State and its subdivisions, on whose account or for whose benefit the offence of illicit enrichment was committed by one of its organs or representatives, is punishable by a fine at a rate equal to five times that incurred by natural persons, whether or not such persons have been convicted as perpetrators or accomplices of the offence.
The liability of the legal person does not exclude that of the natural person.

Article 433-9

A convicted legal person, other than the State or a company with public financial participation, also incurs one of the following sanctions:
1°) exclusion from public procurement, permanently or for a period of at least five years;
2°) prohibition, permanently or for a period of at least five years, from exercising directly or indirectly one or more commercial, professional or social activities in connection with which the offence was committed;
3°) permanent or at least five-year closure of one or more of the company's establishment(s) used to commit the acts;
4°) posting of the decision handed down at the Court and/or the Town Hall or its publication in the print and/or audiovisual press, at its expense;
5°) dissolution.

Paragraph 4: Confiscation

Article 433-10

In the event of a conviction for illicit enrichment, the competent Court shall issue a decision for the confiscation of funds and property that constitute the proceeds of criminal activity, including property mixed with such proceeds or derived from such proceeds or exchanged for such proceeds, or property whose value corresponds to that of such proceeds:
those that constitute the object of the offence;
those that constitute the income and other benefits derived from such funds or property;
those that have been transferred to a party.

Chapter 4: Receiving stolen goods

Article 434-1

Receiving stolen goods is the act of possessing, concealing or transmitting a thing, or acting as an intermediary in order to transmit it, knowing that this thing comes from a crime or an offence.

Also constitutes receiving stolen goods, the act of knowingly benefiting by any means from the proceeds of a crime or an offence.

Article 434-2

Receiving stolen goods is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 434-3

In the case where a criminal penalty is applicable to the act that procured the things received, the receiver is punished by the penalty attached by law to the crime and to the circumstances of the crime of which he had knowledge at the time of receiving.

Chapter 5: Arson-destruction-damage-injury

Section 1: Wilful arson

Article 435-1

Whoever wilfully sets fire to buildings, ships, boats, warehouses, yards when they are inhabited or used for habitation, and generally to an inhabited place or used for habitation, whether they belong or do not belong to the perpetrator of the crime, is punished by death.
Is punished by the same penalty whoever wilfully sets fire, either to carriages or wagons containing persons, or to carriages or wagons not containing persons, but forming part of a convoy that contains them.
Whoever wilfully sets fire to buildings, ships, boats, warehouses, yards, when they are neither inhabited nor used for habitation or forests, woods, coppices or standing crops, when these objects do not belong to him is punished by life imprisonment.
He who, by setting or causing to be set fire to one of the objects listed in the preceding paragraph and belonging to himself, has wilfully caused any prejudice to another, is punished by twenty years' imprisonment. Is punished by the same penalty he who sets fire on the order of the owner.
Whoever wilfully sets fire, either to straw or crops in stacks or in ricks, or to wood arranged in piles or in steres, or to carriages or wagons loaded or not loaded with goods, or other movable objects not forming part of a convoy containing persons, if these objects do not belong to him, is punished by imprisonment of twenty years.

He who, by setting or causing to be set fire to one of the objects listed in the preceding paragraph and belonging to himself, wilfully causes any prejudice to another, is punished by imprisonment of ten years. Is punished by the same penalty he who sets fire on the order of the owner.

He who communicates the fire to one of the objects listed in the preceding paragraphs, by wilfully setting fire to any objects whatsoever belonging either to himself or to another and placed in such a way as to communicate said fire, is punished by the same penalty as if he had directly set fire to one of said objects.

In all cases, if the fire causes the death of one or more persons, the penalty is death.

However, in the case of wilful arson of forests, woods or coppices, the death penalty or that of imprisonment is applicable according to the cases only if the fire was lit with criminal intent.

If the fire is wilfully lit in a personal interest of cultivation or otherwise, the guilty party is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 200,000 francs.

If the wilful fire causes loss of human life, the penalty of imprisonment may be increased up to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Section 2: Involuntary arson

Article 435-2

Without prejudice to damages, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs he who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or non-observance of regulations, causes a fire on the movable or immovable property of another.

The above penalty of imprisonment may be increased to five years and the fine doubled when the above-specified offence is committed in an enterprise, a plant, a factory, a sales or storage warehouse and generally in all places where public or private goods are likely to be kept and when it has resulted in material damage exceeding 1,000,000 francs.

Whoever, through imprudence, inattention, negligence or non-observance of regulations, outside areas protected by forestry legislation, involuntarily causes a fire or a bush fire in violation of texts drawn up for this purpose, is, without prejudice to damages, punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 300,000 francs.

Section 3: Destruction of buildings, depositing of explosives

Article 435-3

Whoever wilfully and otherwise than by explosion or fire destroys, in whole or in part, buildings, dwellings, dikes, causeways, ships, boats, aircraft, vehicles of any kind, warehouses or yards or their outbuildings, bridges, public or private roads, wells, hydraulic installations and all other works of public utility, is punished by imprisonment of twenty years and prohibition of residence for twenty years, without prejudice to the penalties for homicide, if the destruction or attempted destruction has caused death.

If the crime provided for in the preceding paragraph is committed by means of an explosive device, the penalty is death.

The depositing with criminal intent, on a public or private road, of an explosive device is assimilated to attempted murder.

Section 4

Offences against the safety of civil aviation, river navigation and railways

Article 435-4

Any person on board an aircraft in flight or stationary, who by violence or threat of violence, seizes that aircraft or exercises control over it, is punished by imprisonment of ten years.

If these acts have resulted in injuries or illnesses, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty years.

If they have resulted in the death of one or more persons, the death penalty is applicable.

Article 435-5

Any person who, by communicating information that he knows to be false compromises the safety of an aircraft in flight, the services of an airport, a railway station or a river quay, is punished by imprisonment of ten years.

Article 435-6

Is punished by imprisonment of twenty years, any person who, knowingly by means of a device, a substance or a weapon, commits against one or more persons in an airport, an aerodrome, a railway station or a river quay an act of violence that causes or is likely to cause serious violence or death.

Article 435-7

Is punished by the death penalty, any person who, knowingly by means of an explosive or by fire destroys or seriously damages rails, aids to air or river navigation, the installations of an airport or aerodrome or aircraft in service or not, located at that airport, aerodrome, station or quay.

Article 435-8

Any attempt to sabotage an aircraft, train or vessel by means of an explosive or substance capable of destroying said aircraft, train or vessel, or causing damage rendering it unfit for flight, circulation or navigation is punished by twenty years' imprisonment.

Section 5: Damage to immovable property

Article 435-9

Whoever, outside the cases provided for in the first paragraph of Article 435-3 above, voluntarily and otherwise than by explosive or fire, causes or attempts to cause damage to the immovable property of another, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a ten-year residence ban.

Whoever, outside the cases provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 435-3 above, voluntarily, by means of an explosive device causes or attempts to cause damage to the movable or immovable property of another is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a twenty-year residence ban, without prejudice to the penalties for homicide if the damage or attempted damage results in death.

Section 6: Pillage, poisoning of drinking water

Article 435-10

Any pillage, any damage to deposits of foodstuffs or goods, effects, movable property, committed in assembly or in a gang, by open force, is punished by life imprisonment.

The same penalty applies to those guilty of poisoning wells, cisterns, springs and drinking water.

However, the death penalty is incurred when it has resulted in the poisoning of one or more persons.

Section 7: Threat of destruction

Article 435-11

The written or verbal threat to set fire to or destroy the objects listed in Articles 435-1 first paragraph and 435-3 above, is punished by three years' imprisonment. If the threat is made with an order to deposit a sum of money or under any other condition, the penalty is five years' imprisonment.

Section 8

Damage to crops, domestic animals, forests and water points

Article 435-12

Whoever voluntarily, outside the cases provided for in the preceding articles of this chapter devastates crops or plants, fells one or more trees, destroys agricultural instruments, breaks fences, removes or moves boundary markers and without necessity, poisons fish in ponds, fish ponds or reservoirs, or kills a domestic animal, is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Whoever cuts, uproots, mutilates or damages in any way trees or natural plants of protected species, or plants or trees of essence or value, is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 francs.

The attempt is punished as the offence itself.

Section 9: Straying of animals

Article 435-13

Whoever releases into nature or into a built-up area domestic animals without effective control, predisposing them by this fact alone to cause damage to others or to obstruct traffic on public roads, is punished by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

When stray animals cause damage to others or to public property, the penalties provided for in Article 435-12 above apply.

Section 10: Voluntary damage to movable property

Article 435-14

Any other voluntary damage to the movable property of another is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

The attempt is punished as the offence itself.

LIVRE V

OTHER CRIMES AND OFFENCES TITLE I: CYBERCRIME
[Law No. 2019-056 of 05 December 2019 on the repression of cybercrime]

Chapitre 1

General provisions Article 511-1: This title applies to: any offence committed by means of information and communication technologies on all or part of the territory of the Republic of Mali;
any offence committed in cyberspace and whose effects occur on national territory.

Article 511-2 : The following terms mean

1°) covert access: the mechanism allowing access to data or an information system to be concealed without the authorization of the legitimate user;

2°) fraudulent access: any irregular mode of penetration of an automated data processing system;

3°) electronic communication: any emission, transmission or reception of signs, signals, writings, images or sounds, by electromagnetic means; any making available to the public or a category of the public by an electronic or magnetic communication process, of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds or messages of any nature;

4°) cybercrime: all criminal offences committed by means of electronic communications networks and information systems or against said networks and systems;

5°) cryptography: application of mathematics allowing information to be written in such a way as to make it unintelligible to those not possessing the capacity to decipher it;

6°) computer data: any representation of facts, information or concepts in a form suitable for computer processing, including a program of a nature to cause a computer system to perform a function;

7°) subscriber data: any information, in the form of computer data or in any other form, held by a service provider and relating to subscribers to its services, other than traffic or content data, and allowing the establishment of:

a)	the type of communication service used, the technical arrangements taken in this regard and the period of service;

b)	the identity, electronic, postal or geographical address and telephone number of the subscriber, and any other access number, data concerning billing and payment, available on the basis of a contract or service arrangement;

c)	any other information relating to the location of communication equipment, available on the basis of a contract or service arrangement;

8°) traffic data: all data relating to a communication passing through an information system, produced by the latter as an element of the communication chain, indicating the origin, destination, route, time, date, size and duration of the communication or the type of underlying service;

9°) fraudulent remaining in a computer system: any irregular and continuous presence in an automated data processing system:

10°) racist and xenophobic material: any writing, any image or any other representation of ideas or theories which advocates or encourages hatred, discrimination or violence against a person or group of persons, by reason of race, colour, ancestry, affiliation or national or ethnic origin or religion, insofar as the latter serves as a pretext for one or other of these elements or which incites such acts;

11°) minor: any person under the age of eighteen within the meaning of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child;

12°) child pornography: any data of whatever nature or form or medium representing:

a)	a minor engaging in sexually explicit behaviour;

b)	a person who appears as a minor engaging in sexually explicit behaviour;

c)	realistic images representing a minor engaging in sexually explicit behaviour.

13°) computer program: sequence of instructions which specifies step by step the operations to be performed by a computer or computer component to obtain a result;

14°) direct marketing: any sending of a message intended to promote, directly or indirectly, goods, services or the image of a person selling goods or providing services;

15°) information system: organized set of resources (hardware, software, personnel, data and procedures) which allows the collection, grouping, classification, processing and dissemination of information;

16°) computer system: any device whether isolated or not, any set of interconnected or related devices, which ensures or one or more elements of which ensure automated data processing by executing a program;

17°) information and communication technologies: technologies used to collect, store, use and send information as well as those which involve the use of computers or any communication system including telecommunications;

18°) networks: systems for sharing information between several machines.

Chapitre 2

Crimes and offences related to information and communication technologies

Section 1 : Attacks on the confidentiality of information systems

Paragraphe 1 : Fraudulent access to a computer system

Article 512-1

Whoever accesses or attempts to access fraudulently, all or part of an information system, is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Whoever obtains or attempts to obtain fraudulently, for himself or for another, any advantage whatsoever by entering an information system is punished by the same penalties.

Where this has resulted in either the deletion or modification of data contained in the system, or an alteration of the functioning of this system, the imprisonment is two years and the fine is 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Fraudulent remaining in a computer system

Article 512-2

Whoever remains or attempts to remain fraudulently in all or part of an information system, is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 5,000,000 CFA francs.

Where this has resulted in either the deletion or modification of data contained in the system, or an alteration of the functioning of this system, the imprisonment is two years and the fine is 10,000,000 francs.

Section 2

Attacks on the integrity and availability of information systems

Paragraphe 1 : Obstruction of the functioning of an information system

Article 512-3

Whoever intentionally obstructs or attempts to obstruct the functioning of an information system is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Fraudulent introduction of data into an information system

Article 512-4

Whoever introduces or attempts to introduce fraudulently data into an information system is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Section 3 : Attacks on the integrity of data in an information system

Paragraphe 1 : Fraudulent interception of computerized data

Article 512-5

Whoever intercepts or attempts to intercept fraudulently computerized data during their non-public transmission to, from or within an information system, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Fraudulent modification of computerized data

Article 512-6

Whoever intentionally modifies or attempts to modify, damages or attempts to damage, deletes or attempts to delete, erases or attempts to erase, alters or attempts to alter the data of an information system or their modes of processing or transmission is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3 : Falsification of computerised data

Article 512-7

Whoever produces or manufactures a set of digitised data by the fraudulent introduction, erasure or deletion of computerised data stored, processed or transmitted by an information system, generating counterfeit data, with the intention that they be taken into account or used for legal purposes as if they were original, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 60,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 4 : Use of falsified data

Article 512-8

Whoever, knowingly, makes use or attempts to make use of data obtained under the conditions provided for in Article 512-7 above, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Section 4 : Fraudulent obtaining of advantage

Article 512-9

Whoever fraudulently obtains, for himself or for another, any advantage whatsoever, by the introduction, alteration, erasure or deletion of computerised data, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Section 5 : Possession of equipment to commit offences

Article 512-10

Whoever produces, sells, imports, possesses, distributes, offers, transfers or makes available, without right or without authorisation, equipment, a computer program, any device or data designed or specially adapted to commit one or more of the offences provided for in this Code or a password, an access code or similar computerised data allowing access to all or part of an information system, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 200,000,000 francs.

Section 6

Association formed or agreement with a view to committing computer offences

Article 512-11

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 200,000,000 francs, whoever participates in an association formed or an agreement established with a view to the preparation, or the commission concretised by one or more material acts, of one or more of the offences provided for in this title.

Section 7 : Child pornography

Paragraphe 1

Production of images or representations of a child pornographic nature

Article 512-12

Whoever produces, records, offers, makes available, distributes, transmits an image or a representation presenting a character of child pornography by means of an information system is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2

Import or export of images or representations of a child pornographic nature

Article 512-13

Whoever procures or procures for another, imports or causes to be imported, exports or causes to be exported an image or a representation presenting a character of child pornography by means of an information system, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3

Possession of images or representations of a child pornographic nature

Article 512-14

Whoever possesses an image or a representation presenting a character of child pornography in an information system or in any means whatsoever of storing computerised data, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Is punished by the same penalties, whoever facilitates access to images, documents, sound or a representation presenting a character of child pornography.

Article 512-15

Any adult person who intentionally proposes, by means of information and communication technologies, a meeting with a minor child, with the aim of committing against him or her one of the offences provided for in Articles 512-12, 512-13 and 512-14 above, when this proposal has been followed by material acts leading to the said meeting, is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Section 8

Racist, xenophobic acts, threats and insults by means of an information system

Paragraphe 1

Provision of writings or images of a racist or xenophobic nature by means of an information system

Article 512-16

Whoever creates, downloads, distributes or makes available, in any form whatsoever, racist and xenophobic material, by means of an information system is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 2 : Threats by means of an information system

Article 512-17

Whoever utters a threat by means of an information system, to commit a criminal offence, towards a person is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 3 : Insults committed by means of an information system

Article 512-18

Whoever utters an insult by means of an information system towards a person is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 4 : Negationism

Article 512-19

Whoever distributes or makes available, by means of an information system, material which denies, grossly minimises, approves or justifies acts constituting genocide or crimes against humanity as defined by national and international legislation is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine of 50,000,000 francs.

Section 9

Offences related to the activities of providers of communication services to the public by electronic means

Article 512-20

Whoever presents content or an activity as being unlawful with the aim of obtaining its removal or of causing its distribution by a provider of communication services to the public by electronic means to cease, when he knows this information to be inaccurate, is punished by imprisonment of one year and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 512-21

Any provider of communication services to the public by electronic means who does not satisfy the obligation to put in place an easily accessible and visible device allowing any person to bring to notice unlawful data constituting facts of apology for crimes against humanity, incitement to racial hatred and child pornography is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 512-22

Any provider of communication services to the public by electronic means who does not satisfy the obligation to inform promptly the competent public authorities of all unlawful activities which are reported to him and which are carried out by the recipients of their services, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 512-23

Any provider of communication services to the public by electronic means who does not satisfy the obligation to retain data allowing the identification of whoever has contributed to the creation of the content or of one of the contents of the services of which he is the provider, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

The penalties provided for in the first paragraph of this article apply when the provider of communication services by electronic means does not comply with the request of a judicial authority to obtain communication of the data referred to in the same paragraph.

Article 512-24

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any publisher of professional online public communication services who does not make available to the public in an open standard, information on:

1°) if it is a natural person, their surname, first name, domicile and telephone number and, if they are subject to the formalities of registration in the Trade and Movable Credit Register, in the Register of Trades, their registration number;

2°) if it is a legal person, its name or corporate name, its registered office, its telephone number and if it is a company subject to the formalities of registration in the Trade and Movable Credit Register or in the National Register of Enterprises and Associations, its registration number, its share capital, the address of its registered office;

3°) the name of the director or co-director of the publication of the electronic public communication service and, where applicable, that of the person responsible for editing.

Is punished by the same penalties, any person publishing on a non-professional basis an online public communication service who does not make available to the public, their name, their name or corporate name and their address in addition to the communication of their personal identification elements provided for by this title.

Article 512-25

The provider of electronic public communication services who does not provide to publishers of online public communication services the technical means enabling them to satisfy the identification conditions provided for in Article 512-36 below is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 512-26

Is punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs, without prejudice to any other penalties provided for by the legislation in force, any professional or non-professional publisher of a public communication service using information and communication technologies, who, within 24 hours of receiving the request, does not publish the response arising from the exercise of the right of reply.

Article 512-27

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone carrying out an activity in the field of electronic commerce who does not ensure by means of an open standard to those to whom the supply of goods or the provision of services is intended, easy, direct and permanent access to the following information:

1°) if it is a natural person, their surname and first name and, if it is a legal person, its corporate name;

2°) the complete address of the place where it is established, its electronic mail address, as well as its telephone number;

3°) if it is subject to the formalities of registration in the trade register, the number of its registration in the Trade and Movable Credit Register (RCCM), in the Register of Trades, its share capital and the address of its registered office;

4°) if its activity is subject to an authorization regime, the name and address of the authority having issued it;

5°) if it is a member of a regulated profession, the reference to the applicable professional rules, its professional title, the State in which it was granted as well as the name of the order or professional body with which it is registered;

6°) the Code of Conduct to which it is possibly subject as well as information relating to the way in which these codes can be consulted electronically;

7°) if it is a company subject to value added tax, its Identification Number.

Is punished by the same penalties, any person carrying out an activity in the field of electronic commerce, even in the absence of a contract offer, when they mention a price and do not indicate in a clear manner, in particular whether taxes and delivery charges are included.

Article 512-28

Any electronic supplier of goods or services who refuses to reimburse the amounts received from a consumer who exercises their right of withdrawal, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 512-29

Anyone who deceives or attempts to deceive, by fraudulent maneuvers, the purchaser as to the identity, nature or origin of the good sold, by delivering a good other than that ordered and purchased by the consumer, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Section 10: Offences relating to direct marketing

Article 512-30

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who sends one or more messages by means of an automatic calling machine, a fax machine or an electronic mail using, in any form whatsoever, the contact details of a natural person who has not expressed their prior consent to receive direct marketing by this means.

Article 512-31

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who sends, in authorized cases, for the purposes of direct marketing, messages by means of automatic calling machines, fax machines and electronic mail, without indicating valid contact details to which the recipient can usefully transmit a request to obtain that these communications cease.

Is punished by the same penalties provided for in the first paragraph of this article anyone who conceals or attempts to conceal the identity of the person on whose behalf the communication is sent and to mention a subject unrelated to the service or service offered.

Article 512-32

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs, any provider who does not satisfy the request of a recipient to cease sending messages, for the purposes of direct marketing, by means of automatic calling machines, fax machines or electronic mail.

Section 11: Offences relating to advertising by electronic means

Article 512-33

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs:
anyone who sends advertising in any form whatsoever, accessible by an electronic communication service, not clearly identified as such;
anyone who does not clearly identify the natural or legal person on whose behalf the advertising is made;
anyone who does not clearly identify as such, competitions or promotional games and their conditions of participation in an easily accessible, precise and unequivocal manner, including, where applicable, the provider's authorization number.

Section 12: Offences relating to cryptology

Article 512-34

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any provider of cryptology services who does not satisfy the obligation to communicate to the Authority in charge of the regulation of cryptology, the description of the technical characteristics of the means of cryptology as well as the source code of the software used.

Article 512-35

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, anyone who supplies or imports a means of cryptology not exclusively ensuring authentication or integrity control functions without satisfying the obligation of prior declaration to the competent Authority.

Article 512-36

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs anyone who exports a means of cryptology not exclusively ensuring authentication or integrity control functions without having previously obtained the authorization of the Authority in charge of the regulation of cryptology.

Article 512-37

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs, anyone who provides cryptology services without having previously obtained approval from the Authority in charge of cryptology regulation.

Article 512-38

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, anyone who makes available to others a means of cryptology that has been subject to a prohibition on use and circulation, even free of charge.

Article 512-39

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 20,000,000 francs, anyone who obstructs the exercise of the control mission of the Authority in charge of cryptology regulation.

Article 512-40

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 30,000,000 francs anyone who establishes backdoor access to data or to an information system without the authorization of the legitimate user.

Section 13

Offences committed by means of information and communication technologies

Paragraphe 1

Offences against property by means of information and communication technologies

Article 512-41

Is punished by imprisonment of five years, and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, theft committed by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-42

Is punished by imprisonment of five years, and a fine of 10,000,000 francs extortion, whether of funds, securities, signature, writing, deed, title or any document containing or creating an obligation, disposition or discharge committed by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-43

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, breach of trust committed by means of information and communication technologies.

When the same means are used by a clerk or an employee to commit the offence referred to in paragraph 1, to the detriment of his master, the same imprisonment penalty is applicable but the fine is increased to 10,000,000 francs.

When the breach of trust is committed by an approved electronic service provider acting in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions, the imprisonment penalty is that referred to in paragraph 1 but the fine penalty may be increased to 15,000,000 francs.

Article 512-44

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, fraud committed by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-45

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, anyone who receives, in whole or in part, things removed, misappropriated or obtained by means of a crime or an offence, by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-46

Is punished by imprisonment of ten years and a fine equal to at least three times and at most five times the value of the property or funds on which the money laundering operations related any person who commits money laundering by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-47: The penalties provided for in Article 512-45 above are doubled

when the offence of money laundering is committed habitually or by using the facilities provided by the exercise of a professional activity;
when the perpetrator of the offence is in a state of recidivism. In this case, convictions pronounced abroad are taken into account to establish recidivism;
when the offence of money laundering is committed by an organized gang;
when the crime or offence from which the property or sums of money on which the offence of money laundering related originates is punished by a custodial sentence of a duration greater than that of the imprisonment incurred under Article 512-45, money laundering is punished by the penalties attached to the original offence of which its perpetrator had knowledge and, if this offence is accompanied by aggravating circumstances, by the penalties attached only to the circumstances of which he had knowledge.

Article 512-48

Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 512-45 above, any person who, within the framework of an agreement or participation in an association, with a view to committing money laundering, assists, incites or advises a natural or legal person with a view to the execution or facilitation of the execution of money laundering.

Article 512-49

Is punished by imprisonment of twenty years and a fine equal to at least three times and at most five times the value of the property or funds on which the terrorist financing operations related, when the offence of terrorist financing is committed by means of information and communication technologies.

Article 512-50

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs any person who commits theft, fraud, receiving, breach of trust, extortion, blackmail relating to computer data.

Paragraphe 2

Press offences committed by means of information and communication technologies

Article 512-51

Press offences, provided for by the law on the Press Regime and Press Offences, committed by means of information and communication technologies, with the exception of those committed by the press on the Internet, are punished by common law penalties.

Paragraphe 3: Offences committed by any means of public dissemination

Article 512-52

Are considered as means of public dissemination: radio broadcasting, television, cinema, the press, posting, exhibition, distribution of writings or images of all kinds, speeches, songs, cries or threats, uttered in public places or meetings, any technical process intended to reach the public and generally any means of digital communication by electronic means.

Article 512-53

Is punished by imprisonment of seven years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs anyone who:

1°) manufactures or possesses with a view to trading, distributing, renting, posting or exhibiting;

2°) imports or causes to be imported, exports or causes to be exported, transports or causes to be transported knowingly for the same purposes;

3°) posts, exhibits or projects to public view;

4°) sells, rents, offers for sale or rental, even non-publicly;

5°) offers, even free of charge, even non-publicly in any form whatsoever, directly or by indirect means;

6°) distributes or delivers with a view to their distribution by any means whatsoever, all printed matter, all writings, drawings, posters, engravings, paintings, photographs, films or plates, matrices or photographic reproductions, emblems, all objects or images contrary to good morals.

Article 512-54

When the acts referred to in Article 512-52 above are of a pornographic nature, the maximum penalty is pronounced.

The convicted person may, in addition, be subject, for a period not exceeding six months, to a prohibition from exercising, directly or through an intermediary, in law or in fact, management functions of any printing, publishing or grouping and distribution company of newspapers and periodical publications.

Anyone who contravenes the prohibition referred to above is punished by the penalties provided for in this article.

Paragraphe 4 : Digital identity theft

Article 512-55

Any person who usurps the digital identity of a third party or one or more data allowing their identification, with a view to disturbing their peace or that of others or to harm their honour, reputation or interests, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 5 : Infringements of copyright and related rights

Article 512-56

Any person who deliberately commits, by means of information and communication technologies, an infringement of literary and artistic property is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Article 512-57

Any person who commits an infringement of the patrimonial right or the moral right of the author of a computer creation, namely a computer program or a database, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 15,000,000 francs.

Article 512-58

Any electronic service provider who, intentionally, without legitimate excuse or justification, discloses information relating to a criminal investigation, when they have received, in the context of that investigation, an explicit injunction relating to confidentiality or when such confidentiality results from the law, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Paragraphe 6 : Offences against defence and security

Article 512-59

Any person who is guilty of treason and punished by criminal imprisonment for life:

1°) delivers to a foreign power or its agents, in any form or by any means whatsoever, information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence and security;

2°) secures, by any means whatsoever, possession of such information, object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file with a view to delivering it to a foreign power or its agents;

3°) destroys or allows to be destroyed information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file with a view to favouring a foreign power.

4°) discloses by means of information and communication technologies rumours or false information on the state or actions of armed forces engaged at the front with the intention of undermining troop morale or sowing panic and doubt among the population.

Article 512-60

Any person who, with the intention of delivering them to a third country, gathers information, objects, documents, processes, data or computerised files whose assembly and exploitation are likely to harm national defence and security is guilty of treason and punished by criminal imprisonment for life.

Article 512-61

Any person who, without intention of treason or espionage, is punished by imprisonment of ten years:

1°) secures, being without authority, possession of information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file, which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence and security or whose knowledge could lead to the discovery of a secret of national defence and security;

2°) destroys, removes, allows to be destroyed or removed, reproduces or allows to be reproduced information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised files;

3°) brings or allows to be brought to the knowledge of an unauthorised person or the public information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file, or extends its disclosure.

Section 14 : Complementary penalties

Article 512-62

In the event of conviction for an offence committed by means of information and communication technologies, the court may impose as complementary penalties: the prohibition from sending digital communication messages; the provisional or permanent prohibition of access to the site used to commit the offence; or the injunction to cut off access by all available technical means or even to prohibit its hosting.

The judge may issue an injunction to any person legally responsible for the site used to commit the offence or to any qualified person to implement technical means likely to guarantee the prohibition of access, hosting or the cutting off of access to the incriminated site.

Article 512-63

Any person who violates the prohibitions pronounced by the judge, pursuant to Article 131-15 of this Code, is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 512-64

In the event of conviction for an offence committed by means of electronic communication media, the judge may, as a complementary measure, order the dissemination at the expense of the convicted person, by extract, of the decision on that same media.

When it is ordered, the publication provided for in the first paragraph of this article is executed within fifteen days following the day on which the conviction became final, on pain of imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 512-65

Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 512-33 to 512-39 of this Code, the following complementary penalties may be imposed for offences related to cryptology:

1°) confiscation of the tools which were used to commit the offence or which are the product thereof;

2°) the prohibition from exercising a public function or a professional activity related to cryptology for a period of five years;

3°) the closure of one or more establishments of the enterprise used to commit the incriminated acts for a period of five years;

4°) exclusion from public procurement for a period of five years.

The complementary penalties apply to any natural or legal person guilty of one of the offences referred to in this article.

TITRE II : OFFENCES AGAINST CULTURAL HERITAGE

[Law No. 2022-034 of 28 July 2022 establishing the regime for the protection and promotion of national cultural heritage]

Chapitre 1 : General provisions

Article 521-1

For the purposes of this Code, cultural heritage means all tangible and intangible cultural property which, for religious or secular purposes, is of importance to the State, local authorities, communities, groups and individuals for history, art, thought, science and technology.

Article 521-2

This Code applies to cultural property located on national territory, whatever its nature and origin and having exceptional universal value from the aesthetic, scientific or conservation point of view.

Article 521-3

Tangible cultural heritage consists of movable and immovable cultural property.

Intangible cultural heritage consists of all practices, traditions and oral expressions, representations, knowledge, know-how and cultural spaces that the State, local authorities, communities, groups and individuals recognise as part of their cultural heritage.

Article 521-4

Cultural property is considered to be, regardless of its owners, movable or immovable property that is of great importance to the State, Territorial Collectivities and communities.

Movable cultural property is capable of being moved. It includes: archaeological property, products of regular, fortuitous or clandestine archaeological excavations and discoveries;
ethnographic property;
works of art, paintings, drawings, statuary and sculptures, engravings, prints and lithographs, tapestries, weavings, assemblages, installations, shipwrecks and underwater objects;
digital works of art as well as digital libraries based on the interactivity of creative genius and software intelligence;
elements originating from an artistic or historical monument;
rare collections and specimens of zoology, anatomy, botany, mineralogy; objects of paleontological interest; ancient, rare manuscripts, incunabula, books, documents and publications of historical, artistic, scientific, literary interest, isolated or in collections, more than seventy years old; objects and items of antiquity such as inscriptions, coins and engraved seals; archives, iconographic, photographic and audiovisual documents.
Immovable cultural property is property which, either by nature or by destination, cannot be moved without damage to itself and to its environment.
It includes: archaeological sites, buildings, monuments of architecture, art or history, major museums, major libraries, major archives repositories; architectural ensembles or elements of traditional habitats grouped or isolated; roads and cultural routes illustrating the interaction of the movement of exchanges and dialogue between several regions of the country in space and time, ruins and cities buried under the seas or any other aquatic spaces; natural monuments, formations or groups of physical and biological formations having aesthetic or scientific value;
geological formations, areas or zones constituting the habitat of animal and plant species of national importance;
dead cities of archaeological, historical and scientific interest;
living historic cities evolving with medinas or ancient fabrics of historical, scientific and cultural interest;
museum institutions, archives, libraries and centers of ancient manuscripts having exceptional value for history, science, religion.

Article 521-5

A cultural property is under national protection when it is registered in the inventory or classified in the national cultural heritage.

Article 521-6

Any cultural property inscribed on the World Heritage List or in the International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection, the International List of Cultural Property under Enhanced Protection and on the Lists of other UNESCO cultural Conventions is under international protection.

Article 521-7

Taking into account the specific nature of certain major development works of perimeters and sites, construction of large dams, highways, execution of mining and petroleum contracts, environmental, cultural and social impact studies, the archaeological component must be included in the feasibility study costs of said works.

Chapitre 2 : Des infractions

Article 522-1

Commits the crime of destruction of cultural property, whoever intentionally directs an attack against cultural property registered in the inventory, classified in the national cultural heritage or inscribed on a World Heritage List.

Also commits the crime of destruction of cultural property, whoever, in time of armed conflict, intentionally accomplishes in violation of laws and conventions, in particular the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its Second Protocol of 1999, one of the following acts:
the act of directing an attack against cultural property under enhanced protection;
the act of using cultural property under enhanced protection or its immediate surroundings in support of military action;
the act of destroying or appropriating on a large scale cultural property protected by laws and conventions, in particular the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its Second Protocol of 1999;
the act of committing an attack on cultural property covered by the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and its Second Protocol of 1999;
the theft, pillage or misappropriation of cultural property protected by the Convention, and acts of vandalism directed against cultural property protected by these international legal instruments.

Article 522-2

Any person guilty of the crime of destruction of cultural property defined in Article 522-1 above is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, if the property is classified in the national cultural heritage.

Article 522-3

If the destruction of such property was committed in a gang, with weapons, by means of threats or in a concerted action, the penalty is fifteen years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 francs.

Article 522-4

If the property subject to the attack is under international protection, the offender is punished by twenty years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 522-5

The attempt and complicity in the offenses referred to in this chapter are punished by the same penalties as those provided against the principal perpetrator.

Article 522-6

Is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs whoever has willfully desecrated buildings, places of worship or religious sites or mutilated, destroyed cultural objects.

The penalty is five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, if such property is registered in the inventory.

Article 522-7

The removal of items from public collections, the removal of fragments of classified property, the destruction of registers of registration of cultural property, of public collections are punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 1,500,000 francs.
If the offense is the work of a depositary of the competent authority, he is punished by five years' imprisonment.

Article 522-8

Whoever is guilty of pillaging an archaeological site, theft of archaeological property or illicit archaeological excavation is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.
When the acts of pillage or illicit excavation are the work of a person who is a depositary of the competent authority, the manager of the site, museums, or any person involved in the management, surveillance, of the site or establishment, the penalty is five years' imprisonment and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 522-9

Whoever engages in the export of classified property is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.
Any person who issues an export authorization for the purpose of selling classified property is treated as an accomplice of the exporter and punished by the same penalty.

Article 522-10

Whoever, knowing that a property is proposed for classification, exports it, or attempts to export it, is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the action for damages that may be brought by the competent authority.
In addition, the Court may order the confiscation of the property subject to illicit export.

Article 522-11

Anyone who voluntarily fails to include the archaeological component in the feasibility studies for major works referred to in Article 521-7 above is punished by a fine of 20,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the suspension of works and the assumption of necessary studies.

Article 522-12

The alienation of classified property belonging to the State, the modification, transformation, reproduction, exploitation for profit of classified property, are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Article 522-13

The commercialization, exportation of cultural property without authorization from the competent authority are punished by a fine of 5,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the confiscation of property.

TITRE III : DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE L'ENVIRONNEMENT

[Loi n°2021-032/du 24 mai 2021 relative aux pollutions et aux nuisances ;

Loi n°2014-024/du 03 juillet 2014 portant interdiction de la production, de l'importation et de la commercialisation des sachets plastiques non biodégradables en République du Mali ;

Loi n°10-028 du 12 juillet 2010 déterminant les principes de gestion des ressources du domaine forestier national ;

Loi n°2018-036 du 27 juin 2018 déterminant les principes de gestion de la faune et de son habitat ;

Loi n°02-017 du 03 juin 2002 régissant la détention, le commerce, l'exportation, la réexportation, l'importation, le transport et le transit de spécimen d'espèces de faune et de flore sauvages].

Chapitre 1

General Provisions Section 1: Definitions

Article 531-1 : For the purposes of this Code, the following are understood as

1°) environment: a whole perceived as an entity, a space and at a given time, of physical, chemical, biological and social factors likely to have a direct or indirect effect, immediate or in the long term, on the human species and its activities and on animal and plant species;

2°) sanitation: any action aimed at improving all conditions which, in the physical environment of human life, influence or are likely to have an unfavorable influence on physical, mental or social well-being;

3°) precautionary principle: the principle according to which the absence of certainty, taking into account the scientific and technical knowledge of the moment, must not delay the adoption of effective and proportionate measures aimed at preventing a risk of serious and irreversible damage to the environment;
4°) polluter-pays principle: the principle according to which the costs resulting from measures to prevent, reduce pollution and combat it must be borne by the polluter;

5°) environmental information: any data that is available in written form, images or on any other information medium relating to:
the state of water, air, soil, fauna and flora;
activities causing nuisances and pollution;
activities or measures aimed at protecting the environment.

6°) nuisance: any aggression against the natural or artificial environment surrounding man and causing inconvenience or damage to the latter;

7°) waste: any solid, liquid, gaseous substance or residue from a production, transformation or use process of any other substances eliminated or intended to be eliminated;

8°) domestic waste: any waste resulting from household activities, including human excreta;

10°) industrial waste: any waste resulting from industrial, artisanal or commercial activities not assimilated to domestic waste;

11°) agricultural waste: any container having contained chemical products or any packaging having been used for the use of these products in agricultural, horticultural, fish farming and livestock activities;

12°) biomedical waste: any waste from care, pharmacy and biomedical analysis activities;

13°) hazardous waste: unused and unusable products and by-products, residues and waste resulting from an industrial, commercial, artisanal, agricultural, scientific or any other activity which may present a danger to health and the environment, either by themselves or when they come into contact with other products due to their chemical reactivity or their toxic properties;

14°) pollutant: any solid, liquid or gaseous discharge, any waste, odor, sound, vibration, radiation or any combination thereof likely to cause pollution;

15°) pollution: any contamination or direct or indirect modification of the environment caused by an act likely to negatively influence the environment, to cause a situation detrimental to the health, safety, well-being of man, fauna, flora or collective and individual property;

16°) obsolete product: product whose use is prohibited due to its depressive nature for health or environmental protection reasons;

17°) environmental impact study: the identification, description and evaluation of the effects of projects on man, fauna and flora, soil, water, air, climate and landscape, including interactions between these factors, cultural heritage and other material property;

18°) environmental impact study report: any document containing the results of the environmental impact study required to obtain administrative authorization for the realization of any project;

19°) environmental audit: the internal evaluation and management tool carried out by companies and public administration services to ensure that political, regulatory and nominative requirements for environmental protection are respected;

20°) competent administration: National Directorate of Sanitation and Control of Pollution and Nuisances or any other structure authorized by the State.

21°) plastic bag: bag of large or small format made of synthetic material (polyethylene), serving as a container for foodstuffs or any other product;

22°) biodegradable plastic bag: any plastic bag capable of decomposing within a period of at most eighteen months, under the action of microorganisms present in nature.

Section 2 : Provisions relating to pollution and nuisances

[Loi n°2021-032 du 24 mai 2021 relative aux pollutions et aux nuisances]

Paragraphe 1 : Environmental assessments

Article 531-2

Activities likely to harm the environment and the quality of the living environment are subject to a study or to the environmental and social impact notice.

A decree taken in the Council of Ministers sets the list of projects subject to the environmental and social impact study and notice and specifies the content of the procedures.

Article 531-3

All work, all development and all industrial, agricultural, mining, artisanal, commercial or transport works whose activity may be a source of pollution, nuisance or environmental degradation are compulsorily subject to environmental audit.

A decree taken in the Council of Ministers determines the conditions for carrying out the audit.

Paragraphe 2 : Environmental information

Article 531-4 : Every person has the right to free access to environmental information

Access to environmental information, the publication of which affects international relations, national defense, confidentiality or which may cause serious danger to security, is subject to authorization.

Article 531-5

A request for environmental information must be refused if it refers to the transmission of files that are not yet closed or data whose processing is not yet completed or internal administrative communications.

Paragraphe 3 : Des déchets

Sous paragraphe I: Des déchets domestiques solides

Article 531-6

It is prohibited to hold or abandon solid domestic waste under conditions favoring the development of harmful organisms, insects and disease vectors likely to cause damage to persons and the environment.

Article 531-7

Any person who produces or holds solid domestic waste under conditions likely to harm public health and safety or the environment in general, is required to ensure its disposal or recycling.

Article 531-8

It is prohibited to burn solid domestic waste in the open air inside any built-up area.

Article 531-9

It is prohibited to store or bury solid domestic waste in places other than those designated by the competent authority.

Sous paragraphe II: Des déchets domestiques liquides

Article 531-10

It is prohibited to discharge into watercourses, gutters and collectors or other public or private places, liquid domestic waste that does not comply with discharge standards.

Article 531-11

Any person who produces liquid domestic waste is required to ensure that it cannot harm human health and the environment.

Any person who damages or destroys a public, collective or semi-collective sanitation facility must restore it to its original condition or bear the costs of restoration.

Sous paragraphe III: Des déchets agricoles

Article 531-12

It is prohibited to hold or abandon agricultural waste under conditions that favor the development of harmful organisms, insects and other disease vectors likely to cause damage to persons and the environment.

Article 531-13

Any person who produces or holds agricultural waste under conditions likely to harm public health and safety or the environment in general, is required to ensure its disposal and recycling.

Sous paragraphe IV: Des déchets biomédicaux et industriels

Article 531-14

It is prohibited to discharge biomedical and industrial, craft or commercial waste into watercourses, gutters and collectors or other public or private places.

Article 531-15

It is prohibited to deposit biomedical waste and solid industrial waste in a transit depot or in a landfill other than that reserved for them.

Article 531-16

It is prohibited to burn biomedical waste and solid industrial waste in the open air inside any built-up area.

Disposal operations by incineration may only take place in facilities authorized by the ministry in charge of the Environment.

Article 531-17

It is prohibited to bury biomedical waste and solid industrial waste and to deposit them in places other than the landfills reserved for them and authorized storage centers.

Sous paragraphe V: Des déchets dangereux

Article 531-18

Any waste originating from abroad is presumed to be hazardous within the meaning of this Code.

Article 531-19

Prohibited throughout the entire territory of the Republic of Mali are the offer or sale, acquisition and transfer for consideration or free of charge, possession, transformation, destruction, neutralization and disposal of hazardous waste from other countries.

Article 531-20

Prohibited are all acts relating to the purchase, sale, import, export, transit, transport, treatment, deposit and storage of hazardous waste without prior authorization from the minister in charge of the Environment.

Article 531-21

Any producer of hazardous waste is required to send annually to the minister in charge of the Environment, the nature, quantity, date and disposal procedures of the waste produced.

Article 531-22

Exports of hazardous waste may only be authorized to a country when that country has adequate facilities to dispose of them using ecologically sound methods.

Hazardous waste intended for export must be packaged, labeled and transported in accordance with accepted and recognized international standards and rules on packaging, labeling and transport.

Article 531-23

When hazardous waste is the subject of illicit trafficking or mismanagement, the costs of return, the costs of restoring contaminated sites and the repair of damage caused are borne by the offender, without prejudice to the penalties provided for by the regulations in force.

Article 531-24

Prohibited are all forms of use and management of hazardous waste without prior authorization from the minister in charge of the Environment, who sets technical requirements and special rules to be observed.

The procedures for managing hazardous waste are established by order of the Minister in charge of the Environment.

Sous paragraphe VI: Des déchets spéciaux

Article 531-25

Special waste includes biomedical waste, plastic waste, used oils, obsolete pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs), used batteries and accumulators, radioactive waste, electronic, electrical and household appliance waste, waste containing asbestos, waste from military activities, used drums, barrels and packaging, chemical waste related to mining operations, used solvents.

Article 531-26

Any producer of special waste is required to send annually to the minister in charge of the Environment, the nature, quantity, date and disposal procedures of the waste produced.

Article 531-27

Special waste requires specific treatment different from that of household and similar waste. It must be disposed of in specialized facilities.

Special waste intended for export for disposal must be packaged, labeled and transported in accordance with accepted and recognized international standards and rules on packaging, labeling and transport.

Paragraphe 4 : De la pollution atmosphérique et des odeurs incommodantes

Article 531-28

Air, sea, river, road and rail transport, buildings, industrial, craft and agricultural establishments, mines and quarries, treatment plants, generators, mills, or other immovable or movable objects must be constructed, operated or used in such a way as to avoid air pollution or odors that inconvenience populations and compromise public health or safety.

Article 531-29

It is prohibited to operate an industrial, mining or craft unit emitting polluting substances into the air in the form of smoke, dust, gas or liquid without complying with emission standards.

Paragraphe 5 : Des bruits et des nuisances

Article 531-30

Prohibited is any noise likely to disturb rest, tranquility, health, public safety or to harm the environment.

Article 531-31

The establishment and operation of any human, industrial, mining or artisanal facility housing sound or light sources or other sources likely to constitute a threat to rest, tranquility, health, public safety or to harm the environment must be carried out in compliance with sensitivity zones and standards set by regulations in force.

Paragraphe 6 : Protection of green spaces, cemeteries and landfills

Article 531-32

The protection of green spaces against all causes of degradation is of general interest.

When they have acquired ownership of green spaces, wooded or not, the State, public establishments or Local Authorities undertake to preserve, develop and maintain them.

It is prohibited to carry out any activity that degrades green spaces.

Article 531-33

The decommissioning of green spaces, cemeteries, landfills and wastewater and sewage sludge treatment plants is subject to prior authorization from the minister responsible for the Environment, after favorable opinion from the ministers responsible for Urban Planning, Health, Culture and Local Authorities.

Paragraphe 7 : Chemical substances

Article 531-34

Harmful and dangerous chemical substances which, by reason of their toxicity, radioactivity, destructive power in the environment or concentration in biological chains, present or are likely to present a danger to humans, the natural environment or their environment when they are produced, imported into the national territory or discharged into the environment, are subject to control and monitoring by competent State services in this matter.

Article 531-35

Industrial establishments likely to hold and/or dispose of persistent organic pollutants are subject to an audit of their facilities.

Article 531-36

The importation, use, possession, distribution, repackaging and storage of chemical substances that have not been subject to approval or authorization are prohibited.

However, exemptions may be granted by joint order of the ministers responsible for the Environment, Health and Scientific Research to specialized institutions for research and experimentation needs.

Article 531-37

Any person involved in the importation, production and distribution of chemical substances must obtain an authorization issued by the ministers responsible for the Environment, Health, Agriculture and Industries.

Article 531-38

Any holder of a chemical substance must prove the quality of their product by presenting an analysis certificate issued by an approved laboratory.
In case of doubt about the quality of the product, the competent Administration carries out counter-expertise analyses. The analysis costs are borne by the holder.

Article 531-39

Any obsolete or expired chemical substance must be declared to the competent administration.

The holder is required to eliminate their stock or have it eliminated at their expense by a company approved by the minister responsible for the Environment.

In case of voluntary or accidental discharge of chemical substances into the environment, the costs of restoring contaminated sites and repairing the damage caused are borne by the offender, without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by regulations in force.

Paragraphe 8 : Prosecution of offenses

Article 531-40

The sworn agents of the National Directorate of Sanitation and Control of Pollution and Nuisances and Judicial Police Officers investigate and record by official reports offenses against the provisions of this Code and exercise the powers related thereto.

Article 531-41

The agents referred to in the article above may be assisted when necessary by agents of the Police, Gendarmerie, Customs, Health and Water and Forests.

Section 3

Provisions relating to the production, importation and marketing of non-biodegradable plastic bags in the Republic of Mali

[Loi n°2014-024 du 03 juillet 2014 portant interdiction de la production, de l'importation et de la commercialisation des sachets plastiques non biodégradables en République du Mali]

Article 531-42

This Code prohibits the production, importation and marketing of non-biodegradable plastic bags in the Republic of Mali.

Chapitre 2 : Incriminations

Section 1 : Incriminations relating to pollution and nuisances

[Loi n°2021-032 du 24 mai 2021 relative aux pollutions et aux nuisances]

Article 532-1

Is punished by life imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, any person violating the provisions of Article 531-18 of this Code. The offender is sentenced to re-export without delay and at their expense the waste introduced.

Article 532-2

In the cases provided for in Articles 531-19 and 531-20 above, a residence ban for a period of ten years may be pronounced.

Article 532-3

When the offense is committed within the framework of the activity of a legal person, criminal liability falls on any natural person who by virtue of their functions has responsibility for the management, supervision or control of this activity.

Any legal person in question is held primarily liable for payment of fines, civil reparations, costs and expenses.

Article 532-4

Are punished by a fine of 20,000 francs the perpetrators of offenses against the provisions of Articles 531-6, 531-8, 531-10 and 531-12 of this Code.

Article 532-5

Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 242-40 of this Code anyone who opposes the reporting agents referred to in Articles 531-40 and 531-41 above.

In case of recidivism, the fine and penalty are doubled.

Article 532-6

Is punished by a fine of 5,000,000 francs anyone who executes a project likely to harm the environment without carrying out an environmental impact study approved by the minister responsible for the Environment.

In case of recidivism, they are punished by six months' imprisonment and the fine may be doubled.

Article 532-7

Is punished by a fine of 3,000,000 francs anyone who executes a project for five years, likely to harm the environment without carrying out an environmental and social audit approved by the minister responsible for the Environment.

Article 532-8

Are punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 francs the perpetrators of offenses against the provisions of Articles 531-14 and 531-36 of this Code.

Article 532-9

Are punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs the perpetrators of offenses against the provisions of Articles 531-17, 531-20 and 531-21 of this Code.

In case of recidivism the fines and penalties are doubled.

Article 532-10

Are punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, the perpetrators of offenses against the provisions of Articles 531-24, and 531-30 of this Code.

In case of recidivism, these penalties may be doubled.

Article 532-11

Is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs the perpetrators of offenses against the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 531-22 of this Code.

In case of recidivism, these penalties may be doubled.

Section 2

Penalties incurred in case of violation of the prohibition on the production, importation and marketing of non-biodegradable plastic bags in the Republic of Mali

[Law No. 2014-024 of July 3, 2014 prohibiting the production, importation and marketing of non-biodegradable plastic bags in the Republic of Mali]

Article 532-12

Anyone who produces, imports or markets non-biodegradable plastic bags is liable to pay 100 francs per small format bag and 200 francs per large format bag. In addition, these plastic bags are seized and confiscated.

Section 3: Settlements

Article 532-13

In case of violations of the provisions of this Code, the competent administration has full power to settle.

The settlement procedure is exercised before or after judgment. In the latter case, the settlement only concerns pecuniary penalties.

The settlement procedure is excluded in case of recidivism.

TITRE IV: CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST FORESTS AND WILDLIFE

Chapitre 1: Definitions

Section 1: Definitions relating to forests

[Law No. 10-028 of July 12, 2010 determining the principles of management of the resources of the national forest domain]

Article 541-1: For the purposes of this Code, the following are understood as

1°) conservation areas: areas delimited, classified, protected and managed for the purposes of conservation and sustainable use of natural resources;

2°) management: set of rules and techniques implemented in a forest formation or conservation area, with a view to achieving sustainable management;

3°) conservation: development of forest resources with a view to achieving both protection and use objectives;

4°) CITES: the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, concluded in Washington,
D.C, on March 3, 1973;

5°) clearing: any voluntary operation during which all or part of the natural vegetation is cut down for the purpose of establishing a human dwelling, agricultural, industrial or forestry production or on the occasion of carrying out major works in the forest domain;

6°) forest species: indigenous or exotic non-agricultural plant species whose evolutionary process has not been influenced by man to meet his needs;

7°) fully protected forest species: indigenous, non-agricultural, non-cultivated plant species, threatened or presenting particular interest from an ecological, botanical, cultural, economic, scientific or medicinal point of view;

8°) partially protected forest species: indigenous non-agricultural, non-cultivated plant species, protected because of the quality of its wood and whose felling is subject to obtaining a title issued after prior payment of a fee per tree and whose minimum diameter is fixed by the texts in force;

9°) forest species of economic value: indigenous or exotic non-agricultural plant species, protected because of the economic value of its wood, not listed on the list of protected forest species but whose exploitation is prohibited for the production of fuelwood;

10°) forest exploitation: exploitation of the natural resources of the forest, in particular the cutting or collection of forest products;

11°) forest: plant formation whose exclusive or principal products are timber, service wood or fuelwood and which, incidentally, may produce resins, latex, gum, flowers, fruits, bark, roots, leaves, bamboos, raphias, vines, grasses, mushrooms and all other non-agricultural plant products;

12°) classified forest: natural or artificial forest having been the subject of a classification act following a consultation procedure with the populations in accordance with the provisions of the texts in force;
13°) protected forest: natural or artificial forest subject to the provisions of this Code and not having been the subject of a classification act;
14°) exploitation title: document issued for the cutting, harvesting or collection of a determined quantity of woody or non-woody forest products;
15°) transport title: document issued for the transport or circulation of woody or non-woody forest products.

Section 2: Definitions relating to wildlife

[Law No. 2018-036 of June 27, 2018 determining the principles of management of wildlife and its habitat]

Article 541-2: For the purposes of this Code, the following terms mean

1°) core area: central part of the biosphere reserve managed primarily for the purpose of integral protection of ecosystems and having the legal status of a national park;
2°) conservation areas: any area, protected, delimited, specially reserved and managed primarily or entirely for one of the following purposes: protection for scientific purposes or protection of wild resources; protection of ecosystems and for recreational purposes; conservation of specific natural elements; conservation with management interventions; conservation of terrestrial or aquatic landscapes and for recreational purposes as well as:
other areas or zones designated and/or managed primarily for the purposes of conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, as well as those for which criteria are adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Code and its implementing texts or international conventions, treaties or agreements signed and/or ratified by Mali;

3°) protected area: terrestrial or aquatic conservation space, geographically delimited, having been the subject of a legal text of classification following a consultation procedure with populations, particularly those living nearby, and benefiting from special measures for the protection and management of fauna and/or preservation of biological diversity;

4°) migration corridor: one or more environments functionally connecting different vital habitats for a species, a population, a metapopulation or a group of species allowing its dispersal and migration;

5°) biological diversity: variability of living organisms from all sources including, among others, terrestrial, aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part; this variability includes genetic diversity, diversity within species and between species as well as that of ecosystems;

6°) fully protected species: species removed from all taking except for scientific reasons or for the protection of persons and/or their property;

7°) partially protected species: species for which the hunting or capture regime is strictly limited and whose hunting or capture permit is accompanied by culling latitude;

8°) non-protected species: all animals not listed on the list of fully or partially protected species;

9°) national park: protected area managed primarily for the purpose of protecting ecosystems and for recreational purposes;

10°) strict nature reserve: protected area classified in the name of the State, managed primarily for scientific purposes. It consists of a terrestrial and/or aquatic space comprising ecosystems, geological or physiological characteristics and/or remarkable or representative species, managed primarily for the purposes of scientific research and/or continuous environmental monitoring;

11°) Biosphere Reserve: protected area covering an ecosystem or a combination of terrestrial and/or aquatic ecosystems, aimed at promoting a balanced relationship between human beings and the biosphere and providing a demonstration thereof and recognized at the international level within the framework of the UNESCO programme on Man and the Biosphere (MAB).

It is designated by the International Coordinating Council of the MAB Programme, at the request of the State;

12°) partial reserve or sanctuary: area set aside for the protection of characteristic communities of animals and/or the protection of particularly threatened animal or plant species as well as habitats essential to their survival, in which any other interest or activity is subordinated to the achievement of this objective;

13°) specimen: any wild animal, living or dead, belonging to the species covered by this Code and its implementing texts, their remains and trophies, any part or any product obtained from them, whether or not incorporated in goods as well as any other goods in the case where it appears from a supporting document, packaging or a mark, or label or any other element that these are parts or products of these species;

14°) hunting interest zone: classified area, geographically delimited in the protected forest domain, having been the subject of a classification act, and developed for the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fauna and its habitats for hunting, tourism, recreational, economic and/or scientific purposes.

Section 3

Definitions relating to the possession, trade, export, re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species

[Law No. 02-017 of 03 June 2002 governing the possession, trade, export, re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species]

Article 541-3: For the purposes of this Code, the following terms mean

1°) wild fauna: all animal species living freely in their natural environment;

2°) wild flora: all plant species growing in the natural environment;

3°) export: the operation by which a specimen, originating from the country, part or product, belonging to one of the species covered by this Code is sent outside the national jurisdiction;

4°) import: the operation by which a specimen, part or product belonging to one of the species covered by this Code is introduced into the national jurisdiction from a foreign country;

5°) re-export: the export of any specimen that has been previously imported;

6°) hunting products: captured animals, meat, eggs and trophies;

7°) permit or certificate: the official document issued by the Management Authority in order to authorize the import, export, re-export or introduction from the sea of specimens of species covered by this Code;

8°) specimen: any animal or plant, either living or dead belonging to the species covered by this Code, or any part or any product obtained from them, whether or not incorporated in other goods as well as any other goods in the case where it appears from a supporting document, packaging or a mark, or label or any other element that these are parts or products of animals or plants of these species.

Chapter 2: Crimes and offences against forests

[Law No. 10-028 of 12 July 2010 determining the principles of management of resources of the national forest domain]

Section 1: Provisions relating to the forest

Paragraph 1: Mining operations in classified forest

Article 542-1

Any natural or legal person who, without authorization, digs in the soil, extracts or removes sand, peat, turf, stones, earth or in general organizes the search and/or mining operations in a classified forest with or without occupation of the premises, is punished by a fine calculated at the rate of 500 francs per square meter of damaged and/or occupied surface, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of the premises and damages.

In addition, the offender incurs the following sanctions:
prohibition from continuing operations or activities in the classified domain;
restoration of the premises;
demolition of installations, dwellings or other equipment and expulsion of occupants from the classified perimeter.

However, compensatory reforestation must be carried out with seedlings of indigenous forest species adapted to the deforested area.

Paragraphe 2

Damage to and disappearance of boundary markers, pollution and degradation of the classified forest domain

Article 542-2

Without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of premises and damages, the following are punishable by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:
anyone who destroys, moves or causes to disappear all or part of the boundary markers, beacons, signs, marks or fences used to delimit the classified forest domain;
anyone who, without authorization, deposits rubble or refuse of any kind in the classified forest domain.

In cases of pollution using hazardous waste, the provisions of Title III of Book Five of this Code apply.

Paragraphe 3

Clearing, cultivation, occupation of the classified forest domain

Article 542-3

Anyone who, in violation of the provisions of this Code, occupies the classified forest domain, clears and/or cultivates it with or without occupation of the premises, is punishable by a fine calculated at the rate of 250 francs per square meter of cleared area, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of premises and damages.

The offender is also liable to the following sanctions:
prohibition from continuing the operations or activities for which or during which the clearing was carried out;
restoration of the premises, consisting of planting or sowing forest species and other work necessary to ensure the functions that characterized the cleared forest;
demolition of installations, dwellings or other equipment and expulsion of occupants from the classified perimeter;
pure and simple cancellation of the clearing authorization or the title authorizing occupation or exploitation of the land if it exists.

Paragraphe 4 : Clearing without authorization in the protected forest domain

Article 542-4

Anyone who clears without authorization in the protected forest domain is punishable by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 francs per hectare.

If there is incineration of trees, the fine is doubled.

Article 542-5

The owner of wooded land or private forest who clears his land or forest in violation of the provisions of this Code is punishable by a fine of 25,000 francs per hectare without prejudice to restoration of the premises, consisting of planting or sowing forest species and other work necessary to ensure the functions that characterized the cleared forest.

Paragraphe 5 : Grazing of domestic animals in the classified forest domain

Article 542-6

Anyone who, in violation of the provisions of this Code, grazes or moves one or more domestic animals or camps in the classified forest domain is punishable by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 250,000 francs and without prejudice to the confiscation of any tool or means of cutting vegetation and damages.

In addition, he is liable to the following additional sanctions:

a)	demolition of installations, dwellings or other equipment and expulsion of the shepherd(s) and other occupants from the classified perimeter;

b)	payment of a fine of:
1,000 francs per bovine, equine, asinine and camelid;
2,000 francs per ovine, caprine and porcine.

c)	when the offense does not result from purely fortuitous circumstances, imprisonment of two months may be pronounced against the shepherd and his accomplices.

Animals found in the classified perimeter are impounded and confiscated.

Article 542-7

Possession in the classified perimeter of a firearm and/or any tool or means of cutting prohibited vegetation is assimilated to the incriminated act and punished as such. In cases of possession of a firearm, the provisions of the texts governing the possession of weapons and the management of wild fauna and its habitat apply.

Section 2

Arson or intentional bush fire in the protected or classified domain

Article 542-8

In case of fire or bush fire caused intentionally in either the protected or classified domain, the applicable penalties are those of articles 435-1, paragraph 9 and 435-2, paragraph 3 of this Code.

Section 3

Cutting, mutilation, unauthorized exploitation of protected species or species of economic value

Article 542-9

Anyone who, without authorization, cuts, barks, tops, prunes, branches, fells, uproots, mutilates or damages in any way one or more planted trees or natural plants of species listed in the category of fully protected forest species in accordance with the provisions of this Code, is punishable by five years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

The attempt is punishable as the offense itself.

Article 542-10

Anyone who tops, cuts, uproots, prunes, pollards, branches, mutilates or damages in any way one or more planted trees or natural plants of species listed in the category of partially protected forest species or species of economic value, in accordance with the provisions of this Code, is punishable by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 300,000 francs.

The attempt is punishable as the offense itself.

Article 542-11

Anyone who barks, tops, prunes or fells one or more planted trees or natural plants of unprotected forest species, for the purpose of feeding domestic animals, is punishable by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 francs.

Article 542-12

Any owner of an artificial forest formation who exploits and/or transports, without authorization, species listed among those partially or fully protected by the State or Local Authorities, in violation of the provisions of this Code, is punishable by a fine of 150,000 francs.

Section 4 : Forest exploitation without a management plan

Article 542-13

Any commercial exploitation in the forest domain of the State or Local Authorities without a management plan previously approved or adopted by the competent authority of the forest domain concerned, is punishable by a fine of:
500,000 francs for natural persons;
5,000,000 francs for legal persons;

In addition, the exploitation is stopped by the competent authority with jurisdiction over the area.

Section 5 : Import and export of forest products

Article 542-14

Without prejudice to the provisions in force relating to the illegal exercise of trade, anyone who imports or exports a specimen of a product or an object from a forest species in violation of the provisions of this Code, is punishable:
for a fully protected forest species, by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 250,000 francs;
for a partially protected forest species, by six months' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs;
for a forest species of economic value, by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 250,000 francs;
for an unprotected forest species, by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

In addition, the specimen or product is confiscated or returned to the country of origin at his expense in cases of importation.

Article 542-15

Anyone who, without authorization, outside the cases provided for in the exercise of usage rights, cuts or harvests non-timber forest products for commercial purposes, is punishable by eleven days' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs without prejudice to the confiscation of the products.

Section 6

False indication, falsification of writings and reproduction of public seals

Article 542-16

Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 243-44 of this Code, anyone who:
gives false information with a view to concealing the nature of forest products during the issuance of exploitation or circulation or export permits;
falsifies writings or fraudulently reproduces public seals.

Article 542-17

Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by this Code, the withdrawal of permits and the prohibition for a period of five years from obtaining new permits are pronounced against any forest operator who is guilty of false information, falsification of writings and/or reproduction of public seals.

In case of recidivism, the prohibition and withdrawal of the permit for a period of five years are mandatory.

Section 7: Opposition to the authority of Water and Forests agents

Article 542-18: Is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 242-40 of this Code

anyone who opposes by acts, words, gestures, any manoeuvres whatsoever the exercise of the functions of Water and Forests agents of the State or of Local Authorities and thereby, undermines or attempts to hinder the proper functioning of the service responsible for forests as well as any incitement to such opposition;
anyone who, without legitimate excuse, does not respond to regular summons from Water and Forests agents of the State or of Local Authorities;
anyone who, by voluntary abstention hinders or attempts to hinder the exercise of the missions of Water and Forests agents.

When the offence defined above is committed by several persons acting in concert, the penalties provided for are doubled.

Chapter 3: Crimes and offences against fauna

[Law No. 2018-036 of 27 June 2018 determining the principles of management of fauna and its habitat]

Section 1: Provisions relating to fauna

Article 543-1

Anyone who hunts or captures one or more wild animals or organises these activities in a strict nature reserve, a core area of a biosphere reserve or in a national park, is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs without prejudice to the confiscation of hunting or capture products, material means, vehicles, devices and equipment used to commit the offence.

Are punished by the same penalties:
those who, in any place are found in possession of an elephant tusk or other specimen of a fully protected species whose origin they cannot justify;
those who unlawfully appropriate one or more trophies or remains of fully protected animals found dead or killed in the exercise of legitimate defence or the protection of persons and property;
those who are convicted of having accomplished acts of hunting or capturing fully protected animals without the required permit;
those who, without authorisation, introduce one or more exotic animal species into nature.

In cases of illegal introduction of one or more exotic animal and/or plant species into a protected area, the penalties are doubled.

Section 2

Provisions relating to international trade in specimens of wild animals

Article 543-2

Without prejudice to the application of the sanctions provided for by the Commercial Code and by the Customs Code, anyone who transits, imports, exports or re-exports one or more specimens of a species subject to the provisions of this Code and its implementing texts is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

In addition, the specimen is confiscated or returned to the country of origin or provenance at their expense in cases of attempted illegal importation or re-exportation.

Section 3

Mining operations in protected areas or in a migration corridor

Article 543-3

Any natural or legal person who digs in the soil, extracts or removes sand, peat, turf, stones, earth or in general organises prospecting, research and/or mining operations or earthworks or constructions, or tending to modify the appearance of the land and/or vegetation in a protected area, a buffer zone of a protected area or in a fauna migration corridor with or without occupation of the premises is punished:
for the natural person by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the restoration of the premises, the confiscation of mineral substances extracted in the area concerned as well as all material means, vehicles, devices and equipment used to commit the offence within the classified perimeter;
for the legal person by a fine of 20,000,000 francs without prejudice to the restoration of the premises, the confiscation of mineral substances extracted in the area concerned as well as all material means, vehicles, devices and equipment used to commit the offence within the classified perimeter.

In addition, they incur the following complementary penalties:
the payment of a penalty calculated at the rate of 1000 francs per square metre of damaged and/or occupied surface;
the definitive cessation of works and the prohibition to continue operations or activities in the protected area;
the pure and simple cancellation of the authorisation or mining title authorising the occupation or exploitation of the land if it exists;
the demolition of installations, dwellings and the confiscation of equipment and the expulsion of occupants outside the limits of the area concerned.

However, when the offence is committed in a strict nature reserve, a core area of a biosphere reserve or a national park, the fines are doubled.

Section 4: Degradation and pollution of protected areas

Article 543-4

Is punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of premises, anyone who commits the following acts:
the deposit of rubble, waste or refuse of any nature in a protected area;
any pollution of waters and in general, any act likely to harm or cause disturbances to the fauna and/or aquatic flora of a protected area.

In cases of pollution using hazardous waste, the provisions of Title III of this Code apply.

Section 5

Destruction, displacement or disappearance of boundary markers or beacons of a protected area or a fauna migration corridor

Article 543-5

Anyone who destroys, displaces or causes to disappear all or part of the boundary markers, beacons, signs, marks or fencing used to mark the limits of a protected area or a migration corridor, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of premises, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 6,000,000 francs.
When the offence is committed in a strict nature reserve, a core area of a biosphere reserve or a national park, the fine is doubled.

Section 6: Agricultural and forestry exploitation in a protected area

Article 543-6

Any natural or legal person under private or public law, except the State and local authorities, in violation of the provisions of this Code and its implementing texts, who engages in agricultural and/or forestry activity in a protected area, with or without occupation of the premises, is punished:
for natural persons, by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 2,000,000 francs, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions and restoration of the premises;
for legal persons, by a fine of 10,000,000 francs, without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions and restoration of the premises.

The accused also incurs the following sanctions:
payment of a penalty calculated at the rate of 500 francs per square meter of cleared and/or occupied surface area;
prohibition from continuing the operations or activities for which or during which the clearing was carried out;
restoration of the premises, consisting of planting or sowing native forest species adapted to the deforested area and other work necessary to ensure the functions that characterized the cleared forest;
demolition of installations and dwellings as well as confiscation of equipment and expulsion of occupants from the boundaries of the conservation area;
pure and simple cancellation of the clearing authorization or the title authorizing occupation or exploitation of the land, if it exists.

When the offense is committed in a strict nature reserve, a core area of a biosphere reserve or a national park, or when the incriminated activities are organized by a legal person or with its complicity, the fine is doubled.

Section 7: Grazing of domestic animals in protected areas

Article 543-7

Anyone who, in violation of the provisions of this Code and its implementing texts, grazes or moves one or more domestic animals or camps or possesses weapons and ammunition and/or cutting tools or means in a special reserve is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the confiscation of weapons and ammunition as well as tools or means of cutting plants held by the offender and damages.

In addition, he incurs the following complementary sanctions:

1°) demolition of installations and dwellings and confiscation of equipment found, as well as expulsion of the herder(s) and other occupants from the boundaries of the protected area;

2°) payment of a penalty of:
2,000 francs per bovine, equine, asinine and camelid;
4,000 francs per ovine, caprine and porcine.

Article 543-8

When the offenses incriminated in the above article do not result from purely fortuitous circumstances, imprisonment of six months is pronounced against the perpetrators and their accomplices.

Animals found in the protected area are impounded and confiscated.

Article 543-9

Domestic animals found grazing and/or wandering in a strict nature reserve, in a national park or in a core area of a biosphere reserve are slaughtered by agents of the services responsible for surveillance and protection of these protected areas when they cannot capture them alive.

Animals captured in the protected area are impounded and confiscated.

Chapter 4

Crimes and offenses relating to possession, trade, export, re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species

[Law No. 02-017 of June 3, 2002 governing the possession, trade, export, re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species]

Article 544-1

Anyone who contravenes the provisions of the CITES law, with the exception of the purchase, sale and offering for sale of fish or animal meat, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 2,000,000 francs.

Article 544-2

Anyone who contravenes the provisions of the CITES law is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 1,000,000 francs, without prejudice to the confiscation of specimens.

Article 544-3

Anyone who transits, exhibits to the public for commercial purposes, uses for profit without authorization a specimen of a species subject to the provisions of the CITES law, is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 1,000,000 francs without prejudice to the confiscation of said specimen.

Article 544-4

Anyone who introduces an animal or plant species of wild origin in violation of the provisions of the CITES law is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

TITLE V: OFFENSES IN MATTERS OF TRAFFIC

Chapter 1: Offenses in matters of road traffic

[Law No. 2023-045 of August 31, 2023 governing road traffic]

Section 1: Offenses against the rules of vehicle operation

Article 551-1

The driver of a vehicle is criminally liable for offenses committed by him in the operation of said vehicle. However, when the driver acts in the capacity of an employee, the Court may, taking into account the factual circumstances and working conditions, decide that the legal costs shall be wholly or partly borne by the employer.

Article 551-2

Is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 200,000 francs:

1°) any driver of a vehicle who, knowing that this vehicle has just caused or occasioned an accident, did not stop and thus attempted to escape the civil or criminal liability he may incur;

2°) any person who drives or attempts to drive a vehicle while in a state of intoxication or under the influence of an alcoholic state, or under the effect of a narcotic;

3°) any person who drives a vehicle without having obtained the permit or authorization to drive valid for the category of vehicle concerned or whose permit or authorization is the subject of a duly justified measure of suspension, withdrawal or cancellation;

4°) any person who, being the owner or having the use or custody of a vehicle, has it driven or allows it to be driven by a third party whom he knows to be without the required permit.

If there is occasion to apply articles 321-5 and 321-18 of this Code relating to involuntary homicide and injury, the penalties are doubled.

Article 551-3

Is punished by the penalties provided for in the provisions of article 242-40 of this Code, any driver of a vehicle who obstructs the immobilization of the vehicle by an agent authorized for this purpose.

Article 551-4

In case of recidivism of one of the offenses provided for in articles 551-2 and 551-3 above, the Court may pronounce, as a complementary measure, the confiscation for the benefit of the State, of the vehicle which the accused used to commit the offense, if he is the owner.

Article 551-5

Are punished by the penalties provided for in the provisions of article 414-1 of this Code, those who destroy or divert or attempt to destroy or divert any vehicle confiscated in application of the provisions of the preceding article.

Section 2

Offenses against the rules of use of roads open to public traffic

Article 551-6

Is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 500,000 francs anyone who:

1°) with a view to obstructing or hindering traffic and without lawful authorization, creates an obstacle by any means to the passage of vehicles;

2°) knowingly violates legal or regulatory provisions intended to ensure the conservation of public roads open to traffic as well as bridges, ferries and other structures constituting their extension or incorporated therein.

Article : 551-7

Are punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 1,200,000 francs those who organize motor vehicle races without authorization from the competent administrative authority.

Section 3

Offenses against the rules for the use of vehicles and their equipment

Article 551-8

Is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 250,000 francs anyone who:

1°) knowingly puts into circulation a motor vehicle or trailer without holding the authorizations or administrative documents required for the circulation of that vehicle;

2°) voluntarily makes use of a license plate bearing false or supposed false indications or of authorizations and administrative documents required for the circulation of vehicles which he knows to be false, expired or cancelled;

3°) operates a motor vehicle or trailer without the vehicle being equipped with the plates or inscriptions required by regulations and who in addition knowingly declares a false or supposed number, name, or domicile.

Article 551-9

Is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 200,000 francs anyone who:

1°) puts or maintains in circulation a motor vehicle intended for public passenger transport whose general condition presents a manifest danger to users and passengers and which has not been submitted to technical inspection within the regulatory time limits;

2°) violates the rules specially adopted by decree, with a view to ensuring the safety of transported persons;

3°) transports or causes to be transported in a public transport vehicle a number of persons greater than that which the vehicle used was authorized to carry on board.

In the cases provided for above, the Court may also order the confiscation of the vehicle.

Article 551-10

Shall be immobilized any moped or motorcycle that circulates without the driver and passenger wearing helmets or equipped with mandatory equipment intended to guarantee their own safety. If, within seventy-two hours, the driver or passenger of the vehicle has not justified the cessation of the offense, the immobilization is converted into impoundment.

Any person violating the provisions of the first paragraph is punished by a fine of 50,000 francs.

Section 4 : Driving license

Article 551-11 : Is punished by the following penalties

1. any person who, by a false declaration, obtains or attempts to obtain a driving license, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 300,000 francs;

2. any person who, having been notified of a decision pronouncing against him the suspension or cancellation of the driving license, refuses to return the suspended or cancelled license to the agent responsible for executing that decision.

3. The courts and tribunals may order the cancellation of the driving license, in case of conviction, either for one of the offenses provided for in Article 551-2 paragraphs 1, 2, 3, or for the offenses provided for in this Code when involuntary homicide or injuries were committed on the occasion of driving a vehicle.

They may also order cancellation, in case of conviction, in the following cases:

1°) driving a vehicle when a decision of suspension or retention of the license has been notified;

2°) refusal to return one's driving license to the competent authority when a decision of suspension or retention has been notified.

4. The driving license is cancelled, by operation of law, as a consequence of conviction:

1°) in case of recidivism of one of the offenses provided for in Article 551-2 paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above;

2°) when there is simultaneous application of Article 551-2 paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 and the provisions of this Code relating to involuntary homicide and injuries.

5. In case of cancellation of the driving license pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 above, the person concerned may not apply for a new license before the expiration of a period fixed by the judge within a maximum limit of three years and provided that he is recognized as fit, after a medical examination carried out at his expense.

6. In case of recidivism of offenses giving rise to the simultaneous application of Article 551-2 paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above and the provisions of Articles 321-5 and 321-18 of this Code, the person concerned may not apply for a new license before the expiration of a period of ten years provided that he is recognized as fit, after a medical examination carried out at his expense.

Section 5

Provisions relating to the teaching of driving motor vehicles

Article 551-12

No one may, without having been previously authorized under the conditions fixed by decree, teach the driving of motor vehicles.

Is punished by a fine of 500,000 francs anyone who violates the prohibition stated above or the provisions relating to the teaching of driving motor vehicles.

The confiscation of the vehicle or vehicles used for the illegal practice of teaching may also be ordered.

Section 6

Provisions concerning the recording and communication of information relating to the documentation required for driving and the circulation of vehicles

Article 551-13

There shall be carried out, in the State services, under the authority and control of the minister responsible for Transport, the recording of:

1°) all information relating to driving licenses for which issuance is requested or which are issued pursuant to this title, as well as driving licenses issued by foreign authorities and recognized as valid on the national territory;

2°) all information concerning the administrative documents required for the circulation of vehicles or affecting their availability;

3°) all duly notified administrative decisions imposing restriction of validity, suspension, cancellation and restriction of issuance of a driving license;

4°) all measures of withdrawal of the right to use a driving license taken by a foreign authority and communicated to the Malian authorities in accordance with international agreements in force;

5°) official reports of the offenses mentioned in Articles 551-2, 551-3, 551-6, 551-8, 551-9 and 551-11 of this chapter;

6°) all final judicial decisions relating to offenses in matters of road traffic.

Article 551-14

The information mentioned in Article 551-13 above is subject to automated processing.

Article 551-15

Without prejudice to the application of amnesty laws, information relating to judicial convictions and administrative measures affecting the driving licence must be erased in accordance with the statutory limitation period without a judicial decision or a measure mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 551-13 above having occurred again.

The period provided for in the preceding paragraph runs:

1°) for judicial convictions, from the day on which the last conviction became final;

2°) for administrative measures, from the day of the last decision.

In the case where an administrative measure is annulled, the erasure of information relating to that measure is carried out on the day of the judicial or administrative decision pronouncing that annulment.

The period is extended to ten years from the day on which the conviction became final when paragraph 3 of Article 551-11 above is applied.

The period is reduced to two years from the day of registration for information relating to driving licences for which issuance is requested.

Article 551-16

The holder of the driving licence has the right to communication of the complete record of entries concerning him or her. He or she may not obtain a copy thereof.

Article 551-17

The complete record of entries relating to licences applicable to the same person is issued at their request:

1°) to the judicial authorities;

2°) to Judicial Police Officers responsible for executing a jurisdictional order or acting within the framework of a flagrante delicto investigation.

Article 551-18

Information relating to the existence, category and validity of the driving licence is communicated at their request:

1°) to the holder of the licence, his or her lawyer or his or her representative;

2°) to the competent foreign authorities, for the purposes of authentication of the driving licence in accordance with international agreements in force;

3°) to Judicial Police Officers acting within the framework of a preliminary investigation;

4°) to Gendarmes and Military Personnel of the National Police authorised to carry out road checks in application of regulations relating to road traffic;

5°) to civil and military administrative authorities for persons employed or likely to be employed as drivers of motor land vehicles;

6°) to insurance companies for persons whose liability incurred as a result of damage caused by motor land vehicles they guarantee or are called upon to guarantee.

Article 551-19

Information, other than that mentioned in Article 551-19 below relating to administrative documents required for the circulation of vehicles, is communicated at their request:
1°) to the natural or legal person holding the administrative documents, his or her lawyer or his or her representative;
2°) to the judicial authorities;
3°) to Judicial Police Officers in the exercise of their mission defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure;
4°) to Gendarmes and Military Personnel of the National Police authorised to carry out road checks in application of regulations relating to road traffic;

5°) to officials authorised to record offences against traffic police regulations for the sole purpose of identifying the perpetrators of such offences;

6°) to the authorities of Territorial Collectivities for the exercise of their competence in matters of vehicle circulation;

7°) to the services of the Ministry in charge of Industry for the exercise of their competences;

8°) to insurance companies guaranteeing damage suffered by third parties resulting from harm to persons or property in the occurrence of which a motor land vehicle, as well as its trailers or semi-trailers are involved and to organisations assimilated to these companies provided that such information has the sole purpose of identifying the property or persons involved in a traffic accident on condition that at least one of the vehicles is insured by the applicant or that the latter is responsible for compensating one of the victims.

Insurance companies must provide in support of their request all useful elements making it possible to verify the reality of the claim.

Article 551-20

Information relating, on the one hand to pledges constituted on motor land vehicles and, on the other hand to oppositions to the transfer of the registration certificate, is communicated at their request:

1°) to the natural or legal person holding the administrative documents, his or her lawyer or his or her representative;

2°) to the judicial authorities;

3°) to Judicial Police Officers in the exercise of their mission defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure;

4°) to the authorities of Territorial Collectivities for the exercise of their powers in matters of vehicle use and circulation on public roads.

The absence of declaration of pledge or opposition made to the transfer of certificate of a vehicle defined by its registration number alone may, to the exclusion of any other information, be brought to the attention of any other person who requests it.

Article 551-21

Information relating to the civil status of the holder of the registration certificate, the registration number and the characteristics of the vehicle, as well as to pledges constituted and oppositions are, to the exclusion of any other information, communicated at their request for their mission:

1°) to agents responsible for executing an enforceable instrument;

2°) to judicial administrators and liquidators or to trustees appointed within the framework of a judicial reorganisation or liquidation of assets procedure provided for by the Commercial Code.

Article 551-22

No nominative information may be disclosed outside the cases provided for in Articles 551-15 and 551-21 above.

Article 551-23: Is punished by the penalties provided for by this Code, anyone who

1°) takes the name of a person in circumstances which have determined or which could have determined the registration in the name of that person of a judicial conviction or an administrative decision;

2°) has communicated to himself or herself, by taking a false name or a false capacity, the record of entries registered concerning a third party;

3°) obtains, either directly or indirectly, communication of nominative information the disclosure of which is not expressly provided for by the law relating to road traffic.

[Law No. 029 of 29 June 2006, as amended, relating to protection of public roads]

Article 551-24

Is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 200,000 francs, after a formal notice without follow-up from the competent authority, any person who contravenes the provisions of Article 5 of the law relating to the protection of public roads.

Article 551-25

Is punished by imprisonment of thirty days and a fine of 200,000 francs, any person who erects or orders the erection without authorisation from the competent authorities of a speed bump on the public road.

Chapter 2: Offences in matters of circulation within the framework of civil aviation

Section 1

Circulation of persons and vehicles in restricted areas of airports of Mali

Paragraph 1: Movement of Persons

Article 552-1

The movement of persons in a restricted zone is regulated and subject to holding a security access pass or a valid badge.

No one may be present in a security restricted access zone without complying with the measures and procedures applicable to access control to said zone.

Any natural person who accesses a zone of the airport perimeter for which they have neither a pass nor authorization is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 francs.

Suspension may, in addition, be imposed for a period of six days.

The following are punished by the same penalties:
wearing the access pass in a non-visible manner;
usurpation or fraudulent use of access passes;
use of the access pass outside its zone of validity;
refusal to present documents required by the regulations;
failure to return an access pass three days after cessation of work at the airport;
access to a security restricted access zone without complying with the measures and procedures applicable to access control to said zone.

Complicity is punished as the offense itself.

Article 552-2

A legal person with authority who does not take measures to ensure the accompaniment of a person holding a visitor pass, or who does not communicate within a maximum period of five days their cessation of activity in the restricted zone, or who does not return the access card of an employee upon cessation of activity within the same period, incurs a fine of 500,000 francs.

Article 552-3

A natural person who is subject to a conviction for a correctional penalty, who contravenes the regulations in force or who lends their access pass to another person is deprived of said pass.

Article 552-4

Intrusion of any nature whatsoever into the airport perimeter is strictly prohibited.

Any person who contravenes this measure is punished by five years' imprisonment and a fine which may not be less than 1,000,000 francs.

These penalties are doubled if the acts are committed during the night or if the perpetrator is aeronautical personnel.

The perpetrator may not benefit from mitigating circumstances in case of recidivism.

Article 552-5

When circumstances require, restrictions are placed on the free movement of natural and legal persons in the public zone of an airport. These restrictions are immediately brought to the attention of the services responsible for the Police, the Gendarmerie, users, operators and the competent authority for Civil Aviation Security in Mali.

Anyone who contravenes these measures is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 francs.

The fine is 500,000 francs for a legal person.

Confiscation may be applied as an additional penalty.

Paragraph 2: Movement of Vehicles

Article 552-6

Access of any vehicle to the security restricted access zone of the airport is conditional upon presentation of a circulation pass or sticker corresponding to the activity zone of said vehicle with the exception of:
airport vehicles;	maintenance vehicles;	ambulances;	bank vans;	vehicles and equipment operated by airlines.

Any natural person who contravenes this measure is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 125,000 francs.

The fine is 500,000 francs for a legal person.

The following offenses are punished by the same penalties:
wearing the access pass or sticker in a non-visible manner;
usurpation or fraudulent use of access passes;
use of the access pass outside its zone of validity;
refusal to present documents required by the regulations;
failure to return one's access pass after cessation of work at the airport within three days;
access to a security restricted access zone without complying with the measures and procedures applicable to access control to said zone.

Section 2

Obstruction of the Exercise of Profession of Security and Safety Control Agents

Article 552-7

Inspectors, Judicial Police Officers, Gendarmerie Officers and any person representing legitimate authority must not be subject to any hindrance in the exercise of their functions. Any opposition to legitimate authority in the exercise of its function or the act of obstructing the proper conduct thereof constitutes the offense provided for and punished by the penalties provided for in Article 242-40 of this Code.

Section 3: Human Safety

Article 552-8

Any person who smokes in open or closed zones of airport terminals such as the boarding lounge, the check-in hall and warehouses intended for air freight is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs, except when it is a zone reserved for this purpose.

Article 552-9

Any natural person who dumps household waste in the airport domain, practices tall crops along the roads of said domain endangers human safety is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 450,000 francs.

Any violation of other hygiene and sanitation rules in the airport domain is punished by the same penalties.

The fine is 1,000,000 francs for a legal person.

Article 552-10

Any natural person who erects a pylon of more than sixty meters in the airport domain or proceeds to degrade said domain endangers human safety is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 450,000 francs.

The fine is 1,000,000 francs for a legal person.

Section 4: Movement of Rolling Equipment in the Airport Domain

Article 552-11

Any equipment operator who contravenes airport regulations regarding:
traffic;
parking outside a reserved area;
drop-off zone.

is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 francs.

For any person who abandons their equipment in the airport domain, including in reserved areas beyond forty-eight hours, the fine is tripled.

Impoundment of the equipment may be ordered.

Section 5: Failure to Declare a Firearm and Ammunition at Airports

Article 552-12

Airport users or passengers holding a firearm and ammunition carrying authorization are required to declare in advance to the Air and Border Police their firearms and ammunition before accessing the restricted zones of the airport. To this end, forms are made available to them at the Air and Border Police.

Any person who fails to make this declaration is punished by a fine which may not be less than 300,000 francs.

Section 6: Safety of passengers, airport personnel and baggage

Article 552-13: No one shall

enter the restricted access zone, nor board an aircraft unless they have been subjected to screening or inspection in accordance with applicable measures and procedures. This provision applies to agents holding credentials giving them access to said zone;
obstruct, assault, threaten or intimidate an authorized agent when they are carrying out screening operations;
bring baggage or cargo into the reserved zone nor load it aboard an aircraft unless it has been subjected to screening or inspection in accordance with applicable measures and procedures.

Any individual holding a document issued by the aeronautical authority or by an organization approved by the latter, including a crew member certificate, a medical certificate, an authorization or a license must present said document for inspection.

Any person violating these measures is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 200,000 francs.

Any article or package left unattended at any location in the airport, or in its vicinity, is systematically removed and possibly destroyed.

Article 552-14

Any aircraft operator, natural person, having transported passengers who do not meet the conditions for entry and stay on Malian territory is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 francs per passenger transported.

The fine is 5,000,000 francs per passenger transported when the aircraft operator or airline is a legal person.

In addition, all costs of returning the passengers concerned to their port of origin and their medical care, if applicable, are the entire responsibility of the aircraft operator or airline concerned.

Section 7: Documentary fraud

Article 552-15

Any person responsible for the following is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 francs:
a fraudulent declaration in an application form for their identification, for obtaining an airport circulation permit or for approval of a security program;
a fraudulent entry in a report or record that must be kept or used to prove compliance with regulations in force;
reproduction, falsification or modification for fraudulent purposes of a report, record, program, means of access or means of identification.

Section 8: Attempt to commit offenses against civil aviation

Article 552-16

The attempt to commit the offenses provided for in this chapter is punished as the offenses themselves.

Article 552-17

The provisions of this chapter apply without prejudice to regional and international legal instruments relating to civil aviation.

TITLE VI: OFFENSES RELATING TO BIOLOGICAL SAFETY AND SECURITY

Chapter I: Offenses

Article 561-1

The following constitute offenses relating to biological safety and security:
the development, acquisition, manufacture, possession, storage, transport, stockpiling, release, abandonment, destruction, use or handling in a confined environment of controlled pathogens or toxins without a permit, license, authorization or prior agreement granted by the organization in charge of biological safety and security or in violation of the conditions of any permit, license, authorization or prior agreement granted by said authority;
the import, export, re-export, or transshipment of pathogens and/or toxins, dual-use goods or technologies controlled within the national territory without a permit, license, authorization, prior agreement granted by the organization in charge of biological safety and security or without an end-use certificate;
the transport of controlled pathogens and/or toxins either domestically or internationally through carriers not authorized for this purpose;
the construction, acquisition or possession of a facility designed or intended to manufacture or to conduct research on controlled pathogens and/or toxins, except those authorized by the provisions of this Code;
the damaging of any facility, packaging or contents of a containment enclosure containing controlled pathogens and/or toxins in order to release them;
the diversion of controlled pathogens and/or toxins from a facility or vehicle authorized for their transport, or the use or taking control of an authorized vehicle containing controlled pathogens and/or toxins to release the controlled pathogens and/or toxins;
the development, manufacture, acquisition by other means, stockpiling, possession, transport, retention of biological and/or toxin weapons or the transfer, directly or indirectly, of a biological or toxin weapon for any purpose whatsoever;
the use of biological and/or toxin weapons;
engagement in preparations for the use of biological and/or toxin weapons;
the construction, acquisition or possession of any facility intended for the production of biological weapons;
the transformation of any controlled pathogen and/or toxin into a biological weapon;
the intentional release of pathogens and/or toxins for the purpose of causing injury or killing human beings, animals or plants/vegetation and degrading the environment and living environment with the aim of intimidating or coercing a government or civilian population.

Chapter 2: Penalties

Article 562-1

Anyone who commits an offense relating to biological safety and security is punished by ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 10,000,000 francs.

In case of death, the penalty incurred is life imprisonment.

When the offense relating to biological safety and security is committed through a legal person, criminal liability falls on the natural person who committed the offense.

However, the legal person in question is jointly and severally condemned with the physical perpetrator(s) to payment of all or part of the fines, costs and legal fees as well as civil damages.

In case of conviction, the competent court orders the confiscation of the proceeds of the offense or the means that were used or intended to commit it.

Article 562-2

Complicity in the offense relating to biological safety and security is punished as the offense itself.

Article 562-3

Any public agent or any private sector agent found guilty of complicity in the offense specified above or of negligence in the exercise of their duties with regard to the law relating to biological safety and security incurs disciplinary sanctions.

Article 562-4

In case of violations of the provisions of this title, the organization in charge of biological safety and security may negotiate with the persons involved as long as a decision ruling on the merits has not become final.

When the transaction results in an agreement, the file is transmitted to the competent court which finds that the public action is extinguished.

In case of recidivism, no transaction is permitted.

TITLE VII: OFFENCES RELATING TO PUBLIC HYGIENE AND SANITATION

Single Chapter: Offences and penalties

Article 571-1

Any person who contravenes the provisions of the law relating to public hygiene and sanitation concerning housing hygiene and food hygiene is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 30,000 francs.

Article 571-2

Any person who contravenes the provisions of the law relating to public hygiene and sanitation concerning water hygiene and collective catering hygiene is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 francs.

Article 571-3

Any person who contravenes the provisions of the law relating to public hygiene and sanitation concerning hospital hygiene and hygiene of classified establishments is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 francs.

Article 571-4

Any person who contravenes the provisions of the law relating to public hygiene and sanitation concerning mortuary hygiene is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 francs.

Article 571-5

In the event of a repeat offence in the cases referred to in the above articles, the penalties are doubled.

In addition, the competent court shall impose one of the following additional penalties:
temporary closure for eight days with respect to industrial, artisanal, commercial and leisure facilities;
suspension of the administrative authorization or licence.

During this period, the owner or head of the establishment is required to take all useful measures to comply with the regulations in force, repair the damage caused, which are necessary conditions for the reopening of the establishment.

If upon reopening, the same offences are found, the competent court shall order the permanent closure of the establishment.

Article 571-6

The person responsible for hygiene officers may reach a settlement with the persons concerned as long as a decision on the merits has not become final.

When the settlement results in an agreement, the file is transmitted to the competent court which finds that the public prosecution is extinguished.

In the event of a repeat offence, no settlement is permitted.

TITLE VIII: OFFENCES RELATING TO ARCHIVES

[Law No. 002-052 of 22 July 2002 relating to archives]

Single Chapter: Offences and penalties

Article 581-1

Any person who, upon ceasing their functions, misappropriates, even without fraudulent intent, public archives of which they are the holder by reason of their functions, is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Article 581-2

Any person who deliberately alters in any manner whatsoever, destroys or neglects public or private archive documents entrusted on deposit otherwise than under the conditions provided for by the texts in force is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs.

Article 581-3

Any natural person who deliberately misappropriates or removes said documents from the national Territory is punished by a penalty of two years' imprisonment and a fine of 800,000 francs.

The fine is 2,000,000 francs for a legal person without prejudice to the other penalties provided for in Article 131-15 of this Code.

TITLE IX: OFFENCES RELATING TO BLOOD TRANSFUSION

[Law No. 2022-003/of 20 May 2022 relating to blood transfusion]

Single Chapter: Offences and penalties

Article 591-1

Any person who traffics in their own blood is punished by three months' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Article 591-2

Any person who traffics in the blood of others or in blood products of human origin is punished by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 francs.

Article 591-3

Any person who carries out a collection of blood of human origin outside the National Blood Transfusion Centre, its branches and the Armed Forces Health Services or uses it outside authorized healthcare establishments is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 591-4: Any person is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 591-3 who

1°) imports, exports or facilitates the import or export of blood products of human origin outside authorized establishments;

2°) establishes or operates without authorization a blood bank or blood depot;

3°) disregards closure orders for their establishment. Altered or non-compliant products are confiscated.
Repeat offences are judged in accordance with the provisions of Articles 132-8 and following of this Code.

If these acts are committed by a health worker, a ban on practising the profession for a period not exceeding one year may be imposed by the competent court as an additional penalty.

TITLE X: OFFENCES RELATING TO FISHING AND AQUACULTURE

Chapter 1: Offences and penalties relating to fishing

Section 1

Mining operations in a protected area established as a fish reserve or sanctuary

Article 510-1

Any natural or legal person who undertakes prospecting, construction or excavation work in the ground, extracts or removes sand, peat, turf, stones, earth or in general organizes the search for and/or mining operations in an aquatic reserve or in an aquatic sanctuary with or without occupation of the premises, is punished by a fine calculated at the rate of 500 francs per square metre of damaged and/or occupied surface without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of the premises and damages.

In addition, the offender is liable to the following penalties:

1°) prohibition from continuing operations or activities in the classified area;

2°) restoration of the premises;

3°) demolition of installations, dwellings or other equipment and expulsion of occupants from the classified perimeter.

Section 2

Destruction and removal of boundary markers and beacons delimiting the classified fishing area

Article 510-2

Without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of the premises and damages, any person who destroys, moves or removes all or part of the boundary markers, beacons, signs, marks or fences used to delimit the classified fishing area is punished by two years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Section 3: Occupation of the classified fishing area

Article 510-3

Any person who, in violation of the provisions of this title, occupies the classified fishing area, is punished by a fine of 10,000,000 francs without prejudice to confiscations, restitutions, restoration of the premises and damages.

The offender is liable, in addition, to the following penalties:

1°) prohibition from continuing the operations or activities for which or during which the clearing was carried out;

2°) restoration of the premises;

3°) demolition of installations, dwellings or other equipment and expulsion of occupants from the classified perimeter;

4°) outright cancellation of the authorization or title authorizing the occupation or exploitation of the land if it exists.

Section 4: Illegal practice of the fishing profession

Article 510-4

Any person who, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, practises the profession of operator without holding a fishing licence is punished by one month's imprisonment and a fine of 100,000 francs without prejudice to damages.

Section 5

False indication, falsification of writings and reproduction of public seals

Article 510-5

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 800,000 francs, without prejudice to damages and the provisions of this Code relating to forgery in writings, anyone who gives false information during the issuance of fishing licenses.

The penalty is imprisonment of twenty years and a fine of 800,000 francs without prejudice to damages and the provisions of this Code relating to forgery in writings and counterfeiting of State seals, for anyone who falsifies writings and/or fraudulently reproduces public seals.

Article 510-6

Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by this Code, the withdrawal of licenses and the prohibition for a period of one to five years from obtaining new licenses are pronounced against any holder of a fishing license who is guilty of false information, falsification of writings and/or reproduction of public seals.

In case of recidivism, the prohibition and withdrawal of the license for five years are mandatory.

Section 6 : Des moyens, méthodes de pêche et fermeture de la pêche

Article 510-7

Anyone who, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, bars or encloses for fishing purposes the beds of rivers, streams or their direct tributaries and to prevent the free passage of fish, is punished by imprisonment of one month and a fine of 5,000,000 francs without prejudice to damages.

Section 7 : De l'opposition à l'autorité des agents chargés de la police de pêche

Article 510-8

Opposition to the authority of agents responsible for fishing police is provided for and punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 242-40 of this Code.

Section 8 : Des espèces protégées et des eaux

Article 510-9

Is punished by imprisonment of one month and a fine of 500,000 francs without prejudice to damages, anyone who in violation of the provisions of this chapter: fishes juveniles of specimens of species that have not reached the minimum capture size;
proceeds with the capture, detention, sale and offering for sale, trade and export of protected species;
discharges, releases or deposits directly or indirectly into waters materials likely to harm public health as well as aquatic fauna and flora.

Chapitre 2 : Des infractions et des peines en matière d'aquaculture

Section 1 : De l'exploitation illégale en matière d'aquaculture

Article 510-10

Is punished by a fine of 2,000,000 francs, any natural or legal person who operates a commercial or scientific aquaculture establishment without holding an aquaculture operator license.

Article 510-11

Is punished by a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who operates an aquaculture establishment for subsistence purposes in the public or private domain of the State or Territorial Authorities without prior authorization from the administration responsible for aquaculture.

Article 510-12

In the case of offenses provided for by the above articles, the Court may in addition order the closure of the aquaculture establishment and the confiscation of objects and products.

Section 2 : De la gestion d'établissements aquacoles

Article 510-13

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 10,000,000 francs, anyone who commits one or more of the following offenses:

1°) the use of prohibited products in aquaculture establishments;

2°) the modification, extension and conversion of a subsistence aquaculture establishment for commercial or scientific purposes without prior authorization;

3°) the failure to declare to the competent services within the imposed time limit, the change of operator or any modification occurring in the company;

4°) the transplantation from one site to another of different eco-geographical nature of a species or variety of species without authorization;

5°) the release of organisms from aquaculture into the natural environment and for restocking purposes without authorization;

6°) the absence of an aquaculture establishment register and failure to update;

7°) the failure to report to the competent services, within the imposed time limit, the appearance of a contagious disease among the exploited species;

8°) the failure to comply with prescribed measures in order to prevent, halt the development or promote the extinction of diseases affecting the exploited species;

9°) the failure to observe, within the time limit imposed on a commercial aquaculture establishment, the obligation of annual declaration of production, marketing and the status of ongoing cultures as well as employed personnel;

10°) the failure to communicate, by an aquaculture establishment to the competent services within the imposed time limit, the annual report on research conducted;

11°) the failure to comply with one of the clauses of the specifications;

12°) the failure to comply with sanitary standards relating to the hygiene of aquaculture products and the quality of breeding waters;

13°) the failure to comply with breeding standards and food standards;

14°) fishing and placing for consumption or sale in an area or establishment declared infected.

Article 510-14

In the case of a subsistence aquaculture establishment, the offenses provided for in Article 510-13 above are punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Article 510-15

Without prejudice to the provisions of texts governing the control of international trade, anyone who imports, exports, re-exports or introduces a specimen of an animal or plant species into an aquaculture establishment in violation of the provisions of this chapter and texts adopted for its application, is punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 500,000 francs without prejudice to damages.

In addition, the specimen is confiscated or returned to the country of origin at the expense of the offender in cases of importation.

When the imported species specimen is a genetically modified organism or a product derived from a genetically modified organism, the provisions of texts relating to biosafety in force in Mali apply.

Article 510-16

In case of failure to report, to the competent services, within the fixed time limit, the appearance of a contagious disease among the species being farmed, the costs arising from measures taken by the competent authorities to halt the development of the disease are borne by the operator.

Article 510-17

In case of intentional harm to the environment, to other activities conducted in the vicinity, to the well-being of neighboring populations or to the health of animals located in the vicinity, all costs arising from measures taken for the restoration of the premises are borne by the operator.

In all cases, the judge may order the suspension of the aquaculture operator license for a period of six months to twelve months or permanent withdrawal.

Article 510-18

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who refuses access to surveillance agents to a commercial or scientific aquaculture establishment.
Refusal of access is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 500,000 francs in the case of a subsistence aquaculture establishment.

Article 510-19

Is punished by imprisonment of five years and a fine of 500,000 francs, anyone who refuses to allow a surveillance agent to take samples of water, soil, products used, aquaculture products and other elements related to aquaculture activities in the case of a commercial or scientific aquaculture establishment.

In the case of subsistence aquaculture, the imprisonment penalty is three months and a fine of 500,000 francs.

Section 3: Aquaculture establishments and species

Article 510-20

Is punished by imprisonment of one month and a fine of 500,000 francs without prejudice to damages, anyone who, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, installs and operates an aquaculture establishment.

TITRE XI: OFFENCES RELATING TO PASTORAL ACTIVITIES

[Law No. 01-004/of 27 February 2001 on the Pastoral Charter of Mali]

Chapitre unique: Offences and penalties

Article 511-1

Is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs, without prejudice to damage caused to third parties, anyone who:

1°) occupies or obstructs a pastoral route or a stopover site or encroaches on their right of way;

2°) exploits water resources contrary to accepted rules or pollutes them;

3°) moves animals outside pastoral routes;

4°) contravenes the provisions relating to the opening periods of harvested fields for grazing animals.

Article 511-2

Is punished by imprisonment of six months and a fine of 100,000 francs, without prejudice to damage caused to third parties, anyone who:

1°) damages the property of others by allowing animals to roam freely;

2°) without an environmental impact study, implements a programme or project likely to result in the suppression or disappearance of pastoral resources, in whole or in part;

3°) contravenes a transhumance calendar.

TITRE XII: OFFENCES IN MINING MATTERS

[Law No. 2023-040/of 29 August 2023 on the Mining Code in the Republic of Mali]

Chapitre unique: Offences and sanctions

Without prejudice to the provisions relating to the withdrawal of mining titles and authorisations and civil actions for compensation for damage caused, the following sanctions are applicable:

Article 512-1

Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) those who make a false declaration to obtain a mining title;

2°) those who oppose in any manner whatsoever the occupation of a mining perimeter by the holder of the mining title;

3°) those who carry out the analysis of samples outside Mali without prior authorisation from the administration in charge of mines;

4°) those who agree to have children work on their site.

Article 512-2

Are punished by imprisonment of three years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) those who engage in research or exploitation work on mineral substances subject to the mining regime without holding an appropriate title;

2°) those who engage in illegal gold panning;

3°) those who provide aid and assistance to unauthorised prospectors and operators;

4°) those who do not declare, at the end of the mining title, the definitive cessation of work relating to site rehabilitation provided for by the regulations in force;

5°) those who hold mining titles and who do not comply within the prescribed time limit with the instructions of the administration in charge of Mines relating to measures for the protection of the safety and health of personnel, public safety and health, soil conservation, flora, fauna, communication routes, the solidity of public or private buildings, the flow or quality of water of any nature;

6°) those who hold mining titles and quarry exploitation authorisations who falsify their extraction, sale and/or shipment registers.

Article 512-3

Holders of large-scale or small-scale mining exploitation permits and holders of industrial quarry exploitation authorisations who do not keep their extraction, sale or shipment registers regularly, or who refuse to produce them to qualified officials and agents of the administration in charge of Mines, may, after a three-month formal notice by the minister in charge of Mines or the administration in charge of Mines that has remained unsuccessful, be deprived of their titles without prejudice to the payment of a fine of 5,000,000 francs.

Article 512-4

Is punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 2,000,000 francs:

1°) any person other than holders of mining titles and holders of artisanal quarry opening authorisations or industrial quarry exploitation authorisations, executing a borehole, an underground work, an excavation work, whatever the purpose, with the exception of wells for domestic use, the depth of which exceeds ten metres, who does not make the declaration either to the administration in charge of Mines, or to the Territorial Collectivity of the place where the work is carried out, which informs the administration in charge of Mines;

2°) any person who does not make the prior declaration to the administration in charge of Mines before any geophysical survey, any geochemical prospecting campaign or heavy mineral studies.

Article 512-5

Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs:

1°) those who, without a mining title and in an illicit manner, engage in the transport, processing and marketing of mineral substances extracted in Mali;

2°) those who exploit mineral substances subject to the quarry regime not covered by a quarry opening or exploitation authorisation;

3°) those who engage in the exploitation of mineral substances by dredging.

Article 512-6

Officials and sworn agents of the administration in charge of Mines may requisition agents of the public force.

Violence and assault exercised against officials and agents of the administration in charge of Mines in the exercise of their functions are punished by the penalties provided for by the provisions of this Code.

It is prohibited for any official or agent of the State in service in the public administration:

1°) to take directly or indirectly an interest in a research or exploitation enterprise of mineral substances over the entire extent of the territory;

2°) to exercise directly or through an intermediary service provisions with holders of research or exploitation mining titles;

3°) to disclose or give confidential information made available to him in the context of his work or even after cessation of service whatever the reason for a period of at least four years.

Any violation of these provisions results in the dismissal of the agent and the loss of civil servant status without prejudice to sanctions provided for by the competent courts.

Article 512-7

Are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 5,000,000 francs, those who violate the provisions of mining regulations concerning public safety and health and the preservation of the environment, and in particular:

1°) those who conduct works without complying with the regulations in force;

2°) those who oppose the implementation of prescribed measures relating to site rehabilitation provided for by the implementing decree;

3°) those who proceed with the discharge of waste rock or mud into quarries or pits in which mineral resources exist without prior authorization from the minister in charge of Mines.

Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by this article, the State reserves the right to require complete reparation of damage or harm caused to the environment by all means at its disposal. The offender is entirely responsible for the damage and harm caused to the environment until complete reparation thereof.

Article 512-8

Are punished by a fine of 1,000,000 francs, holders of mining titles who do not submit their quarterly report within fifteen days.

Are punished by a fine of 5,000,000 francs, holders of mining titles and holders of industrial quarry operating authorization who do not submit their annual report within forty-five days.

Article 512- 9

The penalties and fines provided for by the provisions of this title are doubled in case of recidivism within five years following the expiration or prescription of the penalty.

Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by the provisions of this title, mineral substances illicitly extracted as well as the means, objects, machines, equipment and instruments that contributed to the offenses cited above are seized, confiscated for the benefit of the State without possibility of settlement. All costs incurred are borne by the offender.

TITRE XIII: OFFENSES RELATING TO LOCAL CONTENT IN THE MINING SECTOR

[Law No. 2023-041 of August 29, 2023 relating to Local Content in the mining sector]

Chapitre unique: Offenses and penalties

Article 513-1

Failure to comply with obligations related to Local Content exposes in particular to the following sanctions:

1°) termination of the contract under the conditions set by the regulations;

2°) payment of the fine provided for in Article 513-2 below;

3°) for subcontractors, suppliers and service providers, exclusion from the competitive bidding platform and prohibition from concluding contracts related to oil and gas activities.

Article 513-2

Natural persons who violate obligations related to Local Content:

1°) are punished by imprisonment of ten days and a fine corresponding to the amount of the share of services or supply of goods not performed without formal notice;

2°) are punished by imprisonment of three months and a fine of 75,000,000 francs for failure to transmit the goods and services procurement plan or for failure to transmit the execution report within the required time limits, after a formal notice of seven clear days that remained without response. The fine is increased by twenty-five percent per day of delay;

3°) are punished by imprisonment of two years and a fine of 200,000,000 francs in case of recidivism, the fine is increased by twenty-five percent per day of delay. In case of persistence, withdrawal of the title is pronounced in accordance with the provisions of the Mining Code.

The same provisions are applicable to legal persons excluding imprisonment penalties.

Article 513-3

Violations of the provisions of the law relating to local content are recorded by the Permanent Secretariat of Local Content "SPCL".

Fines are collected by the Public Treasury. The terms of their distribution are specified by joint order of the ministers in charge of Mines and Finance.

LIVRE VI

POLICE CONTRAVENTIONS

Chapitre 1: Classification of contraventions

Article 601-1

Contraventions are divided according to their severity into three classes and the following penalties are applicable to them:	first class contraventions: a fine not exceeding 50,000 francs;	second class contraventions: a fine exceeding 50,000 francs and not exceeding 75,000 francs;	third class contraventions: a fine exceeding 75,000 francs and not exceeding 100,000 francs.

Article 601-2

Confiscation may be applied as an additional penalty when an express provision indicates it.
Police penalties depriving or restricting rights may be applied to legal persons in the cases specified by this Code.

Chapitre 2: First class contraventions

Section1

First class contraventions punishable by a fine of 50,000 francs

Article 602-1: Are punished by first class contravention penalties

1°) Violations of regulations:	those who violate regulations legally made and published by the administrative or municipal authority;
2°) Refusal to clean streets:	those who neglect to clean streets or passages in sectors where this responsibility is left to the charge of residents;
3°) Failure to observe road regulations:	those who neglect or refuse to execute regulations or orders concerning minor roads or disobey the summons from the administrative or municipal authority to repair or demolish constructions threatening to collapse.
4°) Obstruction of public roads:	those who, without permission from the competent authority, obstruct the public road either by depositing or allowing to be deposited materials or any objects that prevent or diminish the freedom or safety of passage, or by digging excavations therein; those who, in the case where the deposit is permitted, have not removed the deposited objects within the time limit set by the authority, or who neglect to light the materials or objects they have deposited on the public road or excavations they have dug therein.

5°) Negligence or imprudence in securing streets, roads and fields:
those who leave in streets, roads, fields and all public places tools, machines, instruments or weapons that can be used by thieves and other wrongdoers; the judgment orders in this case the confiscation of the aforementioned weapons, instruments or machines;

6°) Gleaning in fields:
those who glean in fields not yet entirely cleared of their crops;

7°) negligence in the maintenance of ovens, chimneys or factories:
those who neglect to maintain, repair or clean ovens, chimneys or factories where fire is used;

8°) Public drunkenness:
those who are found in a state of manifest intoxication likely to disturb public order in streets, roads, squares, cafés, cabarets or other public places.

9°) Forced entry or entry in a state of intoxication into stadiums or performance halls:
those who enter a sports enclosure or a performance hall by force or in a state of intoxication.

10°) Failure to hold the secure biometric national identity card:
any Malian citizen aged at least eighteen years, not holding the secure biometric national identity card in current validity.

Section 2

First class contraventions punishable by a fine of less than 50,000 francs:

Paragraph 1: Offences relating to road traffic policing

[Decree No. 2023-0509 PT-RM of 12 September 2023 establishing the conditions for the use of roads open to public traffic and the putting into circulation of vehicles]

Article 602-2

Any person who contravenes the obligation to immobilize the vehicle or the injunctions addressed to them by agents authorized to record offences relating to road traffic policing, in particular for offences related to vehicle equipment or when the driver or their load causes damage to the road or its appurtenances, is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs.

Article 602-3

Any person who offers for sale or sells a vehicle or trailer in violation of the provisions relating to vehicle registration is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs.

Article 602-4

Any driver of a vehicle who knowingly fails to comply with an order to stop issued by an agent responsible for recording offences and wearing the external and visible insignia of their capacity, or who refuses to submit to the prescribed legal checks concerning the vehicle or its driver, is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs.

Article 602-5

Any person who has contravened the provisions concerning the following is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs:

a)	directions imposed on traffic;

b)	crossing and overtaking;

c)	the speed of motor vehicles with or without trailers;

d)	road intersections and right of way;

e)	significant changes of direction;

f)	parking outside built-up areas when visibility is insufficient near a road intersection, at the top of a hill or on a bend, or at night in unlit places;

g)	the use of lighting, signalling and advance signalling devices outside the cases of change of direction provided for in the provisions of the decree establishing the conditions for the use of roads open to public traffic and the putting into circulation of vehicles;

h)	level crossings;

i)	working conditions in road transport;

j)	signals requiring a complete stop;

k)	prohibitions or restrictions on traffic provided for on certain routes for certain categories of vehicles or for vehicles carrying out certain transport;

l)	obligations or prohibitions relating to the use of roads with specialized traffic;

m)	traffic restrictions enacted on the occasion of races and sporting events;

n)	the wearing of protective helmets concerning drivers and passengers of motorcycles, mopeds and motor-assisted cycles;

o)	stopping or parking in any place where they would constitute a danger;

p)	the transport, for commercial purposes or otherwise, of a number of persons greater than that which the vehicle used is authorized to carry on board;

q)	the use of a device equipped with a screen placed in the field of vision of the driver of a vehicle in motion and not constituting a driving or navigation aid.

Any person who commits a new offence against the provisions regulating parking in built-up areas when they have, in the six months preceding this offence, committed in the same built-up area at least two offences of the same nature followed by conviction is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs.

The fine is increased to the maximum when the number of offences previously committed under the same conditions is at least four. This same penalty is incurred from the second conviction in the cases referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.

Article 602-6

Any person who has contravened the provisions concerning the following is punished by a fine of 5,000 francs:

a)	the driving of vehicles and animals, including parking and stopping, outside the cases provided for in the other articles of the decree establishing the conditions for the use of roads open to public traffic and the putting into circulation of vehicles;

b)	the speed of animals and vehicles without motors with or without trailers or semi-trailers;

c)	the use of audible warning devices;

d)	the wearing of seat belts and the transport of children provided for in the provisions relating to the equipment of vehicle users referred to in the decree cited above.

Article 602-7

Any person who has contravened the rules concerning the regulations on rain barriers and the crossing of bridges is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs.

In case of recidivism, the fine is doubled.

Article 602-8

Any person who has contravened the provisions concerning the following is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs:

a)	the organization of races and sporting events;

b)	the crossing of ferries.

When the fault, negligence or imprudence of a user has caused damage to a public road or its appurtenances, said user is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs, without prejudice, where applicable, to the more severe penalties provided for by Article 602-1-4 of this Code. They are, in addition, sentenced to reimbursement of repair costs for the benefit of the State or the Territorial Authority that suffered the damage.

Article 602-9

Any person who, having placed on a road open to public traffic or in its immediate vicinity an object or device likely to cause a disturbance to traffic, does not comply with the injunctions addressed with a view to the removal of said object or device, by one of the agents authorized to record offences relating to road traffic, is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs.

Article 602-10

Any person who contravenes the special provisions of the decree cited above concerning pedestrian traffic is punished by a fine of 5,000 francs.

Article 602-11

Without prejudice to the requirements of the law governing road traffic, any person who contravenes the provisions of the decree cited above concerning the following is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs:

a)	the brakes of motor vehicles other than motorcycles and mopeds;

b)	the number of authorized seats for public passenger transport vehicles;

c)	the speedometer.

In case of new offences committed by the same person, a fine of 18,000 francs is imposed.

Any carrier or vehicle owner who contravenes the provisions adopted by joint order of the minister responsible for Transport, the minister responsible for Security and the minister responsible for Finance concerning the control of axle load of vehicles, is punished according to the case by the following penalties:

Overload of 1 to 5 tonnes ——————5,000 francs per tonne

Overload of 6 to 10 tonnes —————10,000 francs per tonne

Overload of 11 to 15 tonnes —————15,000 francs per tonne Overload of more than 15 tonnes————18,000 francs per tonne

Article 602-12

Any person who contravenes, except those mentioned in the preceding article, the following is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs:

1°) the particular provisions applicable to motor vehicles and vehicle combinations;

2°) the particular provisions applicable to agricultural vehicles and equipment and to certain special machinery;

3°) the particular provisions applicable to motorcycles, mopeds, motor tricycles and quadricycles and their trailers.

However, offences concerning cycles and their equipment expose their perpetrators to a fine of 5,000 francs.

Article 602-13

Without prejudice to subsequent justification of possession of the document or documents not presented, any person who was unable to immediately present during a road check one of the documents listed below is punished by a fine of 3,000 francs:

1.	their driving licence or driving authorisation;
2.	the vehicle registration certificate and, where applicable, that of the trailer or semi-trailer or the provisional receipts;
3.	the insurance certificate provided for by the Treaty establishing an integrated organisation of the insurance industry in African States;
4.	the special technical inspection certificate;
5.	where applicable:	the exceptional transport authorisation;	the public transport authorisation;	the authorisation to operate a taxi or a hire car with driver;	the route sheet relating to a hire car without driver;	the road crossing fee ticket;	the consignment note.
Any person who, invited to justify within a period of ten days possession of the authorisations and documents mentioned in the first paragraph, has not presented these documents before the expiry of that period is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs.

Article 602-14

Without prejudice to the more severe penalties applicable to offences against the rules concerning the driving of vehicles, vehicles and their equipment, any person who is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs:

a)	causes to circulate on roads open to public traffic a motor vehicle or a towed vehicle without registration plates or the external inscriptions required by this Code;

b)	voluntarily puts or keeps in circulation a motor or towed vehicle fitted with plates or inscriptions not corresponding to the type of vehicle or to that of the user;

c)	puts or keeps in circulation a motor or towed vehicle without holding the authorisations or administrative documents required for the circulation of that vehicle or who has not presented the said vehicle for technical inspection within the regulatory time limits;

d)	makes use of authorisations or administrative documents required for the circulation of a motor or towed vehicle which they know to be expired or cancelled;

e)	drives a vehicle without having applied for the extension of their driving licence or driving authorisation, or without having complied with the conditions of validity thereof.

Paragraphe 2

Traffic offences contained in Decree No. 2019-0590/P-RIM of 31 July 2019 establishing the rules applicable to navigation and transport on navigable waterways in the Republic of Mali

Article 602-15

Any person who contravenes the provisions concerning is punished by a fine of 15,000 francs:
the directions imposed on navigation;
the requirements relating to the registration of craft;
compliance with the useful load of the craft;
general documents;
the rules of use relating to the safety of the craft, persons on board and their property;
the use of lighting and signalling devices outside the cases provided for in the decree establishing the rules applicable to navigation and transport on navigable waterways in the Republic of Mali.

Article 602-16

Failure to present one of the authorisations or administrative documents required for the navigation of a boat or motorised craft is punished by a fine of 3,000 francs.

Any person who, invited to justify within a period of ten days possession of the authorisations or administrative documents mentioned above, does not present these documents before the expiry of that period is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs.

Article 602-17

Without prejudice to the provisions of this Code, any person who is punished by a fine of 18,000 francs:

a)	causes to navigate on navigable waterways, apart from small craft, a motorised craft without registration plates;

b)	voluntarily puts or keeps in navigation, apart from small craft, a motorised craft fitted with plates or inscriptions not corresponding to the type of craft or to that of the user;

c)	puts or keeps in navigation, apart from small craft, a motorised craft without holding the authorisations or administrative documents required for the navigation of that boat or who has not presented the said boat for technical inspection within the regulatory time limits;

d)	makes use of authorisations or administrative documents required for the navigation of a motorised craft which they knew to be expired or cancelled;

e)	operates a boat without having applied for the extension of their licence or navigation authorisation, or without having complied with the conditions of validity thereof.

Chapter 3: Second-class misdemeanours

Article 603-1: Are punished by the penalties for second-class misdemeanours

1°) Negligence in signalling stored materials:
Those who neglect to signal by means of lighting or by any other means, materials stored or holes dug by them on the public highway.

2°) Entry onto another person's land:
those who, being neither owners, nor tenants, nor usufructuaries, nor users of a land or of a right of way, or who being neither agents nor employees of these persons enter or pass onto this land or part of this land, prepared, sown or bearing a crop ready to be removed; those who drive or allow livestock, draught animals, pack animals or riding animals to pass onto another person's land that is sown or bearing a crop.

3°) Use of vehicles with tinted windows:
those who drive in vehicles with tinted windows contrary to the regulations enacted by the competent authorities.

4°) Non-public insults:
those who, without having been provoked, utter non-public insults against someone.

5°) Minor violence and throwing of filth at persons:
the perpetrators and accomplices of brawls, assaults or minor violence and those who, inadvertently, have thrown filth at someone.

6°) Wandering of the mentally ill:
those who allow mentally ill persons placed under their control or care to wander knowing that they are likely to attack persons or cause damage to the property of others.

7°) Straying of dangerous animals:
those who allow dangerous animals placed under their supervision or care to stray or wander in such a way that they may attack passers-by or cause harm to others or who incite said animals to attack or do not prevent them from attacking passers-by.

8°) Throwing of harmful things onto the public highway:
those who, voluntarily or recklessly, throw onto the public highway objects likely to injure passers-by by their fall or to soil their clothing.

9°) Voluntary throwing of objects at another person's property:
those who throw stones or other hard objects or filth at the vehicles, houses, buildings and property of others, without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties provided for by articles 321-10, 435-9 first paragraph and 435-14 of this Code.

10°) Death or injuries caused to animals:
those who, either through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence, failure to observe regulations, or by throwing stones or other hard objects, cause the death or injury of animals or livestock belonging to others, without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties provided for by articles 435-12 and 435-14 of this Code.

11°) Ill-treatment inflicted on animals:
those who exercise without necessity, publicly or not, ill-treatment towards a domestic or tamed animal or one held in captivity; in case of conviction of the owner of the animal or if the owner is unknown, the Court may decide the confiscation of the animal and its transfer to an animal protection organization recognized as being of public utility or declared as such, which may freely dispose of it.

12°) Failure to observe rules relating to the putting into circulation of public transport vehicles:
those who contravene the provisions of the texts on the putting into circulation of public transport vehicles, provisions relating to the weight of said vehicles; the method of their loading, the number and safety of passengers; the indication inside the vehicles of the number of seats they contain and the price of transport; the indication of the name of the owner.

13°) Damage to telephone or telegraph installations:
those who through negligence or imprudence, damage in any manner whatsoever an installation or the equipment of a telephone or telegraph installation.

Chapter 4: Third-class misdemeanours

Article 604-1: Are punished by the penalties for third-class misdemeanours

1°) Lending of firearms:
those who entrust a firearm to an inexperienced person or a person not in full possession of their faculties, without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties provided for by the regulations on weapons and ammunition.

2°) Unauthorised shooting or fireworks:
those who, despite the prohibition by the authority, fire shots or fireworks in public places or on the public highway.

3°) Disturbance of the administration of justice:
those who disturb the administration of justice at a hearing or in any other place, without prejudice, where applicable, to the penalties imposed by law for more serious offences.

4°) Failure to observe the price of foodstuffs:
those who sell foodstuffs or food above the prices set by the authority, without prejudice to the provisions of the legislation on prices.

5°) Use of non-regulatory weights or measures:
those who use weights or measures different from those established by the laws and regulations in force.

6°) Noise disturbance:
the perpetrators or accomplices of abusive or nocturnal noise or disturbances disturbing the tranquillity of the inhabitants.

7°) Use of the telephone while driving:
those who use the telephone while driving a vehicle or handlebars of a motorised or non-motorised device.

8°) Driving vehicles without registration plates:
those who travel in vehicles or drive devices without a registration plate issued by the competent services or bearing fanciful registration plates.

9°) Extinguishing lights on the public highway:
those who extinguish lights intended to facilitate traffic on the public highway or to prevent accidents.

10°) Damage to public roads:
those who damage or deteriorate in any way whatsoever public roads or encroach upon their width;
those who, without authorisation, remove from public roads and their surroundings, plants, earth, stones, sand or materials belonging to the State.

11°) Exhibition of symbols with criminal connotations:
those who display or exhibit, except for the purposes of a film or a show or an exhibition involving a historical evocation, uniforms, insignia or emblems recalling the insignia, uniforms or emblems that have been worn by members of an organisation declared criminal or by a person found guilty by a national or international court of a crime against humanity provided for by this Code; the judgment orders, in addition to the fine, the confiscation of the aforementioned uniforms, insignia or emblems.

12°) Illegal inscriptions on property:
those who, without authorisation from the administration, make by any means whatsoever inscriptions, trace signs or drawings on movable or immovable property of the domain of the State, territorial authorities or on property located on this domain, except in order to allow the execution of a public service;
those who, without being owners, usufructuaries or tenants of an immovable property or without being authorised by one of these persons, make thereon, by any means whatsoever, inscriptions, trace signs or drawings.

13°) Diversion of water:
those who voluntarily divert or unduly use water intended for irrigation by law or by regulatory provisions emanating from the administration or distribution organisations.

14°) Fishing and use of water contrary to local customs:
those who contravene local customs relating to fishing and the use of water.

15°) Display of indecent images:
those who display or cause to be displayed on the public highway or in public places posters, images, drawings or photographs contrary to decency; in this case, in addition to the fine, the judgment of conviction orders the confiscation of the images, drawings or photographs.

16°) Abandonment of vehicle wrecks, refuse and waste:
those who abandon vehicle wrecks, refuse, waste materials and other objects transported in a vehicle.

17°) Violation of military space:
those who carry out surveys or recordings made without authorisation in a prohibited zone established by the military authority; in this case, the judgment orders the confiscation of the surveys and recordings made.

18°) Serious failure or negligence in the supervision of minor children:
parents, guardians or custodians against whom a serious failure or negligence has been established in the supervision of minor children in their care.

19°) Concealment of the face during a demonstration on the public highway:
those who, within or in the immediate vicinity of a demonstration on the public highway, voluntarily conceal their face in order not to be identified in circumstances giving rise to fears of breaches of public order; these provisions are not applicable to demonstrations in accordance with local customs or when the concealment of the face is justified by a legitimate reason.

20°) Refusal to supply goods or provide services:
those who, being a professional, refuse to supply a good or provide a service despite a request to that effect made by a consumer or another professional.

Article 604-2

Are confiscated the fireworks, weapons, weights and measures, in the cases provided for in points 1°, 2° and 5° of the preceding article.

BOOK VII

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Chapter 1: Transitional provisions

Article 701-1

In all matters that have not been regulated by this Code and that are governed by specific laws and regulations, the courts and tribunals shall continue to observe them.

Chapter 2: Final provisions

Article702-1

Are and remain repealed all previous provisions contrary to those of this Code, in particular Law No. 01-079 of 20 August 2001, as amended, establishing the Penal Code.

Bamako, 13 December 2024

The President of the Transition, Head of State,
General Assimi GOITA

ANNEX

TABLE OF CONTENTS

BOOK I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

TITLE I: CRIMINAL LAW

Chapter 1 General principles 111-1 to 111-5

Chapter 2 Application of criminal law in time 112-1 to 112-4

Chapter 3 Application of criminal law in space 113-1 to 113-11

Section 1 Offences committed or deemed to have been committed on the territory of the

Republic	113-1 to 113-6

Section 2

Offences committed outside the territory of the Republic	113-7 to 113-11

TITLE II: CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

Chapter 1 General provisions 121- to 121-7

Chapter 2

Grounds for exemption from or mitigation of responsibility	122-1 to 122-7

TITLE III: PENALTIES, SECURITY MEASURES AND EDUCATIONAL MEASURES

Chapter 1 Nature of penalties 131-1 to 131-21

Section 1 Penalties applicable to natural persons 131-1 to 131-12

Section 2 Penalties applicable to legal persons 131-13 to 131-21

Chapter 2 Penalty regime 132-1 to 132-48

Section 1 General provisions 132-2 to 132-24

Section 2 Methods of personalisation of penalties 132-25 to 132-43

Section 3

Definition of certain circumstances leading to the aggravation of penalties	132-44 to 132-48

Chapter 3 Execution of penalties 133-1 to 133-3

BOOK II

CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE NATION, THE STATE AND PUBLIC PEACE

TITLE I: On High Treason

Single Chapter On High Treason 211-1 to 211-2

TITLE II: CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST THE EXTERNAL SECURITY OF THE STATE

Chapter 1 On Treason 221-1 to 221-2

Chapter 2: On Espionage 222-1 to 222-2

Chapter 3: Other Attacks on the External Security of the State 223-1 to 223-8

TITLE III: CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST THE INTERNAL SECURITY OF THE STATE

Chapter 1: Attacks and Conspiracies Against the Government 231-1 to 231-2

Chapter 2

Crimes Affecting the Internal Security of the State or the Integrity of the Territory Through Civil War, Unlawful Use of Armed Force, Devastation and Public Pillage	232-1 to 232-11

TITLE IV: CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC INTEREST

Chapter 1

Crimes and Offenses Against the Public Interest Committed by Natural Persons Holding Public Authority or Entrusted with a Public Service Mission or Invested with an Elective Mandate	241-1 to 241-24

Section 1 On Attack Against the Constitution 241- 1 to 241-13

Section 2

On Coalition of Public Officials Against the Constitution and the Laws	241-14 to 241-19

Section 3 On Encroachment by Administrative and Judicial Authorities 241-20

Section 4 On Unlawfully Prolonged Exercise of Public Authority 241-21

Section 5

On Refusal of a Legally Due Service and Denial of Justice	241-22 to 241-24

Chapter 2 Crimes and Offenses Against the Public Interest Committed by

Private Individuals	242-1 to 242-99

Section 1 Crimes and Offenses of a Racial, Regionalist or Religious Nature 242-1

Section 2

Crimes and Offenses Relating to the Exercise of Civic Rights	242-2 to 242-5

Section 3 Serious Disturbances to Public Order 242-7-242-33

Section 4 Acts of Obstruction of Justice 242-34 to 242-39

Section 5: Opposition to Lawful Authority 242-40 to 242-41

Section 6 Attacks on Freedom to Work 242-42 to 242-43

Section 7: Resistance, Disobedience and Other Failures Toward

Public Authority	242-44 to 242-62

Section 8 On Detainees and Escape of Detainees 242-63 to 242-68

Section 9 Breaking of Seals 242-69 to 242-72

Section 10 On Usurpation of Title or Functions 242-73

Section 11

Attacks on the Credit of the State and Refusal to Pay Taxes, Contributions and Similar Levies	242-74 to 242-80

Section 12

On the Obligation of Citizens to Provide Their Assistance in Case of Public Calamity	242-81

Section 13 Crimes and Offenses Against Public Peace 242-82 to 242-98

Section 15 On Provocation Within Associations 242-99

Chapter 3

Crimes and Offenses of an Economic Nature and Against the Public Interest	243-1 to 243-90

Section 1 Attacks on Currency, Marks, Titles or Other Fiduciary Values

Issued by Public Authority and Forgery	243-1 to 243-42

Section 2 On Forgery in Writing 243-43 to 243-47

Section 3 On Corruption and Related Offenses 243-48 to 243- 90

TITLE V: TERRORISM

Chapter 1 Acts of Terrorism 251-1 to 251-9

Chapter 2 Preparatory Acts 252-1 to 252-6

Chapter 3

Criminal Association for the Purpose of Perpetrating Terrorist Acts	253-1 to 253-2

Chapter 4 Harboring of Terrorists 254-1 to 254-2

Chapter 5 Apology for Terrorism 255-1

Chapter 6 Recruitment of Terrorists 256-1

Chapter 7 Financing of Terrorism 257-1 to 257-16

Section 1 On the Criminalization of Financing of Terrorism 257-1

Section 2

Failure or Delay in Reporting Suspicious Transactions in Matters of Financing of Terrorism	257-2 to 257-3

Section 3 Refusal to Provide Any Justification 257-4

Section 4 Criminal Penalties Incurred by Natural Persons 257-5

Section 5 Aggravating Circumstances 257-6 to 257-7

Section 6 Optional Supplementary Criminal Penalties Incurred by

Natural Persons	257-8 to 257-9

Section 7 Criminal Penalties Incurred by Legal Persons 257-10

Section 8 Grounds for Exemption from Criminal Penalties 257-11

Section 9 Grounds for Mitigation of Criminal Penalties 257-12

Section 10

Mandatory Confiscation of Funds and Other Financial Resources Related to the Financing of Terrorism	257-13

Section 11 Implementation of Targeted Financial Sanctions in Matters of

Financing of Terrorism and Financing of the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction	257-14 to 257-16

BOOK III

CRIMES AND OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS

TITLE I: INTERNATIONAL CRIMES

Chapter 1 On Genocide 311-1

Chapter 2 Crimes Against Humanity 312-1

Chapter 3 War Crimes 313-1

Chapter 4 Common Provisions 314-1 to 314-6

Chapter 5 On Mercenarism 315-1 to 315-2

TITLE II: ATTACKS ON THE HUMAN PERSON AND GENDER

Chapter 1

Attacks on the Physical and Psychological Integrity of the Person	321-1 to 321-70

Section 1 Homicides 321-1 to 321-5

Section 2 Violation of Tomb and Sepulcher-Removal and Trafficking

of Human Organs or Bones	321-6 to 321-8

Section 3 Blows and Wounds-Violence-Torture 321-9 to 321-51

Section 4 Justifications and Excuses 321-52 to 321-56

Section 5 Threats and Blackmail 321-57 to 321-60

Section 6 Moral Harassment 321-61 to 321-63

Section 7 Incitement to Suicide 321-64 to 321-67

Section 8 Malicious Denunciation 321-68

Section 9 Sorcery, Magic-Charlatanism 321-69 to 321-70

Chapter 2 Attacks on the Privacy of the Person 322-1 to 322-30

Section 1 Violation of Domicile 322-1

Section 2 Disclosure of Secrets 322-2

Section 3 Suppression of Letters or Opening of Letters 322-3

Section 4 Other Attacks on the Privacy of the Person 322-4 to 322-30

Chapter 3 Endangering the Person 323-1 to 323-4

Section 1 Risks Caused to Others 323-1

Section 2 Abandonment of an Incapacitated Person 323-2

Section 3 Failure to Assist a Person in Danger 323-3 to 323-4

Chapter 4 Attacks on the Freedoms of the Person 324-1 to 324-55

Section 1

Unlawful Arrests and Sequestration of Persons, Hostage-Taking	324-1 to 324-5

Section 2 Abduction of Persons 324-6 to 324-7

Section 3 Agreements Affecting Freedom 324-8 to 324-10

Section 4 Slavery and Similar Practices 324-11 to 324-28

Section 5 Trafficking in Persons 324-29 to 324-43

Section 6 Smuggling of Migrants 324-44 to 324-51

Section 7 Child Trafficking 324-52

Section 8 Enforced Disappearance 324-53 to 324-55

Chapter 5 Attacks on Good Morals 325-1 to 325-10

Section 1 Public Indecency 325-1

Section 2 Indecent Assault 325-2

Section 3 Rape 325-3

Section 4 Customary Coitus 325-4

Section 5 Pedophilia 325-5

Section 6

Incitement to Debauchery, Forced Prostitution, Procuring,
Soliciting	325-6 to 325-9

Section 7 Incest 325-10

Chapter 6 Attacks on the Family 326-1 to 326-10

Section 1 Bigamy 326-1

Section 2 Adultery 326-2 to 326-4

Section 3

Abandonment of Marital Domicile, Abandonment of Home or Child and
Failure to Produce a Child
326-5 to 326-7

Section 4 Of repudiation 326-8 to 326-9

Section 5 Of the overbidding of the dowry, of the exchange of women 326-10

Chapter 7 Of other offences against gender 327-1 to 327-21

Section 1 Of gender 327-1

Section 2 Of sexual assaults and other gender-based violence 327-2

Section 3 Of castration 327-3

Section 4 Of sexual harassment 327-4 to 327-6

Section 5 Of forced pornography 327-7

Section 6 Of sex tourism involving children 327-8

Section 7 Of the offence of forced sterilization 327-9 to 10

Section 8 Of forced marriage 327-11

Section 9 Of child marriage 327-12

Section 10 Of forced levirate 327-13

Section 11 Of forced sororate 327-14

Section12 Of gender-based insult 327-15

Section13 Of economic discrimination in the workplace 327-16

Section14 Of refusal to assume a duty associated with parental authority 327-17

Section15 Of denial of resources, services or opportunities with regard to a

person	327-18

Section 16 Of refusal to exercise one's obligations following a separation 327-19

Section 17 Of the imposition of a food prohibition 327-20

Section 18 Of force-feeding 327-21

BOOK IV

OF CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

TITLE I: OF FRAUDULENT APPROPRIATIONS

Chapter 1

Of offences against intellectual property-patents for invention-utility models-trademarks for products or services-industrial designs or models-literary or artistic works	411-1 to 411-4

Chapter 2 Of thefts 412-1 to 412-9

Section 1 Of aggravated thefts 412-2 to 412-6

Section 2 Of simple thefts, of defrauding innkeepers 412-7 to 412-9

Chapter 3 Of frauds 413-1 to 413-10

Section 1 Of frauds and other illicit practices 413-1 to 413-6

Section 2 Of unlawful retention 413-7 to 413-10

Chapter 4

Of extortion - of fraudulent dispossession - of disposal of another's property	414-1 to 414-4

Section 1 Of extortion - of fraudulent dispossession 414-1 to 414-3

Section 2 Of disposal of another's property 414-4

Chapter 5 Of swindling and other related offences 415-1 to 415-37

Section 1 Of swindling 415-1

Section 2 Of stellionate 415-2 to 415-11

Section 3

Of offences relating to cheques, bank cards and other electronic payment instruments and processes.	415-12 to 415-33

Section 4 Of abuse of signature in blank 415-34

Section 5 Of illicit speculation 415-35

Section 6 Of false advertising 415-36 to 415-37

Chapter 6 Of breach of trust and other related offences 416-1 to 416-18

Section 1 Of breach of trust 416-1

Section 2 Of usury 416-2 to 416-15

Section 3 Of removal of procedural documents 416-16

Section 4 Of obstruction of freedom of bidding 416-17

Section 5 Of clandestine transport of passengers 416-18

TITLE II

OF OFFENCES PROVIDED FOR BY THE UNIFORM ACTS OF THE ORGANISATION FOR THE HARMONISATION OF BUSINESS LAW IN AFRICA (OHADA)

Chapter 1

Of offences provided for in the uniform act of 15 December 2010 on general commercial law	421-1

Chapter 2

Of offences contained in the uniform act of 15 December 2010 on the organisation of securities	422-1 to 422-2

Chapter 3

Of offences contained in the uniform act of 30 January 2014 relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups	423-1 to 423-22

Section 1 Of offences relating to the formation of companies 423-1 to 423-3

Section 2

Of offences relating to the management, administration and direction of companies	423-4 to 423-6

Section 3 Of offences relating to general meetings 423-7 to 423-8

Section 4

Of offences relating to changes in the capital of public limited companies	423-9 to 423-12

Section 5 Of offences relating to the supervision of companies 423-13 to 423-16

Section 6 Of offences relating to the dissolution of companies 423-17

Section 7 Of offences relating to the liquidation of companies 423-18 to 423-20

Section 8

Of offences relating to the failure to disclose information on the beneficial owners of legal persons and other legal arrangements	423-21 to 423-22

Chapter 4

Of offences contained in the uniform act of 10 September 2015 on the organisation of collective proceedings for the settlement of debts	424-1 to 424-14

Section 1 Of bankruptcy and related offences 424-1 to 424-7

Section 2 Of other offences 424-8 to 424-14

Chapter 5

Of offences contained in the uniform act of 10 April 1998 on the organisation of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods	425-1 to 425-6

Chapter 6 Of the offence contained in the uniform act relating to accounting law

and financial information of 26 January 2017	426-1

Chapter 7

Of the offence contained in the uniform act of 15 December 2010 relating to the law of cooperative societies	427-1

Chapter 8 Of offences contained in the uniform act relating to the accounting

system for non-profit entities	428-1 to 428-3

TITLE III: OF OTHER CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

Chapter 1 Of money laundering 431-1 to 431-11

Section 1 Of the incrimination of money laundering 431-1 to 431bis

Section 1

bis	Of failure or delay in reporting suspicious transactions (DOS) in relation to money laundering	431-1 ter to 431-1
quater

Section 2 Of criminal sanctions applicable to natural persons 431-2

Section 3

Of criminal sanctions applicable to conspiracy, association, complicity for the purpose of money laundering	431-3

Section 4 Of aggravating circumstances 431-4

Section 5 Of criminal sanctions for certain acts related to money laundering 431-5

Section 6

Of optional additional criminal sanctions applicable to natural persons	431-6

Section 7 Of the exclusion of benefit of suspended sentence 431-7

Section 8 Of criminal sanctions applicable to legal persons 431-8

Section 9 Of grounds for exemption from criminal sanctions 431-9

Section 10 Of grounds for mitigation of criminal sanctions 431-10

Section 11 Of mandatory additional penalties 431-11

Chapter 2

Of offences against the transparency of the WAEMU financial market	432-1 to 432-50

Section 1 General provisions 432-1 to 432-17

Section 2

Of the repression of offences against market transparency	432-18 to 432-42

Section 3 Of procedure 432-43 to 432-50

Chapter 3 Of illicit enrichment 433-1 to 433-10

Section 1 General provisions 433-1 to 433-4

Section 2 Of penalties 433-5 to 433-10

Chapter 4 Of receiving 434-1 to 434-3

Chapter 5 Of fires-destructions-damage 435-1 to 435-14

Section 1 Of voluntary arson 435-1

Section 2 Of involuntary arson 435-2

Section 3 Of destruction of buildings, of depositing explosives 435-3

Section 4

Of offences against the safety of civil aviation, river navigation and railways	435-4 to 435-8

Section 5 Of damage to immovable property 435-9

Section 6 Of pillage, of poisoning of drinking water 435-10

Section 7 Of threat of destruction 435-11

Section 8 Of damage to crops, domestic animals, forests and water points

435-12

Section 9 Of straying of animals 435-13

Section 10 Of voluntary damage to movable property 435-14

BOOK V

OF OTHER CRIMES AND OFFENCES TITLE I: OF CYBERCRIME

Chapter 1 General Provisions 511-1 to 511-2

Chapter 2

Crimes and offences related to information and communication technologies	512-1 to 512-65

Section 1

Breaches of confidentiality of information systems	512-1 to 512-2

Section 2

Breaches of integrity and availability of information systems	512-3 to 512-4

Section 3

Breaches of data integrity of an information system	512-5 to 512-8

Section 4 Obtaining fraudulent advantage 512-9

Section 5 Possession of equipment to commit offences 512-10

Section 6 Association formed or agreement to commit computer offences

512-11

Section 7 Child pornography 512-12 to 512-15

Section 8

Racist acts, xenophobic acts, threats and insults by means of an
information system	512-16 to 512-19

Section 9 Offences related to activities of providers of electronic communication services

to the public	512-20 to 512-29

Section 10 Offences relating to direct marketing 512-30 to 512-32

Section 11 Offences relating to advertising by electronic means 512-33

Section 12 Offences relating to cryptology 512-34 to 512-40

Section 13

Offences committed by means of information and communication
technologies	512-41 to 512-61

Section 14 Complementary penalties 512-62 to 512-65

TITLE II: OFFENCES AGAINST CULTURAL HERITAGE

Chapter 1 General Provisions 521-1 to 521-7

Chapter 2 Offences 522-1 to 522-13

TITLE III: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT

Chapter 1 General Provisions 531-1 to 531-42

Section 1 Definitions 531-1

Section 2 Provisions relating to pollution and nuisances 531-2 to 531-41

Section 3

Provisions relating to the production, importation and marketing
of non-biodegradable plastic bags in the Republic of Mali	531-42

Chapter 2 Incriminations 532-1 to 532-13

Section 1

Incriminations relating to pollution and nuisances	532-1 to 532-11

Section 2

Penalties incurred in case of violation of the prohibition on production, importation and marketing of non-biodegradable plastic bags in
the Republic of Mali	532-12

Section 3 Settlements 532-13

TITLE IV: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST FORESTS AND WILDLIFE

Chapter 1 Definitions 541-1 to 541-3

Section 1 Definitions relating to forests 541-1

Section 2 Definitions relating to wildlife 541-2

Section 3

Definitions relating to possession, trade, export,
re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species	541-3

Chapter 2 Crimes and offences against forests 542-1 to 542-18

Section 1 Provisions relating to forests 542-1 to 542-7

Section 2 Arson or intentional bush fire 542-8

Section 3

Cutting, mutilation, unauthorized exploitation of protected species
or species of economic value	542-9 to 542-12

Section 4 Forest exploitation without management plan 542-13

Section 5

Import and export of forest products	542-14 to 542-15

Section 6

False indication, falsification of documents and reproduction of
public seals	542-16 to 542-17

Section 7 Opposition to the authority of Water and Forestry agents 542-18

Chapter 3 Crimes and offences against wildlife 543-1 to 543-9

Section 1 Provisions relating to wildlife 543-1

Section 2 Provisions relating to international trade in specimens of wild animals

543-2

Section 3 Mining operations in protected areas or in a migration corridor

543-3

Section 4 Degradation and pollution of protected areas 543-4

Section 5

Destruction, displacement or disappearance of boundary markers or beacons
of a protected area or wildlife migration corridor	543-5

Section 6 Agricultural and forestry operations in a protected area 543-6

Section 7 Grazing of domestic animals in protected areas 543-7 to 543-9

Chapter 4

Crimes and offences relating to possession, trade, export,
re-export, import, transport and transit of specimens of wild fauna and flora species	544-1 to 544-4

TITLE V: OFFENCES RELATING TO TRAFFIC

Chapter 1 Offences relating to road traffic 551-1 to 551-24

Section 1 Offences against rules for driving vehicles 551-1 to 551-5

Section 2

Offences against rules for use of roads open to public traffic	551-6 to 551-7

Section 3

Offences against rules for use of vehicles and their equipment	551-8 to 551-10

Section 4 Driving licence 551-11

Section 5

Provisions relating to the teaching of motor vehicle driving	551-12

Section 6

Provisions concerning the recording and communication of information relating to documentation required for driving and circulation of vehicles	551-13 to 551-24

Chapter 2

Offences relating to traffic in the context of civil aviation	552-1 to 552-17

Section 1 Movement of persons and vehicles in restricted areas of

airports of Mali.	552-1 to 552-6

Section 2

Exercise of profession by Security and Safety control agents	552-7

Section 3 Human security 552-8 to 552-10

Section 4

Movement of rolling equipment in the airport domain	552-11

Section 5

Failure to declare a firearm and/or ammunition at airports	552-12

Section 6

Security of passengers, airport personnel and baggage	552-13 to 552-14

Section 7 Documentary fraud 552-15

Section 8

Attempt to commit offences or acts against civil aviation	552-17

TITLE VI: OFFENCES RELATING TO BIOLOGICAL SAFETY AND SECURITY

Chapter 1 Incriminations 561-1

Chapter 2 Penalties 562-1 to 562-4

TITLE VII: OFFENCES RELATING TO PUBLIC HYGIENE AND SANITATION

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 571-1 to 571- 6

TITLE VIII: OFFENCES RELATING TO ARCHIVES

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 581-1 to 581- 3

TITLE IX: OFFENCES RELATING TO BLOOD TRANSFUSION

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 591-1 to 591- 3

TITLE X: OFFENCES RELATING TO FISHING AND AQUACULTURE

Chapter 1 Offences and penalties relating to fishing 5101-1 to 5101- 9

Section 1

Mining operations in a protected area established as a fish reserve or sanctuary	5101- 1

Section 2

Destruction and removal of boundary markers and beacons delimiting the classified fish domain	5101- 2

Section 3 Occupation of the classified fish domain 5101- 3

Section 4 Illegal exercise of the profession of fisherman 5101- 4

Section 5

False indication, falsification of documents and reproduction
of public seals	5101- 5 to 5101-6

Section 6 Fishing means, methods and fishing closure 5101-7

Section 7

Opposition to the authority of agents responsible for fishing policing	5101-8

Section 8: Protected species and waters 5101-9

Chapter 2 Offences and penalties in aquaculture matters 5102-1 to 5102-11

Section 1 Illegal exploitation in aquaculture matters 5102-1 to 5102-3

Section 2 Management of aquaculture establishments 5102-3 to 5102-10

Section 3: Aquaculture establishments and species 5102-11

TITLE XI: OFFENCES RELATING TO PASTORAL ACTIVITIES

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 5111-1 to 5111-2

TITLE XII: OFFENCES IN MINING MATTERS

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 5121-1 to 5121-9

TITLE XIII: OFFENCES RELATING TO LOCAL CONTENT IN THE MINING SECTOR

Single Chapter Incriminations and penalties 5131-1 to 5131-3

BOOK VI

POLICE CONTRAVENTIONS

Chapter 1 Classification of contraventions 601-1

Chapter 2 First class contraventions 602-1 to 602-17

Section 1

First class contraventions subject to a fine of 50,000 francs	602-1

Section 2

First class contraventions subject to a fine of less than 50,000 francs:	602-2 to 602 17

Chapter 3: Second class contraventions 603-1

Chapter 4 Third class contraventions 604-1 to 604-2

BOOK VII

TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Chapter 1 Transitional provisions 701-1

Chapter 2 Final provisions 702-1
