CHAPTER 581

CHAPTER 581

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT
An ACT to make provisions for the substantive articles of the Council of Europe Convention on prevention and combating of violence against women and domestic violence to become, and be, enforceable as part of the Laws of Malta; to promote and protect the right of everyone, and particularly of persons who are at risk of domestic violence to live free from violence in both the public and private sphere; to repeal the Domestic Violence Act (Cap. 481) and the Council of Europe Convention on Prevention and Combating of Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Ratification) Act (Cap. 532) and to make consequential and other amendments to various other laws.

ACT XIII of 2018, as amended by Act XXIV of 2019.
ARRANGEMENT OF ACT

14th May, 2018

Articles

Part I Preliminary 1 - 5

Part II Commission on Gender-Based Violence

and Domestic Violence	6 - 18

Part III Designated Agency 19 - 22

Schedule Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence

Part I

Preliminary
Short title.		1.	The short title of this Act is the Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence Act.

Interpretation. Amended by: XXVI.2019.10.

2.	In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: "Commission" means the Commission established by article 6; "Convention" means the Council of Europe Convention on
Prevention and Combating of Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence, concluded in Istanbul on the 11th May, 2011;
"domestic violence" means all acts or omissions including verbal, physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence causing physical and, or moral harm or suffering, including threats of such acts or omissions, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, that occur within the family or domestic unit, whether or not the perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim, and shall include children who are witnesses of violence within the family or domestic unit;
"family or domestic unit" includes:
(a)	current or former spouses, civil union partners or cohabitants;
(b)	persons living in the same household as the offender or who had lived with the offender within a period of three years preceding the offence;
(c)	persons whose marriage has been dissolved or declared null;
(d)	an ascendant or descendant;
(e)	other adults sharing the same household;
(f)	persons in an informal relationship, who are or were dating;
(g)	persons who are, or have been, formally or informally engaged with a view to get married or enter into a civil union;
(h)	persons who are related to each other either by consanguinity or affinity up to the third degree inclusively;
(i)	persons having or having had a child in common;

"gender" means the socially constructed roles, expectations, activities, behaviours and attributes that society at any given time associates with a person of any sex, assuming any form of gender identity or gender expression;
"gender-based violence" means all acts or omissions that are directed against a person because of their gender, that result in, or are likely to result in, physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life;
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for equality; "victim" means any natural person who is subjected to forms
of violence covered by the scope of this Act and the family members
of any person whose death was directly caused by the said violence and who have suffered harm as a result of that person's death as well as minors who are witnesses to the forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act.
3.	(1)  This Act shall apply to all forms of violence covered by the scope of the Convention.
(2)  This Act shall apply in times of peace and in situations of armed conflict.
4.	(1)  The implementation of the provisions of this Act, in particular measures to protect the rights of victims, shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as age; association with a national minority; belief, creed or religion; colour, ethnic origin and, or race; disability; family responsibilities and, or pregnancy; family and, or civil status; gender expression and, or gender identity; genetic features; health status; language; migrant or refugee status; national or social origin; political or other opinion; property; sex or sex characteristics; sexual orientation or any other status.

Scope.

Non-Discrimination.

(2)  Special measures that are deemed necessary to prevent and protect persons who are particularly vulnerable to violence due to their gender shall not be considered discrimination under the terms of this Act.
5.	(1)  The public administration shall not engage in any act of gender-based violence or domestic violence and shall ensure that government institutions and any others acting on behalf of the public administration act in conformity with this obligation.
(2)	The public administration shall:
(a)	create and adopt, within one year from the

State obligations and due diligence.

Establishment of the Commission.

coming into force of this Act, an Action Plan which includes effective, measurable, comprehensive and co-ordinated policies encompassing all relevant measures to prevent and combat all forms of gender-based violence and domestic violence, in liaison with the Commission;
(b)	ensure the implementation of the aforementioned Action Plan by way of effective co-operation among other relevant Ministries, Commissions, agencies, authorities, institutions, organisations, civil society and any relevant bodies;
(c)	allocate appropriate financial and human resources for the adequate implementation of this Action Plan to prevent and combat all forms of gender-based violence and domestic violence, including those actions carried out by non-governmental organisations, agencies and civil society;
(d)	review the Action Plan periodically and at least once every three years in liaison with the Commission; and
(e)	publish a report, at least once every three years, detailing the progress and status of the Action Plan.

Part II

Commission on Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence
6. (1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the Commission on Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence which shall be a co-ordinating body with the aim of offering a holistic response to gender-based violence and domestic violence by promoting the right of all persons to live free from violence in both the public and private sphere, and of implementing measures to prevent all forms of violence falling within the scope of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate having a distinct legal personality and shall be capable, subject to the provisions of this Act, of entering into contracts, of employing personnel, of acquiring, holding and disposing of property of any kind for the purposes of its functions under this Act or any other law, of suing and of being sued, and of doing all such things and entering into all such transactions as are conducive or incidental to the exercise or performance of its functions as herein contained.
(3) The legal and judicial representation of the Commission shall lie in its Commissioner or such other officer as the Minister may from time to time appoint by notice in the Gazette:
Provided that the Commission may appoint any one of its members or any other person to appear in its name and on its

behalf in any judicial proceedings, and on any act, contract, agreement or document whatsoever.
7. (1) The Commission shall be composed of a Commissioner who shall be called the Commissioner on Gender-Based Violence and Domestic Violence and not less than six but not more than twelve other members, one of whom shall be a person with disability, who are knowledgeable on issues of gender-based violence and domestic violence, and, or legal and administrative issues connected therewith.
(2) The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Minister after consulting such public and private agencies or entities involved in the research, prevention and treatment of gender-based violence and domestic violence, as the Minister may deem appropriate.
(3) The Minister shall ensure that the Commission is composed of members which represent, as far as possible, a wide representation of civil society.
(4) The members of the Commission shall designate any one of its members as Deputy Commissioner and the member so designated shall have all the powers and perform all the functions of the Commissioner during his temporary absence or inability, or while the Commissioner is on vacation, or during any vacancy in the office of Commissioner. The name of the person designated as Deputy Commissioner shall be published in the Gazette.
8. Every member of the Commission shall hold office for a term of three years and may be reappointed at the end of his term of office only once.
9. A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member of the Commission if that person:
(a) is a Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary;
(b) is a practicing Judge or Magistrate;
(c) is legally interdicted or incapacitated;
(d) has been convicted of an offence liable to a term of imprisonment for not less than six months;
(e) has been convicted of an offence relating to a breach of human rights or discrimination; or
(f) is subject to disqualification under article 320 of the Companies Act.

Appointment and composition.
Amended by: XXVI.2019.11.

Term of office.

Disqualification

Cap. 386.

Termination and resignation.

10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a member of the Commission shall become vacant:
(a) upon the expiration of three years from the date of appointment or at such earlier time as may be specified in the instrument by which he was appointed; or
(b) upon resignation by a letter addressed to the Minister; or
(c) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such; or
(d) upon removal by the Commissioner upon a two-thirds vote taken by all members for failure to attend meetings as specified in article 12(2).
(2) A member of the Commission may, at any time, be removed by the Minister after consultation with the other members of the Commission and substituted by another member.
(3) If a member resigns or if the office of a member of the Commission is otherwise vacant, it shall be filled by the appointment of another member by the Minister in accordance with article 7(2). The term of appointment of such member shall be for the remaining period of the three year term of the member whose post has become vacant.

Conflict of interest. 11. Any member of the Commission who has any direct or indirect interest in any matter or situation being considered by the Commission, not being an interest which disqualifies such member from remaining a member, shall disclose the nature of his interest at the first meeting of the Commission after the relevant facts have come to his knowledge. Such disclosure shall then be recorded in the minutes of the meeting, and the member having an interest as aforesaid shall withdraw from any meetings at which such matter or situation is discussed.

Provisions with respect to proceedings of the Commission.

12. (1) The Commission shall meet within one month from its constitution, and meetings of the Commission shall be called by the Commissioner as often as may be necessary but not less than once every two months, either on his own initiative or at the request of any two of the other members thereafter.
(2) Attendance by all members shall be compulsory, with failure to attend without reasonable cause for three consecutive meetings resulting in an immediate and automatic motion for removal.

(3) The quorum for meetings of the Commission shall be half the number of its members, one of whom shall be the Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner.
(4) Decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a simple majority of the votes of the members present and in the event of an equality of votes the Commissioner shall have a casting vote.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall, in general, regulate its own proceedings.
(6) The Commission may appoint sub-committees or working groups from among its members as it deems appropriate in order to better discharge its functions.
(7) The validity of any proceedings of the Commission shall not be affected by any vacancy among the members of the Commission or by any defect in the appointment of any member.
(8) The Commission may appoint any of its officers or employees to act as Secretary and to assist with taking of minutes of its meetings.
(9) The Commission may from time to time invite any person to attend one or more of its meetings, in particular to provide expert advice on specific issues.
13. The functions of the Commission shall be the following:
(a) to advise the Minister and any State institution on all issues relating to gender-based violence and domestic violence, as well as the measures deemed necessary to ensure conformity with their due diligence obligations as established in article 5 and the Convention;
(b) to monitor and oversee the effective implementation of the Action Plan developed by Government in accordance with article 5;
(c) to engage any relevant stakeholders, including civil society, in the effective implementation of the Action Plan mentioned in the preceding paragraph;
(d) to determine the appropriate financial and human resources required for the adequate implementation of the integrated policies, measures and programmes to prevent and combat all forms of gender-based violence and domestic violence covered by the scope of this Act;
(e) to support research in the field of gender-based

Functions of the Commission.

violence and domestic violence in order to study its root causes and effects, incidences and conviction rates, as well as the efficacy of measures taken to implement the Convention;
(f) to monitor national standards for support services for victims and perpetrators of gender-based violence and domestic violence, including public or private shelter services or facilities;
(g) to monitor standards and protocols for professionals in the areas covered by the scope of this Act and organise specialised training for the said professionals, including, but not limited to, educators, members of the judiciary and law enforcement officers;
(h) to comprehensively collect and collate relevant disaggregated statistical data at regular intervals on cases of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act from the State, public sector, agencies and other relevant entities, as appropriate;
(i) to collaborate with the relevant national institutions to conduct population-based surveys at regular intervals to assess the prevalence of and trends in all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act;
(j) to provide the group of experts, as referred to in article 66 of the Convention, with the information collected pursuant to this article in order to stimulate international co-operation and enable international benchmarking;
(k) to ensure that the information collected pursuant to this article is available to the public;
(l) to conduct, on a regular basis and at all levels, awareness-raising campaigns or programmes, including those in co-operation with national human rights institutions and equality bodies, civil society and non-governmental organisations to increase awareness and understanding among the general public of the different manifestations of all forms of gender-based violence and domestic violence and the need to prevent and address such violence;
(m) to ensure the wide dissemination among the general public of information on measures available to prevent acts of violence covered by the scope of this Act, as well as any means of redress available;
(n) to collaborate with the educational authorities to educate students on the forms of violence covered by this Act

and the preventive measures in their regard;
(o) to provide guidelines to the media in relation to the prevention of the forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act.
14. (1) The Commission shall keep proper accounts of its income and expenditure and shall prepare and send to the Minister, by the 31st day of July of each calendar year, statements of accounts in relation to the preceding financial year.
(2) The financial year of the Commission shall commence on the 1st of January and shall end on the 31st of December of each year:

Auditing and accounts.

Provided that the first financial year of the Commission shall begin on the coming into force of this Act and end on the 31st of December of the next following year.
(3) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General and the Public Finance Management Act shall apply.

15. The Commission shall be exempt from any liability to pay tax, in respect of its income, under the Income Tax Act.

16. (1) As soon as practicable after the end of every calendar year, but in any case by no later than the end of March of the year immediately following the year of its constitution, the Commission shall publish a report of all its activities and shall continue to draw up such a report by the end of March of every year thereafter (such report shall hereinafter in this article be referred to as the "annual report").
(2) The annual report shall include a general report of developments during the period to which it relates in respect of matters falling within the functions of the Commission and shall also include a report on the activities, recommendations, advice and other initiatives carried out by the Commission in furtherance of its functions during the period to which the report relates.
(3) A copy of the annual report shall be sent to the Minister who shall, by not later than four weeks after receipt of the report, lay a copy thereof on the Table of the House, so however that if the House is not in session, then such report shall be laid by not later than four weeks after the House resumes its session.
(4) The Commission may also send a copy of the annual report to such other bodies or organisations as the Minister may direct from time to time.

Cap. 601.

Exemption from income tax.
Cap. 123

Reports.

Persons to assist the Commission.

(5) The annual report shall, within the period of eight weeks from the date on which a copy thereof is laid on the Table of the House, be discussed by the Social Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives or any other committee substituting the same.
17. (1) The Minister may, whenever the Commission so requests, appoint a person or designate a public officer to assist it, in a consultative capacity, for the purpose of exercising any of its functions under this Act.
(2) There shall be a Secretary to the Commission who shall be a person appointed as such by the Minister or a public officer designated by the Minister to perform the functions of Secretary.
(3) The Commission shall also have such other staff as the Minister may deem necessary in order for the Commission to perform its functions and duties under this Act, and appoint or designate as aforesaid.

Funding. 18. (1) The Minister shall be responsible for securing adequate funds for the actual and effective performance of the functions as set out in article 13.
(2) In administering such funds, the Commission shall ensure adherence to all applicable legislation, including the

Cap. 601.

provisions of the Public Finance Management Act and relevant public procurement legislation.

Part III

Designated Agency

Designated agency.		19.  (1)  The Minister shall designate one or more public, civil society or other organisations, institutions or other bodies with which arrangements have been made as provided in sub-article (3) as the agency responsible for the provision of preventive, therapeutic and, or treatment programmes for victims and perpetrators of violence covered by the scope of this Act.
(2)	The Minister shall assign those services to be provided by the designated organisation, institution or other body.
(3)	The arrangements referred to in sub-article (1) shall lay down the services which the organisation, institution or other body will be expected to provide for the duration of the arrangements and which shall include the following:
(a)	preventive, therapeutic and, or treatment programmes for victims and perpetrators of forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act;
(b)	public help-line facilities for emergency access

to specialised support services in those areas related to forms of violence covered by the scope of this Act;
(c)	expertise for the assessment of the needs and risks of victims of violence covered by the scope of this Act, including the development of a care plan for each referral;
(d)	sheltered accommodation for victims of violence covered by the scope of this Act, including in partnership with other organisations, institutions or other bodies providing similar accommodation;
(e)	the compilation and dissemination to interested persons and bodies of documentation on the rights of victims of violence covered by the scope of this Act, and on the remedies and services available to them;
(f)	the collation of data concerning domestic violence for use by the Courts, prosecutors, law enforcement officers, health care practitioners, social workers and other agencies and entities, in a manner that protects the identity of victims of violence covered by the scope of this Act.
(4)	The arrangements referred to in sub-article (1) shall also provide for funding by the Minister of the services agreed upon with the organisation, institution or other body.
(5)	The designated agency shall keep the funds referred to in sub-article (4) separately from the other funds of the agency, which shall keep proper books of account thereof audited annually by auditors appointed by it with the concurrence of the Minister and which shall moreover be subject to audit by the Auditor General.
(6)	The designated agency shall, by not later than three months after the close of each financial year, transmit to the Minister:
(a)	a copy of the annual accounts certified by the auditors; and
(b)	a report on the operations of the agency during the year.
(7)	The report referred to in sub-article (6)(b) shall be laid on the Table of the House by the Minister by not later than six weeks after its receipt, or where the House is during the period not in session by not later than the second week after the House resumes its sittings, and this report shall, within the period of eight weeks from the date on which a copy thereof is laid on the Table of the House, be discussed by the Social Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives or any other committee substituting the same.

Cap. 9.

Power to make regulations.

Reservations to the Convention entered by Malta.

Cap. 217.

Convention to be enforceable as part of the law of Malta.

(8)	Any member, officer, employee or member of staff of a designated agency shall be deemed a public officer for the purposes of article 92 of the Criminal Code.
(9)	The designated agency shall, where necessary and in the best interest of all parties involved, liaise with any other agency, institution, non-governmental organisation or any other body which is competent to deal with matters relevant to the scope of this Act.
20.	The Minister may make regulations to implement and give better effect to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, may prescribe anything which shall be done or may be prescribed and provide for any consequential thing, incidental to or connected to the provisions of this Act.
21.	For the avoidance of any doubt, it is hereby declared that, by means of a Note Verbale presented on the 21st May of 2012, Malta reserved the right not to apply:
(a)	article 30(2) of the Convention and to continue to apply its current legislation in so far as State compensation is concerned; and
(b)	article 44(1)(e) of the Convention and to establish jurisdiction when the offence is committed by a person holding permanent residence in terms of article 7 of the Immigration Act.
22.	(1)   The Convention, as reproduced in the Schedule to this Act, shall be, and shall be enforceable as, part of the Laws of Malta.

(2)  Where any ordinary law is inconsistent with rights set out in the Convention, the latter shall prevail, and such ordinary law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void:
Provided that where any ordinary law confers a higher degree of protection and, or further rights than those set out in the Convention, that ordinary law shall apply.

SCHEDULE
Council of Europe Treaty Series - No. 210
Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence
Istanbul, 11.V.2011

Preamble
The member States of the Council of Europe and the other signatories hereto, Recalling the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms (ETS No. 5, 1950) and its Protocols, the European Social Charter (ETS No.
35, 1961, revised in 1996, ETS No. 163), the Council of Europe Convention on action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CETS No. 197, 2005) and the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201, 2007);
Recalling the following recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member States of the Council of Europe: Recommendation Rec(2002)5 on the protection of women against violence, Recommendation CM/Rec(2007)17 on gender equality standards and mechanisms, Recommendation CM/Rec(2010)10 on the role of women and men in conflict prevention and resolution and in peace building, and other relevant recommendations;
Taking account of the growing body of case law of the European Court of Human Rights which sets important standards in the field of violence against women;
Having regard to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966), the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women ("CEDAW", 1979) and its Optional Protocol (1999) as well as General Recommendation No. 19 of the CEDAW Committee on violence against women, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) and its Optional Protocols (2000) and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006);
Having regard to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (2002);
Recalling the basic principles of international humanitarian law, and especially the Geneva Convention (IV) relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949) and the Additional Protocols I and II (1977) thereto;
Condemning all forms of violence against women and domestic violence;
Recognising that the realisation of de jure and de facto equality between women and men is a key element in the prevention of violence against women;

Recognising that violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between women and men, which have led to domination over, and discrimination against, women by men and to the prevention of the full advancement of women;
Recognising the structural nature of violence against women as gender-based violence, and that violence against women is one of the crucial social mechanisms by which women are forced into a subordinate position compared with men;
Recognising, with grave concern, that women and girls are often exposed to serious forms of violence such as domestic violence, sexual harassment, rape, forced marriage, crimes committed in the name of so-called "honour" and genital mutilation, which constitute a serious violation of the human rights of women and girls and a major obstacle to the achievement of equality between women and men;
Recognising the ongoing human rights violations during armed conflicts that affect the civilian population, especially women in the form of widespread or systematic rape and sexual violence and the potential for increased gender-based violence both during and after conflicts;
Recognising that women and girls are exposed to a higher risk of gender-based violence than men;
Recognising that domestic violence affects women disproportionately, and that men may also be victims of domestic violence;
Recognising that children are victims of domestic violence, including as witnesses of violence in the family;
Aspiring to create a Europe free from violence against women and domestic violence,
Have agreed as follows:

Chapter I

Purposes, definitions, equality and non-discrimination, general obligations

Article 1 - Purposes of the Convention

1.	The purposes of this Convention are to:
a	protect women against all forms of violence, and prevent, prosecute and eliminate violence against women and domestic violence;
b	contribute to the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and promote substantive equality between women and men, including by empowering women;
c	design a comprehensive framework, policies and measures for the protection of and assistance to all victims of violence against women and domestic violence;

d	promote international co-operation with a view to eliminating violence against women and domestic violence;
e	provide support and assistance to organisations and law enforcement agencies to effectively co-operate in order to adopt an integrated approach to eliminating violence against women and domestic violence.
2.	In order to ensure effective implementation of its provisions by the Parties, this Convention establishes a specific monitoring mechanism.

Article 2 – Scope of the Convention

1.	This Convention shall apply to all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence, which affects women disproportionately.
2.	Parties are encouraged to apply this Convention to all victims of domestic violence. Parties shall pay particular attention to women victims of gender-based violence in implementing the provisions of this Convention.
3.	This Convention shall apply in times of peace and in situations of armed conflict.

Article 3 – Definitions For the purpose of this Convention

a	"violence against women" is understood as a violation of human rights and a form of discrimination against women and shall mean all acts of gender-based violence that result in, or are likely to result in, physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life;
b	"domestic violence" shall mean all acts of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence that occur within the family or domestic unit or between former or current spouses or partners, whether or not the perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim;
c	"gender" shall mean the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for women and men;
d	"gender-based violence against women" shall mean violence that is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately;
e	"victim" shall mean any natural person who is subject to the conduct specified in points a and b;
f	"women" includes girls under the age of 18.

Article 4 – Fundamental rights, equality and non-discrimination

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative and other measures to promote and protect the right for everyone, particularly women, to live free from violence in both the public and the private sphere.
2.	Parties condemn all forms of discrimination against women and take, without delay, the necessary legislative and other measures to prevent it, in particular by:	embodying in their national constitutions or other appropriate legislation the principle of equality between women and men and ensuring the practical realisation of this principle;	prohibiting discrimination against women, including through the use of sanctions, where appropriate;	abolishing laws and practices which discriminate against women.
3.	The implementation of the provisions of this Convention by the Parties, in particular measures to protect the rights of victims, shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, gender, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, state of health, disability, marital status, migrant or refugee status, or other status.
4.	Special measures that are necessary to prevent and protect women from gender-based violence shall not be considered discrimination under the terms of this Convention.

Article 5 – State obligations and due diligence

1.	Parties shall refrain from engaging in any Act of violence against women and ensure that State authorities, officials, agents, institutions and other actors acting on behalf of the State Act in conformity with this obligation.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative and other measures to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate, punish and provide reparation for acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention that are perpetrated by non-State actors.

Article 6 – Gender-sensitive policies

Parties shall undertake to include a gender perspective in the implementation and evaluation of the impact of the provisions of this Convention and to promote and effectively implement policies of equality between women and men and the empowerment of women.

Chapter II

Integrated policies and data collection Article 7 – Comprehensive and co-ordinated policies
1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative and other measures to adopt and implement State-wide effective, comprehensive and co-ordinated policies encompassing all relevant measures to prevent and combat all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention and offer a holistic response to violence against women.
2.	Parties shall ensure that policies referred to in paragraph 1 place the rights of the victim at the centre of all measures and are implemented by way of effective co-operation among all relevant agencies, institutions and organisations.
3.	Measures taken pursuant to this Article shall involve, where appropriate, all relevant actors, such as government agencies, the national, regional and local parliaments and authorities, national human rights institutions and civil society organisations.

Article 8 – Financial resources

Parties shall allocate appropriate financial and human resources for the adequate implementation of integrated policies, measures and programmes to prevent and combat all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, including those carried out by non-governmental organisations and civil society.

Article 9 – Non-governmental organisations and civil society

Parties shall recognise, encourage and support, at all levels, the work of relevant non-governmental organisations and of civil society active in combating violence against women and establish effective co-operation with these organisations.

Article 10 – Co-ordinating body

1.	Parties shall designate or establish one or more official bodies responsible for the co-ordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and measures to prevent and combat all forms of violence covered by this Convention. These bodies shall co-ordinate the collection of data as referred to in Article 11, analyse and disseminate its results.
2.	Parties shall ensure that the bodies designated or established pursuant to this Article receive information of a general nature on measures taken pursuant to Chapter VIII.
3.	Parties shall ensure that the bodies designated or established pursuant to this Article shall have the capacity to communicate directly and foster relations with their counterparts in other Parties.

Article 11 – Data collection and research

1.	For the purpose of the implementation of this Convention, Parties shall

undertake to:
a	collect disaggregated relevant statistical data at regular intervals on cases of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention;
b	support research in the field of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention in order to study its root causes and effects, incidences and conviction rates, as well as the efficacy of measures taken to implement this Convention.
2.	Parties shall endeavour to conduct population-based surveys at regular intervals to assess the prevalence of and trends in all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.
3.	Parties shall provide the group of experts, as referred to in Article 66 of this Convention, with the information collected pursuant to this Article in order to stimulate international co-operation and enable international benchmarking.
4.	Parties shall ensure that the information collected pursuant to this Article is available to the public.

Chapter III – Prevention Article 12 – General obligations

1.	Parties shall take the necessary measures to promote changes in the social and cultural patterns of behaviour of women and men with a view to eradicating prejudices, customs, traditions and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority of women or on stereotyped roles for women and men.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative and other measures to prevent all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention by any natural or legal person.
3.	Any measures taken pursuant to this chapter shall take into account and address the specific needs of persons made vulnerable by particular circumstances and shall place the human rights of all victims at their centre.
4.	Parties shall take the necessary measures to encourage all members of society, especially men and boys, to contribute actively to preventing all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.
5.	Parties shall ensure that culture, custom, religion, tradition or so-called "honour" shall not be considered as justification for any acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.
6.	Parties shall take the necessary measures to promote programmes and activities for the empowerment of women.

Article 13 – Awareness-raising

1.	Parties shall promote or conduct, on a regular basis and at all levels, awareness-raising campaigns or programmes, including in co-operation with national human rights institutions and equality bodies, civil society and non-governmental organisations, especially women's organisations, where appropriate, to increase awareness and understanding among the general public of the different manifestations of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, their consequences on children and the need to prevent such violence.
2.	Parties shall ensure the wide dissemination among the general public of information on measures available to prevent acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.

Article 14 – Education

1.	Parties shall take, where appropriate, the necessary steps to include teaching material on issues such as equality between women and men, non-stereotyped gender roles, mutual respect, non-violent conflict resolution in interpersonal relationships, gender-based violence against women and the right to personal integrity, adapted to the evolving capacity of learners, in formal curricula and at all levels of education.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary steps to promote the principles referred to in paragraph 1 in informal educational facilities, as well as in sports, cultural and leisure facilities and the media.

Article 15 – Training of professionals

1.	Parties shall provide or strengthen appropriate training for the relevant professionals dealing with victims or perpetrators of all acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, on the prevention and detection of such violence, equality between women and men, the needs and rights of victims, as well as on how to prevent secondary victimisation.
2.	Parties shall encourage that the training referred to in paragraph 1 includes training on co-ordinated multi-agency co-operation to allow for a comprehensive and appropriate handling of referrals in cases of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.

Article 16 – Preventive intervention and treatment programmes

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to set up or support programmes aimed at teaching perpetrators of domestic violence to adopt non-violent behaviour in interpersonal relationships with a view to preventing further violence and changing violent behavioural patterns.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to set up or support treatment programmes aimed at preventing perpetrators, in particular sex offenders, from re-offending.

3.	In taking the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, Parties shall ensure that the safety of, support for and the human rights of victims are of primary concern and that, where appropriate, these programmes are set up and implemented in close co-ordination with specialist support services for victims.

Article 17 – Participation of the private sector and the media

1.	Parties shall encourage the private sector, the information and communication technology sector and the media, with due respect for freedom of expression and their independence, to participate in the elaboration and implementation of policies and to set guidelines and self-regulatory standards to prevent violence against women and to enhance respect for their dignity.
2.	Parties shall develop and promote, in co-operation with private sector actors, skills among children, parents and educators on how to deal with the information and communications environment that provides access to degrading content of a sexual or violent nature which might be harmful.

Chapter IV – Protection and support Article 18 – General obligations

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to protect all victims from any further acts of violence.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures, in accordance with internal law, to ensure that there are appropriate mechanisms to provide for effective co-operation between all relevant state agencies, including the judiciary, public prosecutors, law enforcement agencies, local and regional authorities as well as non-governmental organisations and other relevant organisations and entities, in protecting and supporting victims and witnesses of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, including by referring to general and specialist support services as detailed in Articles 20 and 22 of this Convention.
3.	Parties shall ensure that measures taken pursuant to this chapter shall:	be based on a gendered understanding of violence against women and domestic violence and shall focus on the human rights and safety of the victim;	be based on an integrated approach which takes into account the relationship between victims, perpetrators, children and their wider social environment;	aim at avoiding secondary victimisation;	aim at the empowerment and economic independence of women victims of violence;	allow, where appropriate, for a range of protection and support

services to be located on the same premises;	address the specific needs of vulnerable persons, including child victims, and be made available to them.
4.	The provision of services shall not depend on the victim's willingness to press charges or testify against any perpetrator.
5.	Parties shall take the appropriate measures to provide consular and other protection and support to their nationals and other victims entitled to such protection in accordance with their obligations under international law.

Article 19 – Information

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes reçoivent des informations adéquates et dans les meilleurs délais sur les services d'aide disponibles et les mesures juridiques dans une langue qu'elles comprennent.

Article 20 – Services d'aide généraux

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes aient accès à des services facilitant leur rétablissement après des actes de violence. Ces mesures devraient inclure, si nécessaire, des services tels que le conseil juridique et psychologique, l'aide financière, le logement, l'éducation, la formation et l'aide à la recherche d'emploi.
2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes aient accès aux services de santé et aux services sociaux, que ces services disposent de ressources adéquates et que les professionnels soient formés pour aider les victimes et les orienter vers les services appropriés.

Article 21 – Aide en matière de plaintes individuelles/collectives

Les Parties veillent à ce que les victimes reçoivent des informations sur les mécanismes de plaintes individuelles/collectives régionaux et internationaux applicables et y aient accès. Les Parties encouragent la fourniture d'une aide sensible et compétente aux victimes pour présenter de telles plaintes.

Article 22 – Services d'aide spécialisés

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour fournir ou organiser, selon une répartition géographique adéquate, des services d'aide spécialisés immédiats, à court et à long terme, à toute victime ayant subi l'un des actes de violence couverts par le champ d'application de la présente Convention.
2. Les Parties fournissent ou organisent des services d'aide spécialisés pour toutes les femmes victimes de violence et leurs enfants.

Article 23 – Refuges

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour la

mise en place de refuges appropriés, facilement accessibles et en nombre suffisant, afin d'offrir des logements sûrs aux victimes et pour les atteindre de manière proactive, en particulier les femmes et leurs enfants.

Article 24 – Lignes d'assistance téléphonique

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour mettre en place des lignes d'assistance téléphonique nationales fonctionnant 24 heures sur 24 et 7 jours sur 7 (24/7), gratuites, destinées à fournir des conseils aux appelants, de manière confidentielle ou dans le respect de leur anonymat, en ce qui concerne toutes les formes de violence couvertes par le champ d'application de la présente Convention.

Article 25 – Aide aux victimes de violence sexuelle

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour la mise en place de centres de crise pour victimes de viol ou de centres d'orientation pour victimes de violence sexuelle, appropriés et facilement accessibles, en nombre suffisant pour assurer l'examen médical et médico-légal, le soutien en cas de traumatisme et le conseil aux victimes.

Article 26 – Protection et soutien aux enfants témoins

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que, dans la fourniture de services de protection et d'aide aux victimes, il soit dûment tenu compte des droits et des besoins des enfants témoins de toutes les formes de violence couvertes par le champ d'application de la présente Convention.
2. Les mesures prises conformément au présent article incluent un conseil psychosocial adapté à l'âge des enfants témoins de toutes les formes de violence couvertes par le champ d'application de la présente Convention et tiennent dûment compte de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant.

Article 27 – Signalement

Les Parties prennent les mesures nécessaires pour encourager toute personne témoin de la commission d'actes de violence couverts par le champ d'application de la présente Convention ou qui a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'un tel acte pourrait être commis, ou que de nouveaux actes de violence sont à craindre, à le signaler aux organisations ou autorités compétentes.

Article 28 – Signalement par les professionnels

Les Parties prennent les mesures nécessaires pour que les règles de confidentialité imposées par le droit interne à certains professionnels ne constituent pas un obstacle à la possibilité, dans des conditions appropriées, de faire un signalement aux organisations ou autorités compétentes s'ils ont des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'un acte grave de violence couvert par le champ d'application de la présente Convention a été commis et que de nouveaux actes graves de violence sont à craindre.

Chapitre V – Droit matériel Article 29 – Actions civiles et recours

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour accorder aux victimes des recours civils adéquats à l'encontre de l'auteur de l'infraction.

2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour accorder aux victimes, conformément aux principes généraux du droit international, des recours civils adéquats à l'encontre des autorités de l'État qui auraient manqué à leur devoir de prendre les mesures de prévention ou de protection nécessaires dans le cadre de leurs compétences.

Article 30 – Indemnisation

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes aient le droit de demander une indemnisation aux auteurs de toute infraction établie conformément à la présente Convention.
2. Une indemnisation adéquate de l'État sera accordée à ceux qui ont subi des blessures corporelles graves ou une atteinte à la santé, dans la mesure où le préjudice n'est pas couvert par d'autres sources, telles que l'auteur de l'infraction, les assurances ou les services de santé et d'aide sociale financés par l'État. Cela n'empêche pas les Parties de demander le remboursement de l'indemnisation accordée à l'auteur de l'infraction, pour autant que la sécurité de la victime soit dûment prise en compte.
3. Les mesures prises conformément au paragraphe 2 garantissent l'octroi de l'indemnisation dans un délai raisonnable.

Article 31 – Garde, droit de visite et sécurité

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que, lors de la détermination des droits de garde et de visite concernant les enfants, il soit tenu compte des incidents de violence couverts par le champ d'application de la présente Convention.
2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que l'exercice de tout droit de visite ou de garde ne compromette pas les droits et la sécurité de la victime ou des enfants.

Article 32 – Conséquences civiles des mariages forcés

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les mariages conclus sous la contrainte puissent être annulables, annulés ou dissous sans charge financière ou administrative excessive pour la victime.

Article 33 – Violence psychologique

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que le comportement intentionnel consistant à porter gravement atteinte à l'intégrité psychologique d'une personne par la contrainte ou les menaces soit érigé en infraction pénale.

Article 34 – Harcèlement obsessionnel

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que le comportement intentionnel consistant à adopter, de manière répétée, un comportement menaçant dirigé envers une autre personne, conduisant celle-ci à craindre pour sa sécurité, soit érigé en infraction pénale.

Article 35 – Violence physique

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que le comportement intentionnel consistant à commettre des actes de violence physique à l'égard d'une autre personne soit érigé en infraction pénale.

Article 36 – Violence sexuelle, y compris le viol

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les comportements intentionnels suivants soient érigés en infraction pénale :
a se livrer à une pénétration vaginale, anale ou orale non consentie, à caractère sexuel, du corps d'autrui avec toute partie du corps ou avec un objet ;
b se livrer à d'autres actes non consentis à caractère sexuel avec autrui ;
c contraindre autrui à se livrer à des actes non consentis à caractère sexuel avec un tiers.
2. Le consentement doit être donné volontairement comme résultat de la volonté libre de la personne considérée dans le contexte des circonstances environnantes.
3. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les dispositions du paragraphe 1 s'appliquent également aux actes commis contre d'anciens conjoints ou partenaires ou contre des conjoints ou partenaires actuels tels que reconnus par le droit interne.

Article 37 – Mariage forcé

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infraction pénale le fait, lorsqu'il est commis intentionnellement, de forcer un adulte ou un enfant à contracter un mariage.
2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infraction pénale le fait, lorsqu'il est commis intentionnellement, d'attirer un adulte ou un enfant sur le territoire d'une Partie ou d'un État autre que celui où il ou elle réside dans le but de le ou la forcer à contracter un mariage.

Article 38 – Mutilations génitales féminines

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infractions pénales, lorsqu'ils sont commis intentionnellement :
a l'excision, l'infibulation ou toute autre mutilation de la totalité ou partie des grandes lèvres, petites lèvres ou clitoris d'une femme ;
b le fait de contraindre une femme à subir tout acte énuméré au point a ou de lui fournir les moyens à cette fin ;
c le fait d'inciter ou de contraindre une fille à subir tout acte énuméré au point a ou de lui fournir les moyens à cette fin.

Article 39 – Avortement et stérilisation forcés

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infractions pénales, lorsqu'ils sont commis intentionnellement :
a le fait de pratiquer un avortement sur une femme sans son consentement préalable et éclairé ;
b le fait de pratiquer une intervention chirurgicale qui a pour objet ou pour effet de mettre fin à la capacité d'une femme à se reproduire naturellement sans son consentement préalable et éclairé ou sans qu'elle en ait compris les implications.

Article 40 – Harcèlement sexuel

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que toute forme de comportement non désiré, verbal, non verbal ou physique, à caractère sexuel, ayant pour objet ou pour effet de porter atteinte à la dignité d'une personne, en particulier lorsque ce comportement crée un environnement intimidant, hostile, dégradant, humiliant ou offensant, soit soumise à des sanctions pénales ou à d'autres sanctions légales.

Article 41 – Complicité et tentative

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infraction pénale, lorsqu'elle est commise intentionnellement, la complicité dans la commission des infractions établies conformément aux articles 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.a et 39 de la présente Convention.
2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour ériger en infractions pénales, lorsqu'elles sont commises intentionnellement, les tentatives de commettre les infractions établies conformément aux articles 35, 36, 37, 38.a et 39 de la présente Convention.

Article 42

Justifications inacceptables des infractions pénales, y compris les infractions commises au nom du prétendu « honneur »
1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que, dans les procédures pénales diligentées à la suite de la commission de l'un des actes de violence couverts par le champ d'application de la présente Convention, la culture, la coutume, la religion, la tradition ou le prétendu « honneur » ne soient pas considérés comme justifiant de tels actes. Cela couvre, en particulier, les allégations selon lesquelles la victime aurait transgressé des normes ou coutumes culturelles, religieuses, sociales ou traditionnelles relatives à un comportement approprié.
2. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que l'incitation par toute personne d'un enfant à commettre l'un des actes visés au paragraphe 1 n'atténue pas la responsabilité pénale de cette personne pour les actes commis.

Article 43 – Application des infractions pénales

Les infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention s'appliquent indépendamment de la nature de la relation entre la victime et l'auteur de l'infraction.

Article 44 – Compétence

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour établir leur compétence à l'égard de toute infraction établie conformément à la présente Convention, lorsque l'infraction est commise :
a sur leur territoire ; ou
b à bord d'un navire battant leur pavillon ; ou
c à bord d'un aéronef immatriculé selon leurs lois ; ou
d par l'un de leurs ressortissants ; ou
e par une personne ayant sa résidence habituelle sur leur territoire.
2. Les Parties s'efforcent de prendre les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour établir leur compétence à l'égard de toute infraction établie conformément à la présente Convention, lorsque l'infraction est commise à l'encontre de l'un de leurs ressortissants ou d'une personne ayant sa résidence habituelle sur leur territoire.
3. Pour la poursuite des infractions établies conformément aux articles 36, 37, 38 et 39 de la présente Convention, les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que l'établissement de leur compétence ne soit pas subordonné à la condition que les faits soient érigés en infraction pénale sur le territoire où ils ont été commis.
4. Pour la poursuite des infractions établies conformément aux articles 36, 37, 38 et 39 de la présente Convention, les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que l'établissement de leur compétence en ce qui concerne les points d et e du paragraphe 1 ne soit pas subordonné à la condition que la poursuite soit précédée d'une plainte de la victime ou d'une dénonciation de l'État du lieu où l'infraction a été commise.
5. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour établir leur compétence à l'égard des infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention, dans les cas où un auteur présumé est présent sur leur territoire et ne peut être extradé vers une autre Partie au seul motif de sa nationalité.
6. Lorsque plusieurs Parties revendiquent leur compétence à l'égard d'une infraction présumée établie conformément à la présente Convention, les Parties concernées se concertent, le cas échéant, afin de déterminer quelle est la juridiction la mieux placée pour engager les poursuites.
7. Sans préjudice des règles générales du droit international, la présente Convention n'exclut aucune compétence pénale exercée par une Partie conformément à son droit interne.

Article 45 – Sanctions et mesures

1. Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention soient passibles de sanctions effectives, proportionnées et dissuasives, compte tenu de leur gravité. Ces sanctions incluent, le cas échéant, des peines privatives de liberté pouvant donner lieu à l'extradition.
2. Les Parties peuvent adopter d'autres mesures à l'égard des auteurs d'infractions, telles que : le suivi ou la surveillance des personnes condamnées ; le retrait de l'autorité parentale si l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant, qui peut inclure la sécurité de la victime, ne peut être garanti d'aucune autre manière.

Article 46 – Circonstances aggravantes

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les circonstances suivantes, pour autant qu'elles ne constituent pas déjà des éléments constitutifs de l'infraction, puissent, conformément aux dispositions pertinentes de droit interne, être prises en considération en tant que circonstances aggravantes dans la détermination de la peine relative aux infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention :
a l'infraction a été commise à l'encontre d'un ancien ou actuel conjoint ou partenaire reconnu comme tel par le droit interne, par un membre de la famille, une personne cohabitant avec la victime ou une personne ayant abusé de son autorité ;
b l'infraction, ou des infractions connexes, ont été commises de manière répétée ;
c l'infraction a été commise à l'encontre d'une personne rendue vulnérable par des circonstances particulières ;
d l'infraction a été commise à l'encontre d'un enfant ou en sa présence ;
e l'infraction a été commise par deux ou plusieurs personnes agissant conjointement ;
f l'infraction a été précédée ou accompagnée d'un niveau extrême de violence ;
g l'infraction a été commise avec l'usage ou la menace d'une arme ;
h l'infraction a entraîné un préjudice physique ou psychologique grave pour la victime ;
i l'auteur de l'infraction avait été condamné antérieurement pour des faits de nature similaire.

Article 47 – Sentences passed by another Party

Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to provide for the possibility of taking into account final sentences passed by another Party in relation to the offences established in accordance with this Convention when determining the sentence.

Article 48

Prohibition of mandatory alternative dispute resolution processes or sentencing
1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to prohibit mandatory alternative dispute resolution processes, including mediation and conciliation, in relation to all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that if the payment of a fine is ordered, due account shall be taken of the ability of the perpetrator to assume his or her financial obligations towards the victim.

Chapter VI

Investigation, prosecution, procedural law and protective measures Article 49 – General obligations
1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that investigations and judicial proceedings in relation to all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention are carried out without undue delay while taking into consideration the rights of the victim during all stages of the criminal proceedings.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures, in conformity with the fundamental principles of human rights and having regard to the gendered understanding of violence, to ensure the effective investigation and prosecution of offences established in accordance with this Convention.

Article 50 – Immediate response, prevention and protection

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the responsible law enforcement agencies respond to all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention promptly and appropriately by offering adequate and immediate protection to victims.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the responsible law enforcement agencies engage promptly and appropriately in the prevention and protection against all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, including the employment of preventive operational measures and the collection of evidence.

Article 51 – Risk assessment and risk management

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that an assessment of the lethality risk, the seriousness of the situation and the risk of repeated violence is carried out by all relevant authorities in order to manage the risk and if necessary to provide co-ordinated safety and support.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the assessment referred to in paragraph 1 duly takes into account, at all stages of the investigation and application of protective measures, the fact that perpetrators of acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention possess or have access to firearms.

Article 52 – Emergency barring orders

Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the competent authorities are granted the power to order, in situations of immediate danger, a perpetrator of domestic violence to vacate the residence of the victim or person at risk for a sufficient period of time and to prohibit the perpetrator from entering the residence of or contacting the victim or person at risk. Measures taken pursuant to this Article shall give priority to the safety of victims or persons at risk.

Article 53 – Restraining or protection orders

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that appropriate restraining or protection orders are available to victims of all forms of violence covered by the scope of this Convention.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the restraining or protection orders referred to in paragraph 1 are:	available for immediate protection and without undue financial or administrative burdens placed on the victim;	issued for a specified period or until modified or discharged;	where necessary, issued on an ex parte basis which has immediate effect;	available irrespective of, or in addition to, other legal proceedings;	allowed to be introduced in subsequent legal proceedings.
3.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that breaches of restraining or protection orders issued pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal or other legal sanctions.

Article 54 – Investigations and evidence

Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that, in any civil or criminal proceedings, evidence relating to the sexual history and conduct of the victim shall be permitted only when it is relevant and necessary.

Article 55 – Ex parte and ex officio proceedings

1.	Parties shall ensure that investigations into or prosecution of offences established in accordance with Articles 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 of this Convention shall not be wholly dependant upon a report or complaint filed by a victim if the offence was committed in whole or in part on its territory, and that the proceedings may continue even if the victim withdraws her or his statement or complaint.
2.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure, in accordance with the conditions provided for by their internal law, the possibility for governmental and non-governmental organisations and domestic violence counsellors to assist and/or support victims, at their request, during investigations and judicial proceedings concerning the offences established in accordance with this Convention.

Article 56 – Measures of protection

1.	Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to protect the rights and interests of victims, including their special needs as witnesses, at all stages of investigations and judicial proceedings, in particular by:
a	providing for their protection, as well as that of their families and witnesses, from intimidation, retaliation and repeat victimisation;
b	ensuring that victims are informed, at least in cases where the victims and the family might be in danger, when the perpetrator escapes or is released temporarily or definitively;
c	informing them, under the conditions provided for by internal law, of their rights and the services at their disposal and the follow-up given to their complaint, the charges, the general progress of the investigation or proceedings, and their role therein, as well as the outcome of their case;
d	enabling victims, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of internal law, to be heard, to supply evidence and have their views, needs and concerns presented, directly or through an intermediary, and considered;
e	providing victims with appropriate support services so that their rights and interests are duly presented and taken into account;
f	ensuring that measures may be adopted to protect the privacy and the image of the victim;
g	ensuring that contact between victims and perpetrators within Court and law enforcement agency premises is avoided where possible;
h	providing victims with independent and competent interpreters when victims are parties to proceedings or when they are supplying evidence;
i	enabling victims to testify, according to the rules provided by their internal law, in the courtroom without being present or at least without the

presence of the alleged perpetrator, notably through the use of appropriate communication technologies, where available.
2.	A child victim and child witness of violence against women and domestic violence shall be afforded, where appropriate, special protection measures taking into account the best interests of the child.

This excerpt sits under: CHAPTER 581 > Part III > Chapter V – Substantive law Article 29 – Civil lawsuits and remedies

Article 57 – Aide juridique

Les Parties prévoient le droit à l'assistance juridique et à l'aide juridique gratuite pour les victimes dans les conditions prévues par leur droit interne.

Article 58 – Prescription

Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives et autres nécessaires pour que le délai de prescription pour engager toute procédure judiciaire concernant les infractions établies conformément aux articles 36, 37, 38 et 39 de la présente Convention se poursuive pendant une période de temps suffisante et proportionnée à la gravité de l'infraction en question, afin de permettre l'engagement efficace de poursuites après que la victime a atteint l'âge de la majorité.

Chapitre VII – Migration et asile Article 59 – Statut de résident

1.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes dont le statut de résident dépend de celui du conjoint ou du partenaire tel que reconnu par le droit interne, en cas de dissolution du mariage ou de la relation, se voient accorder en cas de circonstances particulièrement difficiles, sur demande, un titre de séjour autonome indépendamment de la durée du mariage ou de la relation. Les conditions relatives à l'octroi et à la durée du titre de séjour autonome sont établies par le droit interne.
2.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes puissent obtenir la suspension des procédures d'expulsion engagées en relation avec un statut de résident dépendant de celui du conjoint ou du partenaire tel que reconnu par le droit interne afin de leur permettre de demander un titre de séjour autonome.
3.	Les Parties délivrent un titre de séjour renouvelable aux victimes dans l'une des deux situations suivantes, ou dans les deux :
a	lorsque l'autorité compétente considère que leur séjour est nécessaire en raison de leur situation personnelle ;
b	lorsque l'autorité compétente considère que leur séjour est nécessaire aux fins de leur coopération avec les autorités compétentes dans le cadre d'une enquête ou de procédures pénales.
4.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes de mariage forcé amenées dans un autre pays aux fins du mariage

et qui, en conséquence, ont perdu leur statut de résident dans le pays où elles résident habituellement, puissent récupérer ce statut.

Article 60 – Demandes d'asile fondées sur le genre

1.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que la violence fondée sur le genre à l'égard des femmes puisse être reconnue comme une forme de persécution au sens de l'article 1, A (2), de la Convention de 1951 relative au statut des réfugiés et comme une forme de préjudice grave donnant lieu à une protection complémentaire/subsidiaire.
2.	Les Parties veillent à ce qu'une interprétation sensible au genre soit donnée à chacun des motifs de la Convention et à ce que, lorsqu'il est établi que la persécution crainte est fondée sur un ou plusieurs de ces motifs, les demandeurs se voient accorder le statut de réfugié conformément aux instruments pertinents applicables.
3.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour développer des procédures d'accueil et des services d'aide sensibles au genre pour les demandeurs d'asile ainsi que des lignes directrices et des procédures d'asile sensibles au genre, y compris la détermination du statut de réfugié et la demande de protection internationale.

Article 61 – Non-refoulement

1.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour respecter le principe de non-refoulement conformément aux obligations existantes en vertu du droit international.
2.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes de violence à l'égard des femmes qui ont besoin de protection, indépendamment de leur statut ou de leur résidence, ne soient en aucune circonstance renvoyées dans un pays où leur vie serait en danger ou où elles pourraient être soumises à la torture ou à des peines ou traitements inhumains ou dégradants.

Chapitre VIII – Coopération internationale Article 62 – Principes généraux

1.	Les Parties coopèrent entre elles, conformément aux dispositions de la présente Convention, et par l'application des instruments internationaux et régionaux pertinents en matière de coopération en matière civile et pénale, des arrangements convenus sur la base de législations uniformes ou réciproques et des droits internes, dans la mesure la plus large possible, aux fins de :
a	prévenir, combattre et poursuivre toutes les formes de violence couvertes par le champ d'application de la présente Convention ;
b	protéger et fournir une assistance aux victimes ;
c	enquêtes ou procédures concernant les infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention ;

d	exécuter les jugements civils et pénaux pertinents rendus par les autorités judiciaires des Parties, y compris les ordonnances de protection.
2.	Les Parties prennent les mesures législatives ou autres nécessaires pour que les victimes d'une infraction établie conformément à la présente Convention et commise sur le territoire d'une Partie autre que celle où elles résident puissent porter plainte devant les autorités compétentes de leur État de résidence.
3.	Si une Partie qui subordonne l'entraide judiciaire en matière pénale, l'extradition ou l'exécution de jugements civils ou pénaux prononcés par une autre Partie à la présente Convention à l'existence d'un traité reçoit une demande de coopération judiciaire d'une Partie avec laquelle elle n'a pas conclu un tel traité, elle peut considérer la présente Convention comme la base juridique de l'entraide judiciaire en matière pénale, de l'extradition ou de l'exécution de jugements civils ou pénaux prononcés par l'autre Partie à l'égard des infractions établies conformément à la présente Convention.
4.	Les Parties s'efforcent d'intégrer, le cas échéant, la prévention et la lutte contre la violence à l'égard des femmes et la violence domestique dans les programmes d'assistance au développement fournis au bénéfice d'États tiers, y compris en concluant des accords bilatéraux et multilatéraux avec des États tiers en vue de faciliter la protection des victimes conformément à l'article 18, paragraphe 5.

Article 63 – Mesures relatives aux personnes à risque

Lorsqu'une Partie, sur la base des informations dont elle dispose, a des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'une personne court un risque immédiat d'être soumise à l'un des actes de violence visés aux articles 36, 37, 38 et 39 de la présente Convention sur le territoire d'une autre Partie, la Partie qui détient l'information est encouragée à la transmettre sans délai à cette dernière afin de garantir que des mesures de protection appropriées soient prises. Le cas échéant, cette information comprend des détails sur les dispositions de protection existantes au bénéfice de la personne à risque.

Article 64 – Information

1.	La Partie requise informe rapidement la Partie requérante du résultat final de l'action entreprise en vertu du présent chapitre. La Partie requise informe également rapidement la Partie requérante de toute circonstance qui rend impossible l'exécution de l'action demandée ou est susceptible de la retarder de manière significative.
2.	Une Partie peut, dans les limites de son droit interne, sans demande préalable, transmettre à une autre Partie des informations obtenues dans le cadre de ses propres enquêtes lorsqu'elle considère que la divulgation de ces informations pourrait aider la Partie destinataire à prévenir les infractions pénales établies conformément à la présente Convention ou à engager ou mener des enquêtes ou des procédures concernant de telles infractions pénales ou qu'elle pourrait conduire à une demande de coopération de cette Partie en vertu du présent chapitre.
3.	Une Partie recevant toute information conformément au paragraphe 2 soumet cette information à ses autorités compétentes afin que des poursuites puissent être engagées si elles sont jugées appropriées, ou que cette information puisse être prise en compte dans les procédures civiles et pénales pertinentes.

Article 65 – Protection des données

Les données à caractère personnel sont stockées et utilisées conformément aux obligations contractées par les Parties en vertu de la Convention pour la protection des personnes à l'égard du traitement automatisé des données à caractère personnel (STE n° 108).

Chapitre IX – Mécanisme de suivi

Article 66

Groupe d'experts sur la lutte contre la violence à l'égard des femmes et la violence domestique
1.	Le Groupe d'experts sur la lutte contre la violence à l'égard des femmes et la violence domestique (ci-après dénommé « GREVIO ») assure le suivi de la mise en œuvre de la présente Convention par les Parties.
2.	Le GREVIO est composé d'un minimum de 10 membres et d'un maximum de 15 membres, en tenant compte d'un équilibre entre les genres et géographique, ainsi que d'une expertise pluridisciplinaire. Ses membres sont élus par le Comité des Parties parmi des candidats désignés par les Parties pour un mandat de quatre ans, renouvelable une fois, et choisis parmi les ressortissants des Parties.
3.	La première élection de 10 membres se tient dans un délai d'un an suivant l'entrée en vigueur de la présente Convention. L'élection de cinq membres supplémentaires se tient après la 25e ratification ou adhésion.
4.	L'élection des membres du GREVIO est fondée sur les principes suivants :
a	ils sont choisis selon une procédure transparente parmi des personnes de haute moralité, connues pour leur compétence reconnue dans les domaines des droits de l'homme, de l'égalité entre les femmes et les hommes, de la violence à l'égard des femmes et de la violence domestique, ou de l'assistance et de la protection des victimes, ou ayant démontré une expérience professionnelle dans les domaines couverts par la présente Convention ;
b	deux membres du GREVIO ne peuvent être ressortissants du même État ;
c	ils doivent représenter les principaux systèmes juridiques ;
d	ils doivent représenter les acteurs et agences pertinents dans le domaine de la violence à l'égard des femmes et de la violence domestique ;
e	ils siègent à titre individuel et sont indépendants et impartiaux dans l'exercice de leurs fonctions, et sont disponibles pour s'acquitter de leurs tâches de manière efficace.
5.	La procédure d'élection des membres du GREVIO est déterminée par le Comité des Ministres du Conseil de l'Europe, après consultation et obtention du consentement unanime des Parties, dans un délai de six mois suivant l'entrée en vigueur de la présente Convention.

6.	Le GREVIO adopte son propre règlement intérieur.
7.	Les membres du GREVIO, ainsi que les autres membres des délégations effectuant les visites dans les pays comme prévu à l'article 68, paragraphes 9 et 14, jouissent des privilèges et immunités établis dans l'annexe à la présente Convention.

Article 67 – Comité des Parties

1.	Le Comité des Parties est composé des représentants des Parties à la Convention.
2.	Le Comité des Parties est convoqué par le Secrétaire Général du Conseil de l'Europe. Sa première réunion se tient dans un délai d'un an suivant l'entrée en vigueur de la présente Convention afin d'élire les membres du GREVIO. Il se réunit par la suite chaque fois qu'un tiers des Parties, le Président du Comité des Parties ou le Secrétaire Général en fait la demande.
3.	Le Comité des Parties adopte son propre règlement intérieur.

Article 68 – Procedure

1.	Parties shall submit to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, based on a questionnaire prepared by GREVIO, a report on legislative and other measures giving effect to the provisions of this Convention, for consideration by GREVIO.
2.	GREVIO shall consider the report submitted in accordance with paragraph 1 with the representatives of the Party concerned.
3.	Subsequent evaluation procedures shall be divided into rounds, the length of which is determined by GREVIO. At the beginning of each round GREVIO shall select the specific provisions on which the evaluation procedure shall be based and send out a questionnaire.
4.	GREVIO shall define the appropriate means to carry out this monitoring procedure. It may in particular adopt a questionnaire for each evaluation round, which shall serve as a basis for the evaluation procedure of the implementation by the Parties. This questionnaire shall be addressed to all Parties. Parties shall respond to this questionnaire, as well as to any other request of information from GREVIO.
5.	GREVIO may receive information on the implementation of the Convention from non-governmental organisations and civil society, as well as from national institutions for the protection of human rights.
6.	GREVIO shall take due consideration of the existing information available from other regional and international instruments and bodies in areas falling within the scope of this Convention.
7.	When adopting a questionnaire for each evaluation round, GREVIO shall take due consideration of the existing data collection and research in the Parties as

referred to in Article 11 of this Convention.
8.	GREVIO may receive information on the implementation of the Convention from the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, the Parliamentary Assembly and relevant specialised bodies of the Council of Europe, as well as those established under other international instruments. Complaints presented to these bodies and their outcome will be made available to GREVIO.
9.	GREVIO may subsidiarily organise, in co-operation with the national authorities and with the assistance of independent national experts, country visits, if the information gained is insufficient or in cases provided for in paragraph 14. During these visits, GREVIO may be assisted by specialists in specific fields.
10.	GREVIO shall prepare a draft report containing its analysis concerning the implementation of the provisions on which the evaluation is based, as well as its suggestions and proposals concerning the way in which the Party concerned may deal with the problems which have been identified. The draft report shall be transmitted for comments to the Party which undergoes the evaluation. Its comments shall be taken into account by GREVIO when adopting its report.
11.	On the basis of all the information received and the comments by the Parties, GREVIO shall adopt its report and conclusions concerning the measures taken by the Party concerned to implement the provisions of this Convention. This report and the conclusions shall be sent to the Party concerned and to the Committee of the Parties. The report and conclusions of GREVIO shall be made public as from their adoption, together with eventual comments by the Party concerned.
12.	Without prejudice to the procedure of paragraphs 1 to 8, the Committee of the Parties may adopt, on the basis of the report and conclusions of GREVIO, recommendations addressed to this Party (a) concerning the measures to be taken to implement the conclusions of GREVIO, if necessary setting a date for submitting information on their implementation, and (b) aiming at promoting co-operation with that Party for the proper implementation of this Convention.
13.	If GREVIO receives reliable information indicating a situation where problems require immediate attention to prevent or limit the scale or number of serious violations of the Convention, it may request the urgent submission of a special report concerning measures taken to prevent a serious, massive or persistent pattern of violence against women.
14.	Taking into account the information submitted by the Party concerned, as well as any other reliable information available to it, GREVIO may designate one or more of its members to conduct an inquiry and to report urgently to GREVIO. Where warranted and with the consent of the Party, the inquiry may include a visit to its territory.
15.	After examining the findings of the inquiry referred to in paragraph 14, GREVIO shall transmit these findings to the Party concerned and, where appropriate, to the Committee of the Parties and the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe together with any comments and recommendations.

Article 69 – General recommendations

GREVIO may adopt, where appropriate, general recommendations on the implementation of this Convention.

Article 70 – Parliamentary involvement in monitoring

1.	National parliaments shall be invited to participate in the monitoring of the measures taken for the implementation of this Convention.
2.	Parties shall submit the reports of GREVIO to their national parliaments.
3.	The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe shall be invited to regularly take stock of the implementation of this Convention.

Chapter X

Relationship with other international instruments Article 71 – Relationship with other international instruments
1.	This Convention shall not affect obligations arising from other international instruments to which Parties to this Convention are Parties or shall become Parties and which contain provisions on matters governed by this Convention.
2.	The Parties to this Convention may conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements with one another on the matters dealt with in this Convention, for purposes of supplementing or strengthening its provisions or facilitating the application of the principles embodied in it.

Chapter XI – Amendments to the Convention Article 72 – Amendments

1.	Any proposal for an amendment to this Convention presented by a Party shall be communicated to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe and forwarded by her or him to the member States of the Council of Europe, any signatory, any Party, the European Union, any State invited to sign this Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 75, and any State invited to accede to this Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 76.
2.	The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe shall consider the proposed amendment and, after having consulted the Parties to this Convention that are not members of the Council of Europe, may adopt the amendment by the majority provided for in Article 20.d of the Statute of the Council of Europe.
3.	The text of any amendment adopted by the Committee of Ministers in accordance with paragraph 2 shall be forwarded to the Parties for acceptance.
4.	Any amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 2 shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date on which all Parties have informed the Secretary General of their acceptance.

Chapter XII – Final clauses Article 73 – Effects of this Convention

The provisions of this Convention shall not prejudice the provisions of internal law and binding international instruments which are already in force or may come into force, under which more favourable rights are or would be accorded to persons in preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.

Article 74 – Dispute settlement

1.	The Parties to any dispute which may arise concerning the application or interpretation of the provisions of this Convention shall first seek to resolve it by means of negotiation, conciliation, arbitration or by any other methods of peaceful settlement accepted by mutual agreement between them.
2.	The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe may establish procedures of settlement to be available for use by the Parties in dispute if they should so agree.

Article 75 – Signature and entry into force

1.	This Convention shall be open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe, the non-member States which have participated in its elaboration and the European Union.
2.	This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
3.	This Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which 10 signatories, including at least eight member States of the Council of Europe, have expressed their consent to be bound by the Convention in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2.
4.	In respect of any State referred to in paragraph 1 or the European Union, which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 76 – Accession to the Convention

1.	After the entry into force of this Convention, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe may, after consultation of the Parties to this Convention and obtaining their unanimous consent, invite any non-member State of the Council of Europe, which has not participated in the elaboration of the Convention, to accede to this Convention by a decision taken by the majority provided for in Article 20.d of the Statute of the Council of Europe, and by unanimous vote of the representatives of the

Parties entitled to sit on the Committee of Ministers.
2.	In respect of any acceding State, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of deposit of the instrument of accession with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Article 77 – Territorial application

1.	Any State or the European Union may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, specify the territory or territories to which this Convention shall apply.
2.	Any Party may, at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Convention to any other territory specified in the declaration and for whose international relations it is responsible or on whose behalf it is authorised to give undertakings. In respect of such territory, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such declaration by the Secretary General.
3.	Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.

Article 78 – Reservations

1.	No reservation may be made in respect of any provision of this Convention, with the exceptions provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3.
2.	Any State or the European Union may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, declare that it reserves the right not to apply or to apply only in specific cases or conditions the provisions laid down in:

Article 30, paragraph 2;

Article 44, paragraphs 1.e, 3 and 4;

Article 55

, paragraph 1 in respect of Article 35 regarding minor offences; Article 58 in respect of Articles 37, 38 and 39;

Article 59

3.	Any State or the European Union may, at the time of signature or when

depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, declare that it reserves the right to provide for non-criminal sanctions, instead of criminal sanctions, for the behaviours referred to in Articles 33 and 34.
4.	Any Party may wholly or partly withdraw a reservation by means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. This declaration shall become effective as from its date of receipt by the Secretary General.

Article 79 – Validity and review of reservations

1.	Reservations referred to in Article 78, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall be valid for a period of five years from the day of the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the Party concerned. However, such reservations may be renewed for periods of the same duration.
2.	Eighteen months before the date of expiry of the reservation, the Secretariat General of the Council of Europe shall give notice of that expiry to the Party concerned. No later than three months before the expiry, the Party shall notify the Secretary General that it is upholding, amending or withdrawing its reservation. In the absence of a notification by the Party concerned, the Secretariat General shall inform that Party that its reservation is considered to have been extended automatically for a period of six months. Failure by the Party concerned to notify its intention to uphold or modify its reservation before the expiry of that period shall cause the reservation to lapse.
3.	If a Party makes a reservation in conformity with Article 78, paragraphs 2 and 3, it shall provide, before its renewal or upon request, an explanation to GREVIO, on the grounds justifying its continuance.

Article 80 – Denunciation

1.	Any Party may, at any time, denounce this Convention by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
2.	Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.

Article 81 – Notification

The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe, the non-member States which have participated in its elaboration, any signatory, any Party, the European Union, and any State invited to accede to this Convention of:
a	any signature;
b	the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;

c	any date of entry into force of this Convention in accordance with Articles 75 and 76;
d	any amendment adopted in accordance with Article 72 and the date on which such an amendment enters into force;
e	any reservation and withdrawal of reservation made in pursuance of Article 78;
f	any denunciation made in pursuance of the provisions of Article
80;
g	any other Act, notification or communication relating to this
Convention.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Convention.
Done at Istanbul, this 11th day of May 2011, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe, to the non-member States which have participated in the elaboration of this Convention, to the European Union and to any State invited to accede to this Convention.
