TITLE 26 - FAMILY 26 MIRC Ch.9

TITLE 26 - FAMILY	26 MIRC Ch.9

CHAPTER 9.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Arrangement of Sections

Section
PART I - PRELIMINARY
§901. Short title.
§902. Purpose.
§903. Definition.
PART II - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
§904. Domestic Violence Offenses.
§905. Domestic Violence Penalties.
PART III - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROTECTION ORDER
Division 1 - Power of Court to Grant Protection Order.
§906. Power of Court to Grant Protection Order.
§907. Condition of a Protection Order: General.
§908. Conditions of a Protection Order: Specific.
Division 2 - Temporary Protection Order.
§909. Temporary Protection Order.
§910. Further Hearing by Court.
Division 3 - Judicial Separation Orders and Domestic Relation Orders.
§911. Judicial Separation Order.
Division 4 - Application for Protection Order.
§912. Who Can Apply for Protection Order.
§913. Application to Court for Protection Order.
Division 5 - Offenses and Restitution.
§914. Breach to Protection Order.
§915. Restitution.
PART IV- PROCEDURAL MATTERS RELATING TO PROTECTION ORDER.
Division 1 - Application and Service.
§916. Absent Respondent.
§917. Service of Application and Issue of Summon or Warrant.
§918. Service of Protection Order.
Division 2 - Evidence and Burden of Proof.
§919. Evidence.
§920. Spouse may give Evidence.

PART V - MISCELLANEOUS
§921. Variation and Revocation of Orders.
§922. Consent Order.
§923. Collaborative Reporting.
§924. No-drop policy.
§925. Emergency Assistance.
§926. Domestic Violence Protection and Prevention Fund.
§927. Central Data Collection, Monitoring, Reporting, etc.
§928. Effective Date.

An Act to prevent domestic violence, protect complainants or survivors of domestic violence; to ensure investigation, prosecution and punishment of perpetrators of domestic violence; to provide treatment, rehabilitation of survivors and perpetrators, and other related matters.

26 MIRC Ch.9	CHAPTER 9 - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Commencement:	September 29, 2011
Source:	P.L. 2011-60

PART I - PRELIMINARY MATTERS

§901. Short title

This Chapter may be cited as the Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Act, 2011.

§902. Purpose

The purposes of this Chapter are:
(1)	to prevent violence between family members and others who are in domestic relationships;
(2)	to recognize that domestic violence of any kind is not acceptable in the Republic;
(3)	to ensure investigation, prosecution and punishment or persons who commit domestic violence;
(4)	to provide support for complainants/survivors.

§903. Definition

In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a)	"assault" has the same meaning as an offence defined under the Criminal Code.
(b)	"applicant" means:
(i)	the person completing the application for a protection order on his or her behalf;
(ii)	a person on whose behalf an application for a protection is made;
(iii)	any other person who can apply for a protection order under section 912 of this Act
(c)	"care and custody" means a person who expressly or implicitly has, or under the circumstances should have had, physical custody or care of a child at the time;
(d)	"child" means an individual or person under the age of 18;
(e)	"complainant" means the person who is sought to be protected by a protection order, or temporary protection order under this Chapter;
(f)	"court" means any Community Court, District Court and High Court of the Marshall Islands;
(g)	"community court" means court which have local and community jurisdiction as described in Part V of the Judiciary Act 1983;
(h)	"domestic violence" has the meaning given by section 904 of this Chapter;
(i)	"economic abuse" includes:
(i)	denying a spouse or partner access to joint finances;
(ii)	failing to pay bills, provide food, or shelter or to provide for children's needs when finance is available;
(iii)	prohibiting a spouse or partner from seeking of engaging in paid work or attending educational or training, or engage in other income generating activities.
(j)	"partner" means a person to whom the person is not married by law or custom but with whom the person is living as a couple on a genuine domestic basic, or with whom the person is in a relationship as a couple where one or each of them provides personal or financial commitment and support or a domestic nature for the material benefit of the other, irrespective of whether or not they are living under the same roof.
(k)	"protection order" means an order made under section 906 of this Chapter .
(l)	"psychological abuse" means the perpetration of malicious and explicit nonphysical acts including but not limited to"
(i)	intimidation;

TITLE 26 - FAMILY 26 MIRC Ch.9

(ii)	harassment;
(iii)	damage to property; or
(iv)	threats of physical abuse or sexual abuse
In relation to children, including, causing or allowing a child to see or hear physical, sexual or emotional abuse of a person with whom the child has a domestic relationship;
(m)	"family member" means a partner, or a member of a person's family including spouse, child, parent, grandparent, sibling, uncle, aunt, brother-in-law or sister-in-law, or uncle-in-law or nephew, niece or cousin; any other person who is treated by the person as a family member or a member of a same household including by customary adoption;
(n)	"respondent" means the person against whom a domestic violence prevention order is

sought;

(o)	"spouse of a person" means an individual who"
(i)	is or has been married to the person under law or custom; or
(ii)	is a biological parent of a child with the person (whether or not they are or have been married or are living or have lived together).
(p)	"sexual assault" has the same meaning under the Criminal Code of the Republic of the

Marshall Islands;
(q)	"stalking" means the pursuit of somebody with the intend of intimidating "pursue" in relation to a person, includes:
(a)	to repeatedly communicate with the person, whether directly or indirectly and whether in words or otherwise;
(b)	to repeatedly follow the person;
(c)	to prevent the person from doing an act that the person is lawfully entitled to do, or to hinder the person in doing such an act
(d)	to compel the person to do an act that the person is lawfully entitled to abstain from doing.
(r)	"temporary protection order" means an order issued by the Community Court under section 909 of this Chapter .

PART II - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE OFFENSE AND PENALTIES

§904. Domestic violence offenses

(1)	Any person who:
(a)	assaults a family member;
(b)	psychologically abuses or intimidates a family member;
(c)	sexually assaults a family member;
(d)	economically abuses a family member;
(e)	continuously and unlawfully restrains the freedom of movement of a family member;
(f)	stalks a family member;
(g)	unlawfully behaves in an indecent manner to a family member;
(h)	unlawfully damages or causes damage to a family member's property, commits an act of domestic violence.
(2)	Any person who counsels or procures another ro commit any of the acts under subsection
(1) commits an act of domestic violence.
(3)	Any person who threatens to commit any of the acts under subsection (1) commits an act of domestic violence.

§905. Domestic Violence Penalties

(1)	Any person who commits domestic violence pursuant to section 904 (1) is liable to 6 months imprisonment or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both for the first offense, or liable to 2 years imprisonment or $2,000 fine for a second or subsequent offense.
(2)	Any person who counsels or procures another person to commit domestic violence pursuant to section 904 (2) is guilty of an offense and is liable to 6 months imprisonment or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both.

26 MIRC Ch.9	CHAPTER 9 - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

PART III - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROTECTION ORDER

Division 1 - Power of court to grant protection order

§906. Poder del tribunal para otorgar una orden de protección

(1)	Un tribunal puede, mediante solicitud presentada conforme al artículo 912, otorgar una orden de protección contra un demandado si el tribunal está convencido según el balance de probabilidades de que:
(a)	el demandado ha cometido un acto de violencia doméstica contra el denunciante; o
(b)	es probable que el demandado cometa un acto de violencia doméstica contra el denunciante; o
(2)	Al decidir si otorga una orden de protección, el tribunal deberá tomar en cuenta lo siguiente:
(a)	todas las medidas necesarias para asegurar que el denunciante y cualquier niño, así como otros miembros de la familia estén protegidos;
(b)	el bienestar y las necesidades de alojamiento del denunciante y los niños, así como otros miembros de la familia estén asegurados;
(c)	cualquier otro asunto que el tribunal considere relevante y significativo.

§907

Condición de una orden de protección: General
(1)	si un tribunal otorga una orden de protección, debe incluir que:
(a)	el demandado debe tener buen comportamiento hacia el denunciante y cualquier persona nombrada en la orden; y
(b)	el demandado no debe cometer un acto de violencia doméstica.
(2)	el tribunal puede imponer otras condiciones al demandado de conformidad con el artículo 908 si lo considera necesario en las circunstancias, y o deseable en interés del denunciante o cualquier otro miembro de la familia.

§908

Condiciones de una orden de protección: Específicas
Un tribunal puede incluir todas o cualquiera de las siguientes condiciones específicas en una orden de protección:
(1)	Condiciones relativas a la protección individual y las relaciones familiares armoniosas.
(a)	prohibir al demandado o denunciante acercarse a una cierta distancia el uno del otro;
(b)	prohibir al demandado o denunciante acercarse a una cierta distancia el uno del otro mientras esté bajo la influencia del alcohol, otras formas de drogas o drogas sin receta;
(c)	prohibir al demandado o denunciante estar en o dentro de una distancia especificada de locales especificados, aunque el demandado tenga un interés legal o equitativo en los locales;
(d)	prohibir al demandado o denunciante comunicarse entre sí por cualquier medio incluyendo teléfono o electrónicamente;
(e)	prohibir al demandado o denunciante hacer que otra persona participe en la conducta referida en los párrafos (a) a (e).
(2)	Condiciones relativas a armas:
(a)	prohibir al demandado poseer cualquier arma;
(b)	ordenar que el demandado se deshaga de cualquier arma o que sea confiscada a la policía para su eliminación por un oficial de policía de conformidad con la orden.
(3)	Condiciones relativas a la propiedad:
(a)	prohibir al demandado dañar o tomar propiedad del denunciante o propiedad de propiedad conjunta del denunciante;

(b)	ordenar al demandado:
(i)	devolver cualquier propiedad personal especificada del denunciante; o
(ii)	permitir al denunciante recuperar, tener acceso o hacer uso de cualquier propiedad personal especificada
(c)	otorgar al denunciante ocupación exclusiva de una residencia o parte especificada de una residencia ya sea o no que la residencia sea de propiedad exclusiva o arrendada por el demandado;
(d)	ordenar al denunciante devolver propiedad personal especificada al demandado.
(4)	Condiciones relativas a asesoramiento y o mediación:
(a)	ordenar a una o ambas partes asistir a asesoramiento; o
(b)	ordenar mediación; o
(c)	recomendar asesoramiento y mediación; o tratamiento, rehabilitación y recuperación.
Division 2 - Orden de Protección Temporal

§909. Orden de Protección Temporal

(1)	Un Tribunal Comunitario, de Distrito o Superior puede, mediante solicitud presentada conforme al artículo 912, otorgar una orden de protección temporal si el tribunal está convencido de que:
(a)	el denunciante o un niño bajo su cuidado y custodia está en peligro de un acto de violencia doméstica; y
(b)	debido a la distancia, el tiempo u otras circunstancias del caso, no es práctico solicitar a un tribunal.
(3)	Un Tribunal puede otorgar una orden de protección temporal ya sea o no que el demandado o denunciante esté en el tribunal. Si el demandado o denunciante no puede asistir o comparecer, el tribunal puede aceptar declaración jurada u oír cualquier evidencia en nombre del denunciante.
(4)	Una orden de protección temporal hecha bajo este artículo permanecerá en vigor por no más de 28 días, y puede ser renovada mediante solicitud del denunciante o por consentimiento de las partes por un período adicional de 28 días. Una orden de protección temporal puede permanecer en efecto de conformidad con el artículo 910(2)(c).

§910. Audiencia adicional por un Tribunal

(1)	Si una orden de protección temporal es otorgada por un Tribunal de conformidad con el artículo 909(3), el tribunal deberá emitir una citación para que el demandado comparezca en una fecha especificada antes de la expiración de la orden de protección temporal para una audiencia adicional.
(2)	En una audiencia adicional, un Tribunal puede confirmar:
(a)	hacer permanente la orden de protección temporal;
(b)	revocar la orden de protección temporal permanente;
(c)	continuar la audiencia y ordenar que la orden de protección temporal permanezca hasta la finalización de la próxima audiencia.
(d)	variar la orden de protección temporal.
Division 3 - Órdenes de Separación Judicial y otras Órdenes de Relaciones Domésticas.

§911. Orden de Separación Judicial

(1)	Un tribunal puede, mediante solicitud del solicitante, otorgar una orden de separación judicial, basándose en las circunstancias del caso y, en cualquier fundamento sobre el cual una petición de divorcio pueda haber sido presentada bajo las disposiciones y procedimientos de la Ley de Relaciones Domésticas, 26 MIRC Cap.1.
(2)	Cuando el tribunal otorga una orden de separación de conformidad con este artículo, ya no será obligatorio para las partes cohabitar entre sí.
(3)	En la solicitud de orden de separación judicial, el tribunal puede otorgar otras órdenes relativas a la custodia de y acceso a los niños, manutención del denunciante, apoyo financiero para los niños, ocupación de y distribución de propiedad real y personal.
Division 4 - Solicitud de Órdenes de Protección.

§912. ¿Quién puede solicitar una Orden de Protección?

Una solicitud de Orden de Protección puede ser hecha por:

TITLE 26 - FAMILY 26 MIRC Ch.9

(a)	el denunciante; o
(b)	otro miembro de la familia o un amigo del denunciante si, el denunciante ha dado su consentimiento oral o escrito para que ese amigo haga la solicitud;
(c)	un profesional legal calificado en nombre del denunciante; o
(d)	cualquier oficial de policía nacional o local en nombre del denunciante; o
(e)	cualquier fiscal del gobierno nacional o local; o
(f)	cualquier defensor o consejero o trabajador social de cualquier centro de crisis o rehabilitación.

§913. Solicitud a un tribunal de Orden de Protección

(1)	Una solicitud a un tribunal de una orden de protección puede hacerse oralmente, por teléfono o por radio, por escrito, por facsímil, télex o correo electrónico, o cualquier otro modo según lo requieran las reglas y procedimientos del tribunal.
(2)	Si la solicitud se hace en forma no escrita, el tribunal debe reducir la solicitud a escrito.
(3)	Una solicitud de orden de protección temporal deberá hacerse como parte de la solicitud y debe declarar los fundamentos para la solicitud de la orden de protección temporal.
(4)	En el caso de orden de protección temporal, una solicitud puede hacerse ex parte.
(5)	Cuando sea posible la evidencia que respalde la solicitud debe tomarse bajo juramento.
Division 5 - Delito y restitución.

§914. Incumplimiento de orden de protección

Una persona que incumple la orden de protección comete un delito y será, tras condena, sancionada con un término de prisión de 6 meses o una multa de $1,000 o ambos.

§915. Restitution

(1)	A court may make an order that the respondent pay restitution to the complainant if he or she as a result of an act of domestic violence suffered:
(a)	personal injury; or
(b)	damage to property; or
(c)	financial loss.
(2)	The court may take into account the following, in making an order for restitution to a complainant:

or damaged;

(a)	any pain and suffering;
(b)	any physical or mental injury;
(c)	cost of any medical treatment incurred;
(d)	any loss of earnings;
(e)	the value of any property that has been taken, destroyed
(f)	any necessary and reasonable expenses incurred as a result of separation which

results from the act of the domestic violence, including:
(i)	accommodation expenses; and
(ii)	moving and transport expenses; and
(iii)	expenses of setting up a separate household, including housing loan repayments or rent for as long as the court considers reasonably necessary.

PART 4 - PROCEDURAL MATTERS RELATING TO PROTECTION ORDER

Division 1. Application and service.

§916. Absent respondent

(1)	Subject to subsection (2), a court may proceed to hear and determine an application for a protection order if the respondent is not present.
(2)	The court must be satisfied that:
(a)	the respondent has been served with a summons to appear at the hearing;

TITLE 26 - FAMILY 26 MIRC Ch.9

(b)	the respondent is required to appear at the hearing;
(c)	having regard to the circumstances of the case, all reasonable efforts have been made to give the respondent notice of the hearing.

§917. Service of application and issue of summon or warrant

On application made to a court under section 912 for a protection order, whether or not an application for temporary protection order is made the court shall issue a summon directing the respondent to appear at the time and place set out in the summon.

§918. Service of Protection Orders

(1)	If a Protection Order or a Temporary Protection Order is made by a court, the court must:
(a)	explain the order to the complainant and the respondent in the language that he or she understands;
(b)	cause a copy of the order to be served personally on the complainant and on the respondent; and
(c)	in the absence, cause a copy of the order to be given or forwarded to the police officer in charge to serve on the complainant or respondent, or to use alternative forms of service including radio.
Division 2. - Evidence and burden of proof.

§919. Evidence

The Rules of Evidence contained in the Evidence Act, 28 MIRC Ch. 1, do not apply to an application for a protection order or temporary protection order.

§920. Spouse may give evidence

If a person is charged with an offense under this Chapter , respondent's spouse is a competent but not a compellable witness in any legal proceedings in connection with the offense.

PART 5 - MISCELLANEOUS

§921. Variation and revocation of orders

(1)	A court may vary or revoke a protection order upon application by any person whom the order applies.
(2)	Before the court varies or revokes a protection order, it must:
(a)	in the case of protection order, have regard to conditions in section 907 and 908;
(b)	in the case of temporary protection order, consider whether the complainant is in danger of person injury.

§922. Consent orders

On application for protection order, a court may grant protection order with the consent of the complainant and the respondent.

§923. Collaborative Reporting

(1)	Notwithstanding any other law or procedures concerning confidentiality to the contrary, any person, who in their professional or official capacity, have reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has occurred to a person or a child, or there is evidence to believe that such person is at risk to domestic violence, shall immediately report the matter to a Police, or bring the matter before the court pursuant to section 912.
(2)	For the purposes of this section, "person in their professional or official capacity" includes:
(a)	licensed or registered health or medical professionals including medical examiners or coroners, counselors, social workers or case managers;
(b)	employee or officers of public or private schools;

26 MIRC Ch.9	CHAPTER 9 - DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

(c)	employee or officers of law enforcement agencies or institutions;
(d)	employee or officers of any public or private agency providing recreational, sports activities or spiritual welfare including churches.

§924. No-drop policy

(1)	A police officer upon receiving reports of domestic violence cases shall immediately investigate and press charges if appropriate.
(2)	A prosecutor shall proceed with the case in court, before proceeding however, the prosecutor must:
(a)	believe that an act domestic violence has been committed;
(b)	have sufficient evidence to proceed with the case.

§925. Emergency assistance

(1)	Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a local or national police officer from rendering assistance to any person who alleges that he or a minor child has been the victim or survivor of domestic violence.
(2)	The local or national police officer responding to the request for assistance shall as soon as practicable and acting within the law take whatever steps are reasonably necessary to protect the complaint or survivor from harm, and may advice the complainant of the sources of shelter, medical care, counseling and other services.

§926. Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Fund

(1)	A Domestic Violence Prevention and Protection Fund is hereby established. The Fund shall be a fund within the National Treasury and under the control and supervision of the Ministry of Finance, which shall provide for its administration in accordance with the Financial Management Act of 1990.
(2)	All fines imposed and collected under this Chapter , and funds appropriated by the Nitijela for the purpose of the Fund, or any grants and gifts received for the purpose of the fund shall be deposited into the Fund.
(3)	The Secretary of Internal Affairs shall make requests for withdrawn of funds to assist domestic violence center or safe house for women and children, community education program, counseling program, transportation services and call forwarding during the night or any other services in accordance with the purpose for which the fund in created.
(4)	The fund shall be subject to audit by Auditor General as provided under Article VIII, section 15 of the Constitution.

§927. Central data collection, monitoring, reporting etc

The Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs shall be responsible for:
(a)	collection and maintaining data of reported domestic violence cases;
(b)	monitoring, evaluating and providing surveillance to domestic violence vases;
(c)	reporting and providing necessary activities relating to domestic violence cases.

§928. Effective date

This Chapter shall take effect on the date of certification in accordance with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedures of the Nitijela.
