CRIMINAL CODE of Montenegro | Paragraf Lex

CRIMINAL CODE of Montenegro | Paragraf Lex
Dear visitors,
the site will no longer be updated due to the decision of Paragraf Lex company to temporarily withdraw from the Montenegrin market.
All regulations on the site as well as other information are updated as of 31.3.2021.
|
HOME
FREE
Regulations of Montenegro
Register of official gazettes
Non-working days in Montenegro
CONTACT
LOG IN
FREE
|
Regulations of Montenegro
/
Register of official gazettes
/
Non-working days of Montenegro
THIS REGULATION IS CURRENT AS OF 31.3.2021.
CRIMINAL CODE OF MONTENEGRO
("Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro", No. 70/2003, 13/2004 - corr. and 47/2006 and "Official Gazette of Montenegro", No. 40/2008, 25/2010, 32/2011, 64/2011 - other law, 40/2013, 56/2013 - corr., 14/2015, 42/2015, 58/2015 - other law, 44/2017, 49/2018 and 3/2020)
GENERAL PART
CHAPTER ONE
BASIC PROVISIONS
Basis and limits of criminal law coercion

Article 1

The protection of human beings and other fundamental social values constitutes the basis and limits for defining criminal offences, prescribing criminal sanctions and their application, to the extent necessary for the suppression of such offences.
Legality in defining criminal offences and prescribing criminal sanctions

Article 2

A penalty or other criminal sanction may be imposed only for an act which, before it was committed, was defined by law as a criminal offence and for which a penalty was prescribed by law.
No punishment without guilt

Article 3

A penalty and warning measures may be imposed only on a perpetrator who is guilty of the committed criminal offence.
Criminal sanctions and their general purpose

Article 4

(1) Criminal sanctions are: penalties, warning measures, security measures and educational measures.
(2) The general purpose of prescribing and imposing criminal sanctions is the suppression of acts which violate or endanger values protected by criminal legislation.
CHAPTER TWO
CRIMINAL OFFENCE
1. General provisions on criminal offence
Criminal offence

Article 5

A criminal offence is an act which is defined by law as a criminal offence, which is unlawful and which is committed with guilt.
Manner of commission of criminal offence

Article 6

(1) A criminal offence may be committed by action or omission.
(2) A criminal offence is committed by omission when the perpetrator has failed to perform an action which he was obliged to perform.
(3) A criminal offence which is not defined by law as an omission may also be committed by omission if the perpetrator by omitting the obligatory action has fulfilled the elements of the criminal offence.
Time of commission of criminal offence

Article 7

(1) A criminal offence is committed at the time when the perpetrator acted or was obliged to act, regardless of when the consequence of the act occurred.
(2) An accomplice is considered to have committed the criminal offence at the time when he acted or was obliged to act.
Place of commission of criminal offence

Article 8

(1) A criminal offence is committed in the place where the perpetrator acted and was obliged to act or where the consequence of the act occurred in whole or in part, and in the case of an attempt also where the consequence of the attempted act according to his intention should have or could have occurred.
(2) An accomplice is considered to have committed the act also in the place where he undertook the act of complicity.
Act of minor significance

Article 9

(deleted)
Necessary defence

Article 10

(1) An act committed in necessary defence is not a criminal offence.
(2) Necessary defence is that defence which is necessarily required for the perpetrator to repel from his own property or the property of another a simultaneous or immediately imminent unlawful attack.
(3) A perpetrator who has exceeded the limits of necessary defence may be punished more leniently, and if the excess was committed due to strong agitation or fright caused by the attack, he may also be exempted from punishment.
Extreme necessity

Article 11

(1) An act committed in extreme necessity is not a criminal offence.
(2) Extreme necessity exists when an act is committed in order for the perpetrator to avert from his own property or the property of another a simultaneous or immediately imminent danger not caused by fault which could not be averted in another way, provided that the harm caused is not greater than the harm which was threatened.
(3) A perpetrator who himself caused the danger, but through negligence, or who exceeded the limits of extreme necessity, may be punished more leniently, and if the excess was committed under particularly mitigating circumstances, he may also be exempted from punishment.
(4) There is no extreme necessity if the perpetrator was obliged to expose himself to the danger which was threatened.
Force and threat

Article 12

(1) An act committed under the influence of absolute force is not a criminal offence.
(2) If an act is committed in order for the perpetrator to avert from his own property or the property of another a danger which arose due to force which is not absolute or due to threat, the provisions of Article 11 of this Code shall be applied to the perpetrator, considering the force or threat as danger not caused by fault.
(3) If a criminal offence is committed under the influence of force or threat, and the conditions from paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article are not met, the perpetrator may be punished more leniently, and if the act was committed under particularly mitigating circumstances, he may also be exempted from punishment.
(4) In the cases from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, if the person to whom force or threat was applied is not considered the perpetrator of the criminal offence, the person who applied the force or threat shall be considered the perpetrator of the criminal offence.
Guilt

Article 13

(1) A perpetrator is guilty of a criminal offence if he is accountable and if he acted with intent, and was aware or was obliged and could have been aware that his act is prohibited.
(2) For a criminal offence committed through negligence, the perpetrator may be guilty only when the law so provides.
Accountability

Article 14

(1) A perpetrator is not accountable if at the time of commission of the unlawful act defined in the law as a criminal offence he was unable to comprehend the significance of his act or was unable to control his actions due to mental illness, temporary mental disturbance, retarded mental development or other serious mental disturbance (non-accountability).
(2) A perpetrator of a criminal offence whose ability to comprehend the significance of his act or ability to control his actions was substantially diminished due to any condition from paragraph 1 of this Article (substantially diminished accountability) may be punished more leniently.
(3) The guilt of a perpetrator of a criminal offence who by the use of alcohol, drugs or in another way brought himself into a state in which he was unable to comprehend the significance of his act or to control his actions is determined according to the time immediately before bringing himself into such a state.
(4) A perpetrator who under the circumstances from paragraph 3 of this Article committed a criminal offence in a state of substantially diminished accountability may not have his punishment mitigated.
Intent

Article 15

A criminal offence is committed with intent when the perpetrator was aware of his act and wanted its commission or when the perpetrator was aware that he could commit the act and consented to it.
Negligence

Article 16

A criminal offence is committed through negligence when the perpetrator was aware that by his action he could commit the act, but recklessly believed that it would not occur or that he would be able to prevent it, or when he was not aware that by his action he could commit the act although according to the circumstances under which it was committed and according to his personal characteristics he was obliged and could have been aware of that possibility.
Liability for graver consequence

Article 17

When a graver consequence has resulted from a criminal offence for which the law prescribes a more severe penalty for that act, that penalty may be imposed if the perpetrator acted through negligence in relation to that consequence, and also with intent if this does not constitute the elements of another criminal offence.
Factual error

Article 18

(1) An act committed in unavoidable factual error is not a criminal offence.
(2) Unavoidable factual error exists if the perpetrator was not obliged and could not have avoided the error regarding any factual circumstance which constitutes an element of the criminal offence or regarding any factual circumstance which, if it had actually existed, would have made the act permissible.
(3) If the perpetrator was in factual error due to negligence, there shall be a criminal offence committed through negligence when this is prescribed by law.
Legal error

Article 19

(1) An act committed under unavoidable mistake of law is not a criminal offense.
(2) An unavoidable mistake of law exists if the perpetrator was not obliged and could not have known that the act he committed was prohibited.
(3) The punishment may be mitigated for a perpetrator who did not know that the act was prohibited, but was obliged and could have known.
2. Attempt of a criminal offense and voluntary abandonment
Attempt

Article 20

(1) Whoever intentionally commences the commission of a criminal offense but does not complete it shall be punished for an attempt of a criminal offense for which a sentence of imprisonment of five years or a more severe sentence may be imposed by law, and for an attempt of another criminal offense only when the law expressly prescribes punishment for the attempt as well.
(2) The use of a particular means or application of a particular manner of commission shall also be considered as commencement of commission of a criminal offense, if they are determined by law as elements of the criminal offense.
(3) The perpetrator shall be punished for the attempt with the sentence prescribed for the criminal offense, and may also be punished more leniently.
Impossible attempt

Article 21

A perpetrator who attempts to commit a criminal offense by an impossible means or against an impossible object may be released from punishment.
Voluntary abandonment

Article 22

(1) A perpetrator who attempted the commission of a criminal offense but voluntarily abandoned its commission may be released from punishment.
(2) In case of voluntary abandonment, the perpetrator shall be punished for those acts which constitute some other independent criminal offense, which is not encompassed by the criminal offense from the commission of which the perpetrator abandoned.
3. Complicity in a criminal offense
Perpetration and co-perpetration

Article 23

(1) The perpetrator of a criminal offense is a person who undertakes the act of commission of a criminal offense or who commits a criminal offense through another person, provided that this other person cannot be considered a perpetrator of the criminal offense.
(2) If several persons, by participating in the act of commission intentionally or negligently, jointly commit a criminal offense, or by implementing a joint decision by another act intentionally substantially contribute to the commission of the criminal offense, each of them shall be punished with the sentence prescribed for that offense.
Instigation

Article 24

(1) Whoever intentionally instigates another to commit a criminal offense shall be punished as if he committed it himself.
(2) Whoever intentionally instigates another to commit a criminal offense for which a sentence of imprisonment of five years or a more severe sentence may be imposed by law, and the offense is not even attempted, shall be punished as for an attempt of a criminal offense.
Aiding and abetting

Article 25

(1) Whoever intentionally aids another in the commission of a criminal offense shall be punished as if he committed it himself, and may also be punished more leniently.
(2) Aiding and abetting in the commission of a criminal offense shall be considered in particular: giving advice or instructions on how to commit a criminal offense, placing at the perpetrator's disposal means for the commission of the criminal offense, creating conditions or removing obstacles for the commission of the criminal offense, as well as concealment promised in advance of the criminal offense, the perpetrator, the means by which the criminal offense was committed, traces of the criminal offense or objects obtained by the criminal offense.
Limits of responsibility and punishability of accomplices

Article 26

(1) A co-perpetrator is responsible within the limits of his intent or negligence, and an instigator and aider and abettor within the limits of his intent.
(2) A co-perpetrator, instigator or aider and abettor who voluntarily prevented the commission of the criminal offense may be released from punishment.
(3) Personal relations, characteristics and circumstances due to which the law excludes guilt or allows release from punishment, on which the existence of a lighter or more severe form of the offense depends or which affect the sentencing, may be taken into account only for that perpetrator, co-perpetrator, instigator or aider and abettor in whom such relations, characteristics and circumstances exist.
Punishment of instigator and aider and abettor for attempt and lighter criminal offense

Article 27

(1) If the criminal offense remained at the attempt stage, the instigator and aider and abettor shall be punished for the attempt.
(2) If the perpetrator committed a lighter criminal offense than the one to which the instigation or aiding and abetting relates, and which would be encompassed by it, the instigator and aider and abettor shall be punished for the criminal offense that was committed.
(3) The provision of paragraph 2 of this Article shall not be applied if the instigator would be punished more severely by application of Article 24 paragraph 2 of this Code.
4. Special provisions on responsibility for criminal offenses committed through the media
Responsibility of the editor

Article 28

(1) For criminal offenses committed through the media, the editor, that is, the person who replaced him at the time of publication of the information, is responsible if:
1) the author remained unknown until the completion of the main hearing before the first instance court;
2) the information was published without the consent of the author;
3) at the time of publication of the information there existed factual or legal obstacles to the prosecution of the author, which still persist.
(2) The editor, that is, the person replacing him, is not responsible if for justified reasons he did not know of any of the circumstances specified in paragraph 1 items 1 to 3 of this Article.
Responsibility of the publisher, printer and producer

Article 29

(1) When the conditions from Article 28 of this Code exist, the following are responsible:
1) the publisher - for a criminal offense committed through a non-periodic printed publication, and if there is no publisher or there exist factual or legal obstacles to his prosecution - the printer who knew of this;
2) the producer - for a criminal offense committed through a compact disc, gramophone record, magnetic tape and other auditory means, film for public and private showing, slides, video means or similar means intended for a wider circle of persons.
(2) If the publisher, printer or producer is a legal entity or state body, the person responsible for publishing, printing or production is responsible.
Application of provisions from Articles 28 and 29

Article 30

The provisions on the responsibility of persons from Articles 28 and 29 of this Code shall be applied only if these persons under the general provisions of this Code cannot be considered a perpetrator of a criminal offense.
5. Responsibility of legal entities for a criminal offense

Article 31

(1) The responsibility of legal entities for criminal offenses, as well as sanctions for them, shall be provided by law.
(2)
(deleted)
CHAPTER THREE
PUNISHMENTS
1. Purpose of punishment, types of punishments and conditions for their imposition
Purpose of punishment

Article 32

Within the general purpose of criminal sanctions (

Article 4 paragraph 2) , the purpose of punishment is

1) preventing the perpetrator from committing criminal offenses and influencing him not to commit criminal offenses in the future;
2) influencing others not to commit criminal offenses;
3) expressing social condemnation for the criminal offense and the obligation to respect the law;
4) strengthening morals and influencing the development of social responsibility.
Types of punishments

Article 33

The following punishments may be imposed on the perpetrator of a criminal offense:
1) sentence of long-term imprisonment;
2) sentence of imprisonment;
3) fine;
4) community service.
Principal and accessory punishments

Article 34

(1) The sentence of long-term imprisonment, sentence of imprisonment and community service may be imposed only as principal punishments.
(2) A fine may be imposed both as a principal and as an accessory punishment.
(3) If several punishments are prescribed for one criminal offense, only one may be imposed as a principal punishment.
Sentence of long-term imprisonment

Article 35

(1) The sentence of long-term imprisonment may not be shorter than thirty nor longer than forty years.
(2) The sentence of long-term imprisonment may be prescribed for the most serious criminal offenses, whereby it may not be prescribed as the only punishment for a particular criminal offense.
(3) The sentence of long-term imprisonment may not be imposed on:
1) a person who at the time of commission of the criminal offense had not reached twenty-one years of age;
2) a person whose accountability at the time of commission of the criminal offense was substantially diminished (

Article 14 paragraph 2);

3) for an attempt of a criminal offense.
Sentence of imprisonment

Article 36

(1) Imprisonment may not be shorter than thirty days nor longer than twenty years.
(2) Imprisonment from paragraph 1 of this article shall be imposed in full years and months, and up to six months also in days.
Imprisonment Served in Residential Premises
Article 36a
(1) If the court imposes a sentence of imprisonment of up to six months on the perpetrator of a criminal offense, the court may simultaneously order that this sentence shall be served by the convicted person serving it in the premises where he resides, if, having regard to the personality of the perpetrator, his previous life, his conduct after the commission of the offense, the degree of guilt and other circumstances under which the offense was committed, it can be expected that the purpose of punishment will be achieved in this manner as well.
(2) A convicted person who has been ordered to serve imprisonment in the manner referred to in paragraph 1 of this article may not leave the premises where he resides, except in cases prescribed by the law governing the execution of criminal sanctions. If the convicted person arbitrarily leaves the premises where he resides once for a duration exceeding six hours or twice for a duration of up to six hours, the court shall order that the remainder of the imprisonment sentence be served in the Institution for Execution of Criminal Sanctions.
(3) A convicted person for a criminal offense against marriage and family who lives with the injured party in the same family household or family community may not be ordered to serve imprisonment in the manner referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
Conditional Release

Article 37

(1) The court may conditionally release from serving a sentence of imprisonment or a sentence of long-term imprisonment a convicted person who has served two-thirds, and exceptionally one-half of the sentence of imprisonment or the sentence of long-term imprisonment, if during the serving of the sentence he has reformed to such an extent that it can be reasonably expected that he will behave well at liberty, and in particular that he will not commit a new criminal offense until the expiration of the time for which the sentence was imposed. In assessing whether the convicted person will be conditionally released, consideration shall be given to whether the convicted person behaved well and performed work duties according to his work capacity, and in particular whether he was disciplinarily punished during the serving of the sentence of imprisonment or the sentence of long-term imprisonment, whether he compensated for the damage caused by the criminal offense and returned the property benefit acquired by committing the criminal offense, as well as whether the purpose of punishment has been achieved.
(2) In the decision on conditional release, it may be determined that the convicted person is obliged to fulfill the obligation established by law.
(3) In the case referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, if the conditional release is not revoked, it shall be considered that the convicted person has served the sentence.
Revocation of Conditional Release

Article 38

(1) The court shall revoke conditional release if the convicted person, while on conditional release, commits one or more criminal offenses for which a sentence of imprisonment exceeding one year has been imposed, or if the convicted person does not fulfill any obligation imposed on him on the basis of law.
(2) The court may revoke conditional release if the conditionally released person commits one or more criminal offenses for which a sentence of imprisonment of up to one year has been imposed. In assessing whether to revoke conditional release, the court shall particularly take into account the similarity of the criminal offenses committed, the motives from which they were committed and other circumstances indicating the justification for revoking conditional release.
(3) The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article shall also apply when the conditionally released person is tried for a criminal offense committed before he was conditionally released.
(4) When the court revokes conditional release, it shall impose a sentence by applying the provisions of Articles 48 and 50 paragraph 2 of this Code, taking the previously imposed sentence as already established. The part of the sentence that the convicted person served under the previous conviction shall be credited toward the new sentence, and the time spent on conditional release shall not be credited.
(5) If the conditionally released person is sentenced to imprisonment of up to one year and the court does not revoke conditional release, the conditional release shall be extended for the time that the convicted person spent serving that sentence of imprisonment.
(6) In the case referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 of this article, conditional release may be revoked no later than within two years from the day the conditional release expired.
Fine

Article 39

(1) A fine may not be less than two hundred euros. A fine may not be greater than twenty thousand euros, and for criminal offenses committed out of greed greater than one hundred thousand euros.
(2) A fine as a principal punishment shall be imposed in the following amounts:
1) up to two thousand euros for criminal offenses for which imprisonment of up to three months is prescribed;
2) from four hundred to four thousand euros for criminal offenses for which imprisonment of up to six months is prescribed;
3) from six hundred to eight thousand euros for criminal offenses for which imprisonment of up to one year is prescribed;
4) from eight hundred to sixteen thousand euros for criminal offenses for which imprisonment of up to two years is prescribed;
5) at least one thousand two hundred euros for criminal offenses for which imprisonment of up to four years is prescribed;
6) at least one thousand two hundred euros for criminal offenses for which a fine is prescribed as the only punishment.
(3) For criminal offenses committed out of greed, a fine as an accessory punishment may be imposed even when it is not prescribed by law or when the law prescribes that the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment or a fine, and the court imposes imprisonment as the principal punishment.
(4) If the court establishes a fine as a principal punishment and also establishes a fine as an accessory punishment, it shall impose one fine according to the rules of Article 48 of this Code.
(5) In the judgment, the time limit for payment of the fine shall be determined, which may not be shorter than fifteen days nor longer than three months. In justified cases, the court may allow the convicted person to pay the fine in installments, provided that the payment period may not be longer than one year.
(6) If the convicted person does not pay the fine within the specified time limit, the court shall replace the fine with imprisonment, so that for every commenced twenty-five euros of the fine it shall determine one day of imprisonment, provided that imprisonment may not be longer than six months, and if a fine in an amount exceeding nine thousand euros has been imposed, imprisonment may not be longer than one year.
(7) An unpaid fine that does not exceed the amount of two thousand euros may, instead of imprisonment, be replaced with community service work with the consent of the convicted person, so that for every commenced twenty-five euros of the fine eight hours of community service work shall be determined, provided that community service work may not be longer than three hundred sixty hours.
(8) If the convicted person pays only part of the fine, the court shall proportionally replace the remainder of the sentence with imprisonment, and if the convicted person pays the remainder of the fine, the execution of the imprisonment sentence shall be suspended.
(9) After the death of the convicted person, the fine shall not be executed.
Fine in Daily Amounts

Article 40

(1) In cases where it is possible to determine the income and expenses of the perpetrator of a criminal offence, the court may impose a fine in daily amounts.
(2) The number of daily amounts may not be less than ten, nor more than three hundred and sixty days. The number of daily amounts for the committed criminal offence shall be measured on the basis of the general rules for measuring punishment from Article 42 of this Code.
(3) The amount of the daily fine shall be determined by dividing the difference between the income and necessary expenses of the perpetrator of the criminal offence in the previous calendar year by the number of days in the year, provided that one day of the fine may not be less than five euros nor more than one thousand euros.
(4) The court shall arrive at the amount of the fine by multiplying the measured number of daily amounts by the determined value of one daily amount.
(5) For the purpose of determining the value of the monetary amount, the court may request data from banks or other financial institutions, state authorities and legal entities, which are obliged to provide the requested data and may not invoke the protection of business or other secrets.
(6) If reliable data on the income and expenses of the perpetrator of the criminal offence cannot be obtained, or if he does not earn any income, the court shall determine the amount of one daily fine on the basis of available data at its free discretion.
(7) The provisions of Article 39 paragraphs 3 to 9 of this Code shall also apply in cases where the fine is imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Community service

Article 41

(1) Community service may be imposed for criminal offences for which a fine or imprisonment of up to five years is prescribed.
(2) Community service may not be less than sixty hours nor more than three hundred and sixty hours and shall be determined for a period that may not be less than thirty days, nor longer than six months.
(3) This punishment shall be imposed with the consent of the perpetrator of the criminal offence and may not be longer than sixty hours during one month.
(4) Community service is any socially useful work that does not offend human dignity and is not performed for the purpose of profit.
(5) When imposing this punishment, the court shall take into account the type of criminal offence committed, as well as the personality of the perpetrator.
(6) If the perpetrator does not perform community service, this punishment shall be replaced by imprisonment, so that every commenced sixty hours of community service shall be replaced by imprisonment for a period of one month.
2. Measuring of punishment
General rules on measuring of punishment

Article 42

(1) The court shall measure the punishment to the perpetrator of a criminal offence within the limits prescribed by law for that offence, having in mind the purpose of punishment and taking into account all circumstances that affect whether the punishment should be lesser or greater (mitigating and aggravating circumstances), and in particular: the degree of guilt, the motives from which the offence was committed, the intensity of endangerment or violation of the protected good, the circumstances under which the offence was committed, the previous life of the perpetrator, his personal circumstances, his conduct after the commission of the criminal offence, and in particular his relationship towards the victim of the criminal offence, as well as other circumstances relating to the personality of the perpetrator.
(2) When measuring a fine, the court shall particularly take into account the financial status of the perpetrator.
(3) A circumstance that is a characteristic of a criminal offence may not be taken into account as an aggravating or mitigating circumstance, except if it exceeds the measure necessary for the existence of the criminal offence or a particular form of criminal offence, or if there are two or more such circumstances, and only one is sufficient for the existence of a more serious or less serious form of criminal offence.
Special circumstance for measuring punishment for a criminal offence committed out of hatred
Article 42a
(1) If a criminal offence was committed out of hatred towards another person because of national or ethnic affiliation, affiliation to a race or religion or because of the absence of such affiliation, disability, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity, the court shall assess that circumstance as aggravating, unless it is prescribed as a characteristic of the basic or more serious form of the criminal offence.
(2) If a criminal offence was committed against a person who belongs to a particularly vulnerable category of persons (children, persons with disabilities, pregnant women, elderly persons, refugees), the court shall take that circumstance as aggravating.
Recidivism

Article 43

When the court measures punishment to a perpetrator for a criminal offence that he committed after serving, pardoning or expiry of the statute of limitations of a punishment or release from punishment, after the expiry of the period for revocation of a suspended sentence or after a judicial admonition was pronounced, it may take that circumstance as aggravating, assessing in particular the gravity of the previously committed criminal offence, whether the previous offence is of the same type as the new offence, whether both offences were committed from the same motives, the circumstances under which the offences were committed and how much time has elapsed since the previous conviction, that is, since the pronounced, pardoned or time-barred punishment, release from punishment, since the expiry of the period for revocation of the previous suspended sentence or since the pronounced judicial admonition.
Multiple recidivism

Article 44

(1) For a criminal offence committed with intent for which imprisonment is prescribed, the court may impose a more severe punishment than prescribed, under the following conditions:
1) if the perpetrator was previously convicted two or more times for criminal offences with intent to imprisonment of at least one year and shows a propensity for committing criminal offences;
2) if five years have not elapsed from the day of the perpetrator's release from serving the previously imposed punishment until the commission of the new criminal offence.
(2) The more severe punishment may not exceed double the measure of the prescribed punishment nor twenty years of imprisonment.
(3) When assessing whether to impose a punishment more severe than prescribed, the court shall particularly take into account the number of previous convictions, the relatedness of the committed criminal offences, the motives from which they were committed, the circumstances under which they were committed, as well as the need to impose such a punishment in order to achieve the purpose of punishment.
Mitigation of punishment

Article 45

The court may impose a punishment below the limit prescribed by law or a milder type of punishment on the perpetrator of a criminal offence, when:
1) the law provides that the perpetrator may be punished more leniently;
2) the law provides that the perpetrator may be released from punishment, and the court does not release him from punishment;
3) it determines that there are particularly mitigating circumstances and assesses that the purpose of punishment can be achieved even with a mitigated punishment.
Limits of mitigation of punishment

Article 46

(1) When conditions for mitigation of punishment from Article 45 of this Code exist, the court shall mitigate the punishment within these limits:
1) if imprisonment of five or more years is prescribed as the minimum measure of punishment for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to two years of imprisonment;
2) if imprisonment of three or more years is prescribed as the minimum measure of punishment for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to one year of imprisonment;
3) if imprisonment of two years is prescribed as the minimum measure of punishment for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to six months of imprisonment;
4) if imprisonment of one year is prescribed as the minimum measure of punishment for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to three months of imprisonment;
5) if imprisonment below one year is prescribed as the minimum punishment for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to thirty days of imprisonment;
6) if imprisonment is prescribed for a criminal offence without indication of the minimum measure, a fine may be imposed instead of imprisonment;
7) if a fine with indication of the minimum measure is prescribed for a criminal offence, the punishment may be mitigated to six hundred euros.
(2) When the court is authorized to release the perpetrator of a criminal offence from punishment, it may mitigate his punishment, without the restrictions prescribed for mitigation of punishment.
Release from punishment

Article 47

(1) The court may exempt the perpetrator of a criminal offence from punishment only when the law expressly provides for it.
(2) The court may also exempt from punishment the perpetrator of a criminal offence committed through negligence when the consequences of the offence affect the perpetrator so severely that imposing punishment in such a case would obviously not serve the purpose of punishment.
(3) The court may also exempt from punishment the perpetrator of a criminal offence for which imprisonment of up to five years is prescribed, if after the commission of the criminal offence, but before learning that it has been discovered, he eliminates the consequences of the offence or compensates for the damage caused by the criminal offence.
Concurrence of criminal offences

Article 48

(1) If the perpetrator has committed several criminal offences by one act or by several acts for which he is being tried simultaneously, the court shall first determine the punishments for each of those offences, and then impose a single punishment for all those offences.
(2) The court shall impose a single punishment according to the following rules:
1) if for any of the criminal offences in concurrence it has determined a sentence of long-term imprisonment, it shall impose only that sentence;
2) if for the criminal offences in concurrence it has determined sentences of imprisonment, it shall increase the most severe determined sentence, provided that the single sentence may not reach the sum of the determined sentences, nor exceed twenty years of imprisonment;
3) if for all criminal offences in concurrence sentences of imprisonment of up to three years are prescribed, the single sentence may not be greater than ten years of imprisonment;
4) if for the criminal offences in concurrence it has determined only fines, it shall impose one fine in the amount of the sum of the determined fines, provided that it may not exceed twenty thousand euros, or one hundred thousand euros when one or more criminal offences were committed out of greed, and if it has determined only fines in daily amounts, it may not exceed the amount of three hundred sixty thousand euros;
5) if for the criminal offences in concurrence it has determined only sentences of community service, it shall impose one sentence of community service in the amount of the sum of the determined hours of work, provided that it may not exceed three hundred sixty hours, and the time within which the work must be performed may not be longer than six months;
6) if for some criminal offences in concurrence it has determined sentences of imprisonment, and for other offences fines, it shall impose one sentence of imprisonment and one fine according to the provisions of items 2 to 4 of this paragraph.
(3) The court shall impose a fine as an accessory punishment if it has been determined for at least one criminal offence in concurrence, and if it has determined several fines, it shall impose one fine according to the provision of paragraph 2 item 4 of this Article.
(4) If the court has determined sentences of imprisonment and juvenile imprisonment for criminal offences in concurrence, it shall impose a sentence of imprisonment as a single sentence by applying the rules provided for in paragraph 2 item 2 of this Article.
Continuing criminal offence

Article 49

(1) A continuing criminal offence consists of several identical or similar criminal offences committed in temporal connection by the same perpetrator and which constitute a whole due to the existence of at least two of the following circumstances: identity of the injured party, similarity of the object of the offence, use of the same situation or the same permanent relationship, unity of place or space of commission of the offence, or unified intent of the perpetrator.
(2) Criminal offences directed against a person may constitute a continuing criminal offence only if they are committed against the same person.
(3) Those offences which by their nature do not allow combination into one offence cannot constitute a continuing criminal offence.
(4) If a continuing criminal offence encompasses lighter and more serious forms of the same offence, it shall be considered that the most serious form of the committed offences has been committed by the continuing criminal offence.
(5) For a continuing criminal offence, the court may impose a more severe punishment than prescribed if the continuing criminal offence consists of at least three criminal offences that meet the conditions from paragraph 1 of this Article.
(6) The more severe punishment may not exceed double the measure of the prescribed punishment nor twenty years of imprisonment.
(7) A criminal offence that is not encompassed by the continuing criminal offence in a final court judgment constitutes a separate criminal offence, or forms part of a separate continuing criminal offence.
Sentencing of a convicted person

Article 50

(1) If a convicted person is being tried for a criminal offence committed before he began serving the sentence under a previous conviction or for a criminal offence committed during the serving of a sentence of imprisonment or juvenile imprisonment, the court shall impose a single sentence for all criminal offences by applying the provisions of Article 48 of this Code, taking the previously imposed sentence as already determined. The sentence or part of the sentence that the convicted person has served shall be credited towards the imposed sentence of imprisonment.
(2) For a criminal offence committed during the serving of a sentence of imprisonment or juvenile imprisonment, the court shall impose a sentence on the perpetrator, independently of the previously imposed sentence, if by applying the provisions of Article 48 of this Code, having regard to the gravity of the criminal offence and the unserved part of the previously imposed sentence, the purpose of punishment could not be achieved.
(3) A convicted person who during the serving of a sentence of imprisonment or juvenile imprisonment commits a criminal offence for which the law prescribes a fine or imprisonment of up to one year shall be punished by disciplinary measures.
Crediting of detention and previous sentence

Article 51

(1) Time spent in detention, as well as any other deprivation of liberty in connection with the criminal offence, shall be credited towards the imposed sentence of imprisonment, juvenile imprisonment, sentence of community service and fine.
(2) If criminal proceedings have been conducted for several criminal offences in concurrence, and detention has not been ordered for each of them, the time spent in detention shall be credited towards the imposed sentence of imprisonment, juvenile imprisonment, sentence of community service and fine for the criminal offence for which the accused has been convicted.
(3) Imprisonment or a fine that the convicted person has served or paid for a misdemeanour or economic offence, as well as a sentence or disciplinary measure of deprivation of liberty that he has served for a breach of military discipline, shall be credited towards the sentence imposed for a criminal offence whose elements also encompass the elements of the misdemeanour, economic offence, or breach of military discipline.
(4) In every crediting, one day of detention, one day of deprivation of liberty, one day of juvenile imprisonment, one day of imprisonment, eight hours of community service and twenty-five euros of a fine shall be equated.
CHAPTER FOUR
WARNING MEASURES
1. Suspended sentence and judicial admonition
Purpose of suspended sentence and judicial admonition

Article 52

(1) Warning measures are: suspended sentence and judicial admonition.
(2) Within the general purpose of criminal sanctions (

Article 4

paragraph 2) , the purpose of a suspended sentence and judicial admonition is not to apply punishment to the perpetrator of a criminal offence for minor criminal offences, when it is not necessary for the purposes of criminal law protection and when it can be expected that a warning with the threat of punishment (suspended sentence) or a warning alone (judicial admonition) will sufficiently influence the perpetrator not to commit criminal offences anymore.
Suspended sentence

Article 53

(1) By a suspended sentence, the court determines the punishment for the perpetrator of a criminal offence and at the same time orders that it will not be executed if the convicted person does not commit a new criminal offence during the period determined by the court, which may not be shorter than one nor longer than five years (probationary period).
(2) The court may determine in the suspended sentence that the punishment will be executed also if the convicted person does not return within a specified time limit the pecuniary benefit acquired by the commission of the criminal offence, does not compensate for the damage caused by the criminal offence, or does not fulfil other obligations provided for in criminal law provisions. The time limit for fulfilling those obligations is determined by the court within the determined probationary period.
(3) Security measures imposed together with a suspended sentence shall be executed.
Conditions for imposing a suspended sentence

Article 54

(1) A suspended sentence may be imposed when a prison sentence of up to two years has been determined for the perpetrator.
(2) For criminal offences for which a prison sentence of ten years or a more severe sentence may be imposed, a suspended sentence may not be imposed.
(3) A suspended sentence may not be imposed if more than five years have not elapsed since the finality of the judgment by which the perpetrator was sentenced to a penalty for an intentional criminal offence. A suspended sentence may not be imposed on a perpetrator who has already been given two suspended sentences.
(4) When deciding whether to impose a suspended sentence, the court shall, taking into account the purpose of the suspended sentence, particularly consider the personality of the perpetrator, his previous life, his conduct after the commission of the criminal offence, the degree of guilt and other circumstances under which the offence was committed.
(5) If both a prison sentence and a fine have been determined for the perpetrator, a suspended sentence may be imposed only for the prison sentence.
Revocation of suspended sentence due to a new criminal offence

Article 55

(1) The court shall revoke the suspended sentence if the convicted person commits one or more criminal offences during the probationary period for which a prison sentence of two years or longer has been imposed.
(2) If the convicted person commits one or more criminal offences during the probationary period for which a prison sentence of less than two years or a fine has been imposed, the court shall, after assessing all circumstances relating to the criminal offences committed and the perpetrator, and in particular the relatedness of the criminal offences committed, their significance and the motives from which they were committed, decide whether to revoke the suspended sentence. In doing so, the court is bound by the prohibition on imposing a suspended sentence if, for the criminal offences determined in the suspended sentence and for the new criminal offences, a sentence of more than two years' imprisonment should be imposed (

Article 54 paragraph 1)

(3) If it revokes the suspended sentence, the court shall, by applying the provisions of Article 48 of this Code, impose a single prison sentence for both the previously committed and the new criminal offence, taking the sentence from the revoked suspended sentence as determined.
(4) If it does not revoke the suspended sentence, the court may impose a suspended sentence or a sentence for the newly committed criminal offence. For a convicted person who is sentenced to imprisonment for a new criminal offence, the time spent serving this sentence shall not be counted in the probationary period determined by the suspended sentence for the previous offence.
(5) If the court finds that a suspended sentence should also be imposed for the new criminal offence, by applying the provisions of Article 48 of this Code, it shall determine a single sentence for both the previously committed and the new criminal offence and shall determine a new probationary period which may not be shorter than one year nor longer than five years, counting from the day the new judgment becomes final. If the convicted person commits a criminal offence again during the new probationary period, the court shall revoke the suspended sentence and impose a prison sentence, by applying the provision of paragraph 3 of this Article.
Revocation of suspended sentence due to a previously committed criminal offence

Article 56

(1) The court shall revoke the suspended sentence if, after its imposition, it determines that the convicted person committed a criminal offence before being conditionally sentenced and if it assesses that there would be no grounds for imposing a suspended sentence had that offence been known. In that case, it shall apply the provision of Article 55 paragraph 3 of this Code.
(2) If the court does not revoke the suspended sentence, it shall apply the provision of Article 55 paragraph 4 of this Code.
Revocation of suspended sentence due to non-fulfilment of certain obligations

Article 57

If the convicted person has been ordered by the suspended sentence to fulfil an obligation from Article 53 paragraph 2 of this Code, and he does not fulfil that obligation within the time limit specified in the judgment, the court may, within the probationary period, extend the time limit for fulfilment of the obligation or may revoke the suspended sentence and impose the sentence that was determined in the suspended sentence. If it determines that the convicted person, for justified reasons, cannot fulfil the imposed obligation, the court shall release him from fulfilment of that obligation or replace it with another appropriate obligation provided by law.
Time limits for revocation of suspended sentence

Article 58

(1) A suspended sentence may be revoked during the probationary period. If the convicted person commits a criminal offence during that period which entails revocation of the suspended sentence, and this is established by judgment only after the expiry of the probationary period, the suspended sentence may be revoked at the latest within one year from the day the probationary period expired.
(2) If the convicted person does not fulfil an obligation from Article 53 paragraph 2 of this Code within the specified time limit, the court may, at the latest within one year from the day the probationary period expired, order that the sentence determined in the suspended sentence be executed.
Suspended sentence with protective supervision

Article 59

(1) The court may order that the perpetrator to whom a suspended sentence has been imposed be placed under protective supervision for a specified time during the probationary period.
(2) Protective supervision includes legally prescribed measures of assistance, care, supervision and protection.
(3) and (4)
(deleted)
Conditions for ordering protective supervision

Article 60

(1) When imposing a suspended sentence, the court may order that the perpetrator be placed under protective supervision if, having regard to his personality, previous life, conduct after the commission of the criminal offence, and in particular his relationship to the victim of the criminal offence and the circumstances of the commission of the offence, it can be expected that the purpose of the suspended sentence will be more fully achieved through protective supervision.
(2) Protective supervision is ordered by the court in the judgment imposing the suspended sentence and determines the measures of protective supervision, their duration and the manner of their fulfilment.
Content of protective supervision

Article 61

Protective supervision may include one or more of the following obligations:
1) reporting to the authority responsible for the execution of protective supervision at intervals determined by that authority;
2) training the perpetrator for a particular occupation;
3) accepting employment that corresponds to the abilities and inclinations of the perpetrator;
4) fulfilling obligations of supporting the family, caring for and raising children and other family obligations;
5) refraining from visiting certain places, premises or events, if this may be an opportunity or incentive for committing criminal offences again;
6) timely notification of a change of place of residence, address or place of work;
7) refraining from using drugs or alcoholic beverages;
8) treatment in an appropriate health institution;
9) attending certain professional and other counselling centres or institutions and acting in accordance with their instructions;
10) eliminating or mitigating the damage caused by the criminal offence, and in particular reconciliation with the victim of the committed criminal offence.
Selection of protective supervision measures

Article 62

When selecting the obligations from Article 61 of this Code and determining their duration, the court shall particularly take into account the age of the perpetrator, his state of health, inclinations and habits, the motives from which he committed the criminal offence, his conduct after the commission of the criminal offence, his previous life, personal and family circumstances, conditions for fulfilment of the imposed obligations, as well as other circumstances relating to the personality of the perpetrator that are relevant for the selection of protective supervision measures and their duration.
Duration of protective supervision

Article 63

(1) The duration of protective supervision measures is determined within the probationary period established in the suspended sentence.
(2) Protective supervision ceases upon revocation of the suspended sentence.
(3) During the duration of protective supervision, the court may, having regard to the results achieved, revoke individual obligations or replace them with others.
(4) If during the duration of protective supervision the court determines that the purpose of this measure has been fulfilled, it may revoke the protective supervision before the expiry of the specified time.
Consequences of non-fulfilment of protective supervision obligations

Article 64

If a convicted person to whom protective supervision has been imposed does not fulfil the obligations that the court has ordered, the court may warn him or may replace the previous obligations with others or extend the duration of protective supervision within the probationary period or revoke the suspended sentence.
Judicial warning

Article 65

(1) A judicial admonition may be pronounced for criminal offences punishable by imprisonment of up to one year or a fine, committed under such mitigating circumstances that make them particularly minor.
(2) For certain criminal offences and under conditions provided by law, a judicial admonition may be pronounced even when imprisonment of up to three years is prescribed.
(3) A judicial admonition may be pronounced by the court for multiple criminal offences committed in concurrence, if the conditions from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article exist for each of those offences.
(4) When deciding whether to pronounce a judicial admonition, the court shall, taking into account the purpose of the judicial admonition, particularly consider the personality of the perpetrator, his previous life, his conduct after the commission of the criminal offence, and especially his relationship towards the victim of the criminal offence, the degree of guilt and other circumstances under which the offence was committed.
(5) A judicial admonition may not be pronounced to military persons for criminal offences against the Army of Montenegro.
CHAPTER FIVE
SECURITY MEASURES
Purpose of security measures

Article 66

Within the general purpose of criminal sanctions (

Article 4

paragraph 2), the purpose of security measures is to eliminate conditions or circumstances that may influence the perpetrator to commit criminal offences in the future.
Types of security measures

Article 67

The following security measures may be pronounced to the perpetrator of a criminal offence:
1) mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in a health institution;
2) mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty;
3) mandatory treatment of drug addicts;
4) mandatory treatment of alcoholics;
5) prohibition of performing a profession, activity and duty;
6) prohibition of driving a motor vehicle;
7) confiscation of objects;
8) expulsion of a foreigner from the country;
9) public announcement of the judgment;
10) prohibition of approach;
11) removal from an apartment or other residential space.
Pronouncement of security measures

Article 68

(1) The court may pronounce to the perpetrator of a criminal offence one or more security measures when the conditions for their pronouncement provided by this Code exist.
(2) Mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in a health institution and mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty are pronounced independently to an insane perpetrator. Along with these measures, prohibition of performing a profession, activity and duty, prohibition of driving a motor vehicle and confiscation of objects may be pronounced.
(3) The measures from paragraph 2 of this Article may be pronounced to a perpetrator of a criminal offence whose sanity is substantially diminished, if a sentence or suspended sentence has been pronounced to him.
(4) Mandatory treatment of drug addicts, mandatory treatment of alcoholics, prohibition of performing a profession, activity and duty, prohibition of driving a motor vehicle, confiscation of objects and public announcement of the judgment may be pronounced if a sentence, suspended sentence, judicial admonition has been pronounced to the perpetrator or the perpetrator has been released from punishment.
(5) Expulsion of a foreigner from the country may be pronounced if a sentence or suspended sentence has been pronounced to the perpetrator.
(6) Prohibition of approach and removal from an apartment or other residential space may be pronounced if a sentence of imprisonment or a fine has been pronounced to the perpetrator.
(7) For criminal offences in concurrence, a security measure shall be pronounced if it has been established for one of the criminal offences in concurrence.
Mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in a health institution

Article 69

(1) The court shall pronounce mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in an appropriate health institution to a perpetrator who committed a criminal offence in a state of substantially diminished sanity, if, having regard to the committed criminal offence and the state of mental disorder, it establishes that there exists a serious danger that the perpetrator will commit a more serious criminal offence and that his treatment in such an institution is necessary to eliminate this danger.
(2) If the conditions from paragraph 1 of this Article are met, the court shall pronounce mandatory treatment and custody in a health institution to a perpetrator who in a state of insanity committed an unlawful act provided in law as a criminal offence.
(3) The court shall terminate the measure from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article when it establishes that the need for treatment and custody of the perpetrator in a health institution has ceased.
(4) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article pronounced along with a sentence of imprisonment may last longer than the pronounced sentence.
(5) For a perpetrator who committed a criminal offence in a state of substantially diminished sanity and who has been sentenced to imprisonment, the time spent in a health institution shall be credited towards the duration of the pronounced sentence. If the time spent in a health institution is shorter than the duration of the pronounced sentence, the court shall, upon cessation of the security measure, order that the convicted person be sent to serve the remainder of the sentence or be released on parole. When deciding on release on parole, the court shall, in addition to the conditions from Article 37 of this Code, particularly take into account the success of the convicted person's treatment, his health condition, the time spent in the health institution and the remainder of the sentence that the convicted person has not served.
Mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty

Article 70

(1) The court shall pronounce mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty to a perpetrator who in a state of insanity committed an unlawful act defined in law as a criminal offence, if it establishes that there exists a serious danger that the perpetrator will commit an unlawful act provided in law as a criminal offence and that his treatment at liberty is sufficient to eliminate this danger.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article may also be pronounced to an insane perpetrator for whom mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in an appropriate health institution has been ordered, when the court, based on the results of treatment, establishes that his custody and treatment in such an institution is no longer necessary, but only his treatment at liberty.
(3) Under the conditions from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court may pronounce mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty also to a perpetrator whose sanity is substantially diminished, if a suspended sentence has been pronounced to him or he has been released on parole pursuant to Article 69 paragraph 5 of this Code.
(4) Mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty may be carried out periodically also in an appropriate health institution, if this is necessary for more successful treatment, provided that periodic treatment in the institution may not last continuously longer than fifteen days, nor in total longer than two months.
(5) Mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty lasts as long as the need for treatment exists, but not longer than three years.
(6) If in the case from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article the perpetrator does not submit to treatment at liberty or arbitrarily abandons it, or despite treatment there arises a danger that he will again commit an unlawful act provided in law as a criminal offence, such that his treatment and custody in an appropriate health institution is necessary, the court may pronounce mandatory psychiatric treatment and custody in such an institution.
Mandatory treatment of drug addicts

Article 71

(1) The court shall pronounce mandatory treatment to a perpetrator who committed a criminal offence due to dependence on the use of narcotic drugs and in whom there exists a serious danger that he will continue to commit criminal offences due to this dependence.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is executed in an institution for execution of sentences or in an appropriate health or other specialized institution and lasts as long as the need for treatment exists, but not longer than three years.
(3) When the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is pronounced along with a sentence of imprisonment, it may last longer than the time of the pronounced sentence, but its total duration may not be longer than three years.
(4) The time spent in the treatment institution is credited towards the sentence of imprisonment.
(5) When the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is pronounced along with a fine, suspended sentence, judicial admonition or release from punishment, it is executed at liberty and may not last longer than three years.
6) If the perpetrator, without justified reasons, does not submit to treatment at liberty or arbitrarily abandons the treatment, the court shall order that the measure be forcibly executed in an appropriate health or other specialized institution.
Mandatory treatment of alcoholics

Article 72

(1) The court shall impose mandatory treatment on a perpetrator who has committed a criminal offense due to dependence on the use of alcohol and in whom there exists a serious danger that he will continue to commit criminal offenses due to this dependence.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be executed in an institution for the execution of imprisonment or in an appropriate health or other specialized institution and shall last as long as there is a need for treatment, but not longer than the imposed prison sentence.
(3) Time spent in a treatment institution shall be credited toward the prison sentence.
(4) When the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is imposed together with a fine, suspended sentence, judicial admonition or release from punishment, it shall be executed at liberty and may not last longer than two years.
(5) If the perpetrator, without justified reasons, does not undergo treatment at liberty or arbitrarily abandons treatment, the court shall order that the measure be forcibly executed in an appropriate health or other specialized institution.
Prohibition of Exercising a Profession, Activity and Duty

Article 73

(1) The court may prohibit the perpetrator of a criminal offense from exercising a certain profession, certain activity or all or some duties related to disposing of, using, managing or handling another's property or to safeguarding such property, if it can be justifiably considered that his further exercise of such activity would be dangerous.
(2) The court shall determine the duration of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, which may not be shorter than one nor longer than ten years, counting from the day the decision becomes final, with the proviso that time spent in detention, that is, in a health institution in which a security measure was executed, shall not be credited toward the duration of this measure.
(3) If it imposes a suspended sentence, the court may order that the sentence shall be revoked if the perpetrator violates the prohibition of exercising a profession, activity or duty.
Prohibition of Driving a Motor Vehicle

Article 74

(1) The court may impose a prohibition of driving a motor vehicle on the perpetrator of a criminal offense that endangers public traffic.
(2) When imposing the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court shall determine which types and categories of vehicles the prohibition applies to.
(3) The court may impose the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article if it finds that the gravity of the committed offense, the circumstances under which the offense was committed or previous violations of traffic regulations by the perpetrator show that it is dangerous for him to drive a motor vehicle of a certain type or category.
(4) The court shall determine the duration of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, which may not be shorter than three months nor longer than five years, counting from the day the decision becomes final, with the proviso that time spent in detention, that is, in an institution in which a security measure or educational measure is executed, shall not be credited toward the duration of this measure.
(5) The court may impose the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article without time limitation (permanently) on the perpetrator of a criminal offense that endangers public traffic which resulted in the death of one or more persons, if this security measure had already been imposed on him.
(6) If the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is imposed on a person who has a foreign license to drive a motor vehicle, the prohibition applies to driving a motor vehicle on the territory of Montenegro.
(7) If it imposes a suspended sentence, the court may order that the sentence shall be revoked if the perpetrator violates the prohibition of driving a motor vehicle.
(8) The law may prescribe a mandatory prohibition of driving a motor vehicle.
Confiscation of Objects

Article 75

(1) Objects that were used or were intended for the commission of a criminal offense or that were created by the commission of a criminal offense may be confiscated if they are the property of the perpetrator.
(2) Objects from paragraph 1 of this Article may be confiscated even when they are not the property of the perpetrator, if required by reasons of safety of people or property or reasons of morality or when there still exists a danger that they will be used for the commission of a criminal offense, without prejudice to the right of third parties to compensation for damage from the perpetrator.
(3) The law may prescribe mandatory confiscation of objects and conditions for their confiscation.
(4) The law may prescribe mandatory destruction of confiscated objects.
Expulsion of a Foreigner from the Country

Article 76

(1) The court may expel from the territory of Montenegro a foreigner who has committed a criminal offense for a period from one to ten years or permanently, if the criminal offense was committed in recidivism (

Article 43)

(2) When assessing whether to impose the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court shall take into account the nature and gravity of the committed criminal offense, the motives for which the criminal offense was committed, the manner of commission of the criminal offense and other circumstances indicating the undesirability of the foreigner's further stay in Montenegro.
(3) The duration of expulsion shall be counted from the day the decision becomes final, with the proviso that time spent in detention shall not be credited toward the duration of this measure.
(4) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article may not be imposed on a perpetrator who could be subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment in the country to which he would be expelled or who enjoys other protection in accordance with ratified international treaties.
Public Announcement of the Judgment

Article 77

(1) Upon conviction for a criminal offence committed through the media or for a criminal offence that has caused danger to the life or health of people, and if publication of the judgment would contribute to removing or reducing that danger, the court may decide that the court judgment be published in whole or in extract, at the expense of the convicted person, through the same medium or in another appropriate manner.
(2) The law may prescribe mandatory publication of the judgment. In that case, the court shall decide through which media the judgment will be published and whether it will be published in whole or in extract.
(3) Public publication of the judgment shall be carried out no later than within thirty days from the day the judgment becomes final.
Prohibition of approach
Article 77a
(1) The court shall impose a prohibition of approach to the victim or another person or group of persons or a specific place on the perpetrator of a criminal offence against sexual freedom, a criminal offence of domestic violence or violence in a family community and a criminal offence of incest or some other criminal offence that endangers the life or body of a person or a criminal offence of unauthorised production, possession and placing on the market of narcotic drugs, when there is a danger that the perpetrator might commit the same or similar criminal offence again towards those persons or at that place.
(2) The court shall determine the duration of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, which may not be shorter than one year nor longer than five years, counting from the day the decision becomes final, provided that time spent in detention shall not be counted towards the duration of this measure.
(3) After one year has elapsed from the commencement of execution of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court may, upon proposal of the convicted person, suspend its execution if it determines that the danger from paragraph 1 of this Article no longer exists.
(4) The court shall notify the special organisational unit of the ministry responsible for judicial affairs that supervises the implementation of conditional release about the final measure imposed under paragraph 1 of this Article.
Removal from apartment or other residential premises
Article 77b
(1) The court shall impose removal from an apartment or other residential premises on the perpetrator of a criminal offence of domestic violence or violence in a family community if there is a danger that the perpetrator might commit that criminal offence again.
(2) The court shall determine the duration of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, which may not be shorter than three months nor longer than three years, counting from the day the decision becomes final, provided that time spent in detention shall not be counted towards the duration of this measure.
(3) The person on whom the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article has been imposed is obliged, in the presence of a police officer, immediately upon the judgment becoming final, to leave the apartment or some other residential premises that constitutes a joint household.
(4) After six months have elapsed from the commencement of execution of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court may, upon proposal of the convicted person, suspend its execution if it determines that the danger from paragraph 1 of this Article no longer exists.
(5) The court shall notify the special organisational unit of the ministry responsible for judicial affairs that supervises the implementation of conditional release and the administrative authority responsible for police affairs about the final measure imposed under paragraph 1 of this Article.
Termination of security measure based on court decision

Article 78

(1) The court may decide to terminate the security measures of prohibition of pursuing a calling, activity or duty and prohibition of driving a motor vehicle if three years have elapsed from the day of their application.
(2) When assessing whether to order termination of the security measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the court shall take into account the behaviour of the convicted person after conviction, whether he has compensated for the damage caused by the criminal offence, whether he has returned the property benefit acquired by commission of the criminal offence and other circumstances indicating the justification for termination of those measures.
CHAPTER SIX
Arts. 79-111
(ceased to be in force)
CHAPTER SEVEN
CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY BENEFIT
Basis for confiscation of property benefit

Article 112

(1) No one may retain property benefit acquired by an unlawful act that is defined in law as a criminal offence.
(2) The benefit from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be confiscated under the conditions prescribed by this Code and by court decision.
Conditions and manner of confiscation of property benefit

Article 113*

(1) Money, objects of value and any other property benefit acquired by a criminal offence shall be confiscated from the perpetrator, and if confiscation is not possible, the perpetrator shall be obliged to pay a monetary amount corresponding to the acquired property benefit.
(2) Property benefit for which there is reasonable suspicion that it was acquired through criminal activity may also be confiscated from the perpetrator of a criminal offence, unless the perpetrator makes it probable that its origin is lawful (extended confiscation).
(3)
(ceased to be in force)
(4)
(ceased to be in force)
(5) Property benefit acquired by a criminal offence shall also be confiscated from a person to whom it was transferred without consideration or from a person who knew that the property benefit was acquired by a criminal offence or could and should have known it.
(6) If property benefit was acquired by a criminal offence for another person, that benefit shall be confiscated.
Protection of the injured party

Article 114

(1) If a property claim of the injured party has been granted in criminal proceedings, the court shall order confiscation of property benefit only insofar as it exceeds the granted property claim of the injured party in that amount.
(2) An injured party who has been referred to civil proceedings in criminal proceedings regarding his property claim may request to be satisfied from the confiscated property benefit if he initiates civil proceedings within six months from the day the decision referring him to civil proceedings becomes final and if within three months from the day the decision granting his property claim becomes final he requests satisfaction from the confiscated property benefit.
(3) An injured party who did not submit a property claim in criminal proceedings may request satisfaction from the confiscated property benefit if he initiated civil proceedings to establish his claim within three months from the day of learning of the judgment ordering confiscation of property benefit, and at the latest within three years from the day the decision on confiscation of property benefit becomes final, and if within three months from the day the decision granting his property claim becomes final he requests satisfaction from the confiscated property benefit.
CHAPTER EIGHT
LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CONVICTION
Occurrence of legal consequences of conviction

Article 115

(1) Convictions for certain criminal offences or to certain punishments may have as a legal consequence the termination or loss of certain rights or prohibition of acquisition of certain rights.
(2) Legal consequences of conviction cannot occur when a fine has been imposed on the perpetrator for a criminal offence, a suspended sentence, if it is not revoked, a judicial admonition, or when the perpetrator has been released from punishment.
(3) Legal consequences of conviction may be prescribed only by law and occur by force of the law by which they are prescribed.
Types of legal consequences of conviction

Article 116

(1) Legal consequences of conviction relating to termination or loss of certain rights are:
1) termination of performance of public functions;
2) termination of employment or termination of performance of a certain calling or occupation;
3) loss of certain permits or approvals that are given by decision of a state authority or local self-government authority.
(2) Legal consequences of conviction consisting of prohibition of acquisition of certain rights are:
1) prohibition of acquisition of certain public functions;
2) prohibition of acquisition of a certain title, calling or occupation or promotion in service;
3) prohibition of acquisition of the rank of military officer;
4) prohibition of obtaining certain permits or approvals that are given by decision of state authorities or local self-government authorities.
Commencement and duration of legal consequences of conviction

Article 117

(1) The legal consequences of conviction take effect on the day the judgment becomes final.
(2) In the event that after the judgment becomes final, on the basis of which the legal consequences of conviction took effect, that judgment is modified by extraordinary legal remedy, the occurrence or further duration of the legal consequences of conviction shall be harmonized with the new decision.
(3) Legal consequences of conviction consisting of a prohibition on acquiring certain rights may be prescribed for a duration of up to ten years at most.
(4) Time spent serving a sentence shall not be counted in the duration of the legal consequence of conviction.
(5) Rehabilitation terminates the legal consequences of conviction provided for in Article 116 paragraph 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER NINE
REHABILITATION, TERMINATION OF LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CONVICTION AND PROVISION OF DATA FROM CRIMINAL RECORDS
General concept of rehabilitation

Article 118

(1) By rehabilitation the conviction is erased and all its legal consequences cease, and the convicted person is considered not to have been convicted.
(2) Rehabilitation occurs either on the basis of the law itself (statutory rehabilitation) or upon application of the convicted person on the basis of a court decision (judicial rehabilitation).
(3) Rehabilitation does not affect the rights of third parties based on the conviction.
Statutory rehabilitation

Article 119

(1) Statutory rehabilitation is granted only to persons who before the conviction to which the rehabilitation relates had not been convicted or who were considered not to have been convicted by law.
(2) Statutory rehabilitation occurs if:
1) a person who has been found guilty but released from punishment or to whom a judicial admonition has been pronounced, within one year from the finality of the judgment, does not commit a new criminal offense;
2) a person to whom a suspended sentence has been pronounced, during the probation period and within one year after the expiry of the probation period, does not commit a new criminal offense;
3) a person who has been sentenced to a fine, community service sentence or imprisonment up to six months, within three years from the day that sentence was served, became statute-barred or was pardoned, does not commit a new criminal offense;
4) a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment over six months up to one year, within five years from the day that sentence was served, became statute-barred or was pardoned, does not commit a new criminal offense.
(3) Statutory rehabilitation does not occur if an accessory sentence has not yet been served or if security measures are still in effect.
Judicial rehabilitation

Article 120

(1) Judicial rehabilitation may be granted to a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment over one year up to two years, if within five years from the day that sentence was served, became statute-barred or was pardoned, he does not commit a new criminal offense.
(2) To a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment over two years up to three years, judicial rehabilitation may be granted if within eight years from the day that sentence was served, became statute-barred or was pardoned, he does not commit a new criminal offense.
(3) In the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the court shall grant rehabilitation if it finds that the convicted person has by his conduct deserved rehabilitation and if he has, according to his abilities, compensated for the damage caused by the criminal offense, whereby the court is obliged to take into account all other circumstances relevant to granting rehabilitation, and in particular the nature and significance of the offense.
(4) Judicial rehabilitation cannot be granted if an accessory sentence has not yet been served or if security measures are still in effect.
Judicial rehabilitation of a person who has been convicted multiple times

Article 121

To a person who has been convicted multiple times, the court may grant rehabilitation only if the conditions from Articles 119 and 120 of this Code are met with respect to each criminal offense for which he was convicted. In assessing whether to grant rehabilitation in such a case, the court shall take into account the circumstances from Article 120 paragraph 3 of this Code.
Termination of legal consequences of conviction

Article 122

(1) When three years have elapsed from the day the sentence was served, became statute-barred or was pardoned, the court may decide that the legal consequence of conviction relating to the prohibition on acquiring a certain right shall cease, unless it has already ceased as a result of rehabilitation.
(2) In deciding on the termination of the legal consequence of conviction, the court shall take into account the conduct of the convicted person after the conviction, whether he has compensated for the damage caused by the criminal offense and returned the property benefit acquired by committing the criminal offense, as well as other circumstances indicating the justification for terminating the legal consequence of conviction.
Provision of data from criminal records

Article 123

(1) Criminal records contain personal data about the perpetrator of a criminal offense, data about the criminal offense, data about the sentence, suspended sentence, judicial admonition, release from punishment and pardoned sentence, as well as data about the legal consequences of conviction. Criminal records also include subsequent modifications of data contained in criminal records, data about serving the sentence, as well as annulment of records concerning wrongful conviction.
(2) Records of educational measures contain the following data: personal data about juvenile perpetrators, data about the criminal offense, data about educational measures that were applied and executed, as well as other data relating to the application of educational measures.
(3) Data from criminal records may be provided only to a court, state prosecutor and administrative body competent for police affairs in connection with criminal proceedings conducted against a person who was previously convicted, to a body for execution of criminal sanctions and a body participating in the procedure for granting amnesty, pardon, rehabilitation or deciding on the termination of legal consequences of conviction, as well as to guardianship authorities, when necessary for the performance of duties within their competence.
(4) Data from criminal records may, upon reasoned request, also be provided to a state body, business company, other organization or entrepreneur, if the legal consequences of conviction or security measures are still in effect and if there is a justified interest based on law.
(5) No one has the right to require a citizen to submit proof of his conviction or non-conviction.
(6) Citizens may, upon their request, be provided with data about their conviction or non-conviction only if they need it for the realization of their rights abroad.
CHAPTER TEN
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
Statute of limitations for criminal prosecution

Article 124

(1) Unless otherwise provided in this Code, criminal prosecution cannot be undertaken when the following periods have elapsed:
1) twenty-five years from the commission of a criminal offense for which long-term imprisonment may be imposed by law;
2) twenty years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment over fifteen years may be imposed by law;
3) fifteen years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment over ten years may be imposed by law;
4) ten years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment over five years may be imposed by law;
5) five years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment over three years may be imposed by law;
6) three years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment over one year may be imposed by law;
7) two years from the commission of a criminal offense for which imprisonment up to one year or a fine may be imposed by law.
(2) If multiple sentences are prescribed for a criminal offense, the statute of limitations is determined according to the most severe prescribed sentence.
Course and interruption of the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution

Article 125

(1) The statute of limitations for criminal prosecution begins from the day the criminal offense was committed. If the consequence of the criminal offense occurs later, the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution begins from the day the consequence occurred.
(2) The statute of limitations does not run for the period during which, according to law, prosecution cannot be commenced or continued.
(3) The statute of limitations for criminal prosecution for an offense committed against a minor does not run until that person reaches eighteen years of age.
(4) The statute of limitations is interrupted by every procedural action undertaken for the purpose of discovering the criminal offense or for the purpose of discovering and prosecuting the perpetrator for the committed criminal offense.
(5) The statute of limitations is also interrupted when the perpetrator, during the limitation period, commits an equally serious or more serious criminal offense.
(6) With each interruption, the statute of limitations begins to run anew.
(7) The statute of limitations for criminal prosecution occurs in any case when double the time required by law for the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution has elapsed.
Statute of limitations for execution of sentence

Article 126

(1) Unless otherwise provided in this code, an imposed sentence cannot be executed when the following period has elapsed:
1) twenty years from sentencing to imprisonment exceeding fifteen years;
2) fifteen years from sentencing to imprisonment exceeding ten years;
3) ten years from sentencing to imprisonment exceeding five years;
4) five years from sentencing to imprisonment exceeding three years;
5) three years from sentencing to imprisonment exceeding one year or to a sentence of community service;
6) two years from sentencing to imprisonment up to one year or to a fine.
(2) Execution of a sentence of long-term imprisonment does not become statute-barred.
Statute of limitations for execution of accessory sentence and security measure

Article 127

(1) The statute of limitations for execution of a fine as an accessory sentence occurs when two years have elapsed from the day the judgment imposing that sentence became final.
(2) The statute of limitations for execution of the security measure of mandatory psychiatric treatment at liberty, mandatory treatment of drug addicts, mandatory treatment of alcoholics and confiscation of objects occurs when five years have elapsed from the day the decision imposing those measures became final.
(3) The statute of limitations for execution of the security measures of prohibition from pursuing a calling, activity and duty, prohibition from driving a motor vehicle and expulsion of a foreigner from the country occurs when the time for which those measures were imposed has elapsed.
(4) Execution of the security measure of mandatory psychiatric treatment and confinement in a health institution does not become statute-barred, but if more than five years have elapsed from the finality of the judgment imposing the security measure and execution has not commenced, the court shall examine whether execution of this measure is still necessary.
Running and interruption of the statute of limitations for execution of sentence and security measure

Article 128

(1) The statute of limitations for execution of a sentence begins from the day the judgment imposing the sentence became final, and if a suspended sentence was revoked - from the day the decision on revocation became final.
(2) If by an act of amnesty or pardon or by a court decision following an extraordinary legal remedy the imposed sentence was reduced, the time required for the statute of limitations to occur is determined according to the new sentence, but the running of the statute of limitations is calculated from the earlier final judgment.
(3) The statute of limitations does not run for the period during which, according to law, execution of the sentence cannot be undertaken.
(4) The statute of limitations is interrupted by every action of the competent authority undertaken for the purpose of executing the sentence.
(5) With each interruption, the statute of limitations begins to run anew.
(6) The statute of limitations for execution of a sentence occurs in any case when double the time required by law for the statute of limitations for execution of the sentence has elapsed.
(7) In case of occurrence of the statute of limitations under paragraph 6 of this article, commenced execution of the sentence shall be suspended.
(8) The provisions of paragraphs 2 to 5 of this article apply mutatis mutandis to the statute of limitations for execution of a security measure.
Non-applicability of statute of limitations for criminal prosecution and execution of sentence

Article 129

Criminal prosecution and execution of sentence do not become statute-barred for criminal offenses provided for in Articles 264 to 276b, 401, 401a, 422 to 424 and 426 to 431 of this code, nor for criminal offenses for which, according to ratified international treaties, the statute of limitations cannot occur.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
AMNESTY AND PARDON
Amnesty

Article 130

(1) Persons covered by an act of amnesty are granted exemption from criminal prosecution or full or partial exemption from execution of sentence, the imposed sentence is replaced with a more lenient sentence, rehabilitation is granted, or individual or all legal consequences of conviction are abolished.
(2) By amnesty, the following security measures may be abolished: prohibition from pursuing a calling, activity and duty, prohibition from driving a motor vehicle and expulsion of foreigners from the country.
Pardon

Article 131

(1) By pardon, a specifically named person is granted exemption from criminal prosecution or full or partial exemption from execution of sentence, the imposed sentence is replaced with a more lenient sentence or with a suspended sentence, rehabilitation is granted, a shorter duration of a particular legal consequence of conviction is determined, or individual or all legal consequences of conviction are abolished.
(2) By pardon, the security measure of prohibition from pursuing a calling, activity and duty, prohibition from driving a motor vehicle and expulsion of a foreigner from the country may be abolished or a shorter duration may be determined.
Effect of amnesty and pardon on rights of third parties

Article 132

The granting of amnesty or pardon does not affect the rights of third parties based on the conviction.
CHAPTER TWELVE
APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LEGISLATION OF MONTENEGRO
Temporal application of criminal legislation

Article 133

(1) The law that was in force at the time of commission of the criminal offense applies to the perpetrator of the criminal offense.
(2) If after commission of the criminal offense the law has been amended, once or several times, the law that is most lenient for the perpetrator shall apply.
(3) The law with a specified temporal duration applies to the perpetrator of a criminal offense defined by that law, regardless of when he is tried, unless otherwise provided by that law.
(4) Security measures and educational measures prescribed by the new law may be applied to the perpetrator if they are not more unfavorable for him than those that could have been applied under the law that was in force at the time of commission of the offense.
Application of criminal legislation on the territory of Montenegro

Article 134

(1) The criminal legislation of Montenegro applies to anyone who commits a criminal offense on its territory.
(2) The criminal legislation of Montenegro also applies to anyone who commits a criminal offense on a domestic vessel, regardless of where the vessel is located at the time of commission of the offense.
(3) The criminal legislation of Montenegro also applies to anyone who commits a criminal offense in a domestic civil aircraft or in a domestic military aircraft, regardless of where the aircraft was located at the time of commission of the criminal offense.
Application of criminal legislation of Montenegro to perpetrators of certain criminal offenses committed abroad

Article 135

The criminal legislation of Montenegro applies to anyone who commits abroad a criminal offense under Articles 357 to 369, Articles 371 to 374 and Articles 447 to 449b of this code or under Articles 258 and 268 of this code, if the counterfeiting relates to money that was legal tender in Montenegro at the time of commission of the criminal offense.
Application of criminal legislation of Montenegro to a citizen of Montenegro who commits a criminal offense abroad

Article 136

The criminal legislation of Montenegro applies to a citizen of Montenegro even when he commits abroad any other criminal offense, apart from the criminal offenses specified in Article 135 of this code, if he is found on the territory of Montenegro or is extradited to it.
Under the conditions of paragraph 1 of this article, the criminal legislation of Montenegro also applies to a perpetrator who became a citizen of Montenegro after commission of the criminal offense
Application of criminal legislation of Montenegro to a foreigner who commits a criminal offense abroad

Article 137

(1) The criminal legislation of Montenegro shall also apply to a person who is not a citizen of Montenegro who commits outside the territory of Montenegro a criminal offense against it or its citizen and when the criminal offenses referred to in Article 135 of this Code are not in question, or commits a criminal offense under Articles 276a, 276b, 422, 422a, 423 and 424 of this Code, in the commission of which a citizen of Montenegro is involved in any way, if found on the territory of Montenegro or Serbia or is extradited to SCG.
(2) The criminal legislation of Montenegro shall also apply to a person who is not a citizen of Montenegro who commits abroad against a foreign state or against a foreigner a criminal offense for which under the law of the country in which it was committed a prison sentence of four years or a more severe penalty may be imposed, if found on the territory of Montenegro and is not extradited to a foreign state. Unless otherwise provided by this Code, the court in such case may not impose a more severe penalty than that prescribed by the law of the country in which the criminal offense was committed.
Special conditions for criminal prosecution

Article 138

(1) If in the case referred to in Article 134 of this Code criminal proceedings have been initiated or completed in a foreign state, criminal prosecution in Montenegro shall be undertaken only with the approval of the Supreme State Prosecutor of Montenegro.
(2) In the case referred to in Article 134 of this Code, criminal prosecution of a foreigner may, subject to reciprocity, be transferred to a foreign state.
(3) In the cases referred to in Articles 136 and 137 of this Code, criminal prosecution shall not be undertaken if:
1) the perpetrator has fully served the sentence to which he was sentenced abroad;
2) the perpetrator was acquitted abroad by a final judgment or the sentence has become time-barred or pardoned;
3) an appropriate security measure has been executed abroad against the insane perpetrator;
4) the criminal offense under foreign law is prosecuted upon request of the injured party, and such request has not been submitted.
(4) In the cases referred to in Articles 136 and 137 of this Code, criminal prosecution shall be undertaken only when the criminal offense is punishable also under the law of the country in which the act was committed, except for criminal offenses under Articles 268, 276a, 276b, 422, 422a, 423 and 424 of this Code. When in the cases referred to in Articles 136 and 137 paragraph 1 of this Code, under the law of the country in which the act was committed that criminal offense is not punishable, criminal prosecution may be undertaken only with the approval of the Supreme State Prosecutor.
(5) In the case referred to in Article 137 paragraph 2 of this Code, if the act in question at the time it was committed was considered a criminal offense according to general legal principles recognized in international law, prosecution may be undertaken in Montenegro with the approval of the Supreme State Prosecutor, regardless of the law of the country in which the criminal offense was committed.
Crediting of detention and sentence served abroad

Article 139

Detention, any other deprivation of liberty in connection with a criminal offense, deprivation of liberty during extradition proceedings, as well as the sentence served by the perpetrator pursuant to a judgment of a foreign court shall be credited toward the sentence imposed by the domestic court for the same criminal offense, and if the sentences are not of the same type, crediting shall be carried out at the discretion of the court.
Application of the law of the member state providing for a criminal offense

Article 140

(deleted)
Application of the general part of this Code

Article 141

The provisions of the general part of this Code shall apply to all criminal offenses provided for by this Code or other law.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
MEANING OF TERMS
Meaning of terms in this Code

Article 142

(1) The territory of Montenegro means the land territory, territorial sea and water surfaces within its borders, as well as the airspace above them.
(2) The criminal legislation of Montenegro means this code as well as all criminal law provisions contained in other laws of Montenegro.
(3) An official person is considered to be:
1) a person who performs official duties in a state body;
2) an elected, appointed or assigned person in a state body, local self-government body or a person who permanently or temporarily performs official duties or official functions in those bodies;
3) a person in an institution, company or other entity, entrusted with the exercise of public powers, who decides on the rights, obligations or interests of natural or legal persons or on the public interest;
4) any other person who performs official duties on the basis of law, regulations adopted pursuant to law, contract or arbitration agreement, as well as a person who is de facto entrusted with the performance of certain official duties or tasks;
5) a military person except when the provisions of Chapter thirty-six of this code are concerned;
5a) a person who performs legislative, executive, judicial or other public function for a foreign state in a foreign state, a person who performs official duties in a foreign state on the basis of law, regulations adopted pursuant to law, contract or arbitration agreement, a person who performs an official duty in an international public organization and a person who performs a judicial, prosecutorial or some other function in an international court.
(4) A responsible person is considered to be the owner of a company or other entity or a person in a company, institution or other entity who, with regard to their function, invested funds or on the basis of authorization, is entrusted with a certain range of tasks in managing property, production or other activity or in exercising supervision over them or is de facto entrusted with performing certain tasks. A responsible person is also considered to be an official person when criminal offences are concerned in which the responsible person is designated as the perpetrator, and which are not provided for in this code in the chapter on criminal offences against official duty, that is, as criminal offences of an official person.
(5) A military person is considered to be: a professional military person (contract soldier, non-commissioned officer, contract non-commissioned officer, officer and contract officer), a person in reserve composition (reserve soldier, reserve non-commissioned officer and reserve officer), a civilian person performing a certain military duty and a person who is subject to military obligation during a state of war or state of emergency.
(6) When an official person, responsible person or military person is designated as the perpetrator of certain criminal offences, the persons listed in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of this article may be perpetrators of those offences, unless it follows from the characteristics of an individual offence or from an individual regulation that the perpetrator can only be one of those persons.
(7) A child is considered to be a person who has not reached the age of fourteen.
(8) A juvenile is considered to be a person who has reached the age of fourteen but has not reached the age of eighteen.
(9) A minor is considered to be a person who has not reached the age of eighteen.
(10) A perpetrator is considered to be the principal, co-principal, instigator and accomplice.
(11) A victim is a person to whom physical or mental pain or suffering, property damage or violation of human rights and freedoms has been caused by an unlawful act prescribed by law as a criminal offence.
(12) Property benefit acquired by a criminal offence is considered to be property benefit acquired by a criminal offence, directly or indirectly, which consists of any increase or prevention of decrease of property that occurred through the commission of a criminal offence, property for which the property benefit acquired by a criminal offence has been exchanged or with which it has been merged or into which it has been converted, as well as any other benefit obtained from the property benefit acquired by a criminal offence or property for which the property benefit acquired by a criminal offence has been exchanged or into which it has been converted, regardless of whether it is located on the territory of Montenegro or outside it, as well as all documents proving any property right.
(13) A bribe, within the meaning of this code, is a gift or other unlawful property or non-property benefit, regardless of value.
(14) Force is also considered to be the use of hypnosis or intoxicating substances, with the aim of bringing someone into an unconscious state or incapacitating them for resistance against their will.
(15) Elections are considered to be elections for the Assembly of Montenegro, the President of Montenegro, local self-government bodies and other elections that are called and conducted on the basis of the Constitution and law.
(15a) Political subjects are considered to be subjects in accordance with the regulation governing the financing of political subjects and election campaigns.
(15b) An election campaign is considered to be a campaign in accordance with the regulation governing the financing of political subjects and election campaigns.
(16) A referendum is considered to be a vote of citizens in which decisions are made on issues for which this is determined by the Constitution or law.
(17) Narcotic drugs are considered to be substances and preparations that have been declared narcotic drugs by regulations based on law.
(18) Movable property is also considered to be any produced or collected energy for providing light, heat or motion, telephone impulse, as well as computer data and computer program.
(19) A computer system is considered to be any device or group of interconnected or interdependent devices, one or more of which, depending on the program, performs automatic data processing.
(20) Computer data is considered to be any presentation of facts, data or concepts in a form suitable for processing in a computer system, including programs by means of which the computer system performs its functions.
(21) A computer program is considered to be a set of ordered computer data on the basis of which a computer system performs its functions.
(22) A computer virus is a computer program that threatens or changes the functions of a computer system and changes, threatens or unlawfully uses computer data.
(23) Computer traffic data is considered to be all computer data generated by computer systems that form a chain of communication between two computer systems that communicate, including themselves.
(24) A protected natural asset is also considered to be an asset that enjoys preliminary protection under regulations on the protection of natural assets.
(25) A cultural asset is also considered to be an asset that enjoys preliminary protection under regulations on the protection of cultural assets, part of a cultural asset and the protected environment of an immovable cultural asset.
(26) Money is metal and paper money or money made of some other material that is in circulation in Montenegro or in a foreign state on the basis of law.
(27) Tokens of value are also considered to be foreign tokens of value.
(28) A motor vehicle is considered to be any means of transport with motor propulsion in land, water and air traffic.
(29) A document is considered to be any object that is suitable or intended to serve as proof of any fact that has significance for legal relations, as well as computer data.
(30) A file, letter, shipment and document may also be in electronic form.
(31) Members of a family or family community are also considered to be former spouses, blood relatives and relatives from full adoption in the direct line without limitation, and in the collateral line up to and including the fourth degree, relatives from incomplete adoption, relatives by marriage up to and including the second degree, persons living in the same family household and persons who have a common child or the child is on the way to being born although they have never lived in the same family household.
(32) The expression "shall not be punished" means that in that case there is no criminal offence.
(33) When the act of a criminal offence is determined by a continuous verb, it is considered that the offence has been committed if the act has been performed once or more times.
SPECIAL PART
CHAPTER FOURTEEN CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST LIFE AND BODY
Murder

Article 143

Whoever deprives another of life shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Aggravated murder

Article 144

Imprisonment of at least ten years or a long-term imprisonment sentence shall be imposed on:
1) whoever deprives another of life in a cruel or insidious manner;
2) whoever deprives another of life during reckless violent behaviour;
3) whoever deprives another of life and thereby intentionally endangers the life of another person;
4) whoever deprives another of life out of greed, for the purpose of committing or concealing another criminal offence, out of ruthless revenge or other base motives;
5) whoever deprives of life an official or military person in the performance of or in connection with the performance of official duty;
6) whoever deprives of life a child or a pregnant woman;
7) whoever deprives of life a member of his family or family community whom he had previously abused;
8) whoever intentionally deprives of life several persons, and it does not concern murder in the heat of passion, murder of a child during childbirth or deprivation of life out of compassion.
Murder in the heat of passion

Article 145

Whoever deprives another of life in the heat of passion, brought without his fault into a state of strong agitation by an attack, abuse or grave insult by the person killed, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Murder of a child during childbirth

Article 146

A mother who deprives of life her child during childbirth or immediately after childbirth, while she is in a state of disturbance caused by childbirth, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Deprivation of life out of compassion

Article 147

Whoever deprives of life an adult person out of compassion due to the serious health condition in which that person finds himself, and at his serious and explicit request, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Negligent deprivation of life

Article 148

Whoever deprives another of life through negligence shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Inducing suicide and assisting in suicide

Article 149

(1) Whoever induces another to commit suicide or assists him in committing suicide, and this is committed or attempted, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) Whoever assists another in committing suicide under the conditions of Article 147 of this Code, and this is committed or attempted, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) Whoever commits the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article against a minor or against a person who is in a state of substantially diminished mental capacity shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed against a child or against a person lacking mental capacity, the perpetrator shall be punished pursuant to Article 144 of this Code.
(5) Whoever treats cruelly or inhumanly a person who is in a relationship of subordination or dependence towards him, and that person as a result of such treatment commits or attempts suicide which can be attributed to the negligence of the perpetrator, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Unlawful termination of pregnancy

Article 150

(1) Whoever, contrary to the regulations on the performance of termination of pregnancy, performs an abortion on a pregnant woman with her consent, begins to perform an abortion or assists her in performing an abortion, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever performs or begins to perform an abortion on a pregnant woman without her consent, and if she is younger than eighteen years without her consent and without the written consent of her parent, adoptive parent or guardian, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article death, serious impairment of health or other serious bodily injury of the woman on whom the termination of pregnancy was performed has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished for the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article by imprisonment from six months to six years, and for the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Serious bodily injury

Article 151

(1) Whoever seriously injures another's body or seriously impairs his health shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) Whoever seriously injures another's body or impairs his health so seriously that as a result thereof the life of the injured person is endangered or an important part of his body or an important organ is destroyed or permanently and substantially damaged or weakened or permanent incapacity for work of the injured person is caused or permanent and serious impairment of his health or disfigurement, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of the injured person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) Whoever commits the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article through negligence shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(5) Whoever commits the offence from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article in the heat of passion, brought without his fault into a state of strong agitation by an attack, abuse or grave insult by the injured person, shall be punished for the offence from paragraph 1 by imprisonment up to three years, for the offence from paragraph 2 by imprisonment from three months to four years, and for the offence from paragraph 3 by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Mutilation of female genitalia
Article 151a
(1) Whoever mutilates the external parts of female genitalia shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Forced sterilisation
Article 151b
Whoever by use of force or threat performs sterilisation of another person with the aim of preventing his reproduction shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Minor bodily injury

Article 152

(1) Whoever slightly injures another's body or slightly impairs his health shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If such injury is inflicted with a weapon, a dangerous instrument or other means capable of seriously injuring the body or seriously impairing health, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(3) The court may pronounce a judicial admonition to the perpetrator of the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article if the perpetrator was provoked by indecent or rude behaviour of the injured party.
(4) Prosecution for the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article is undertaken by private action.
Participation in a fight

Article 153

Whoever participates in a fight in which someone is deprived of life or serious bodily injury is inflicted on another shall be punished for mere participation by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Endangering with a dangerous instrument during a fight or quarrel

Article 154

Whoever during a fight or quarrel reaches for a weapon, a dangerous instrument or other means capable of seriously injuring the body or seriously impairing health shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
Exposure to danger

Article 155

(1) Whoever leaves another person without assistance in a condition or circumstances dangerous to life or health which he himself caused shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article serious impairment of health or other serious bodily injury of the abandoned person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(3) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of the abandoned person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Abandonment of a helpless person

Article 156

(1) Whoever leaves without assistance a helpless person who has been entrusted to him or whom he is otherwise obliged to care for in a condition or circumstances dangerous to life or health shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article serious impairment of health or other serious bodily injury of the abandoned person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(3) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of the abandoned person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Failure to render assistance

Article 157

(1) Whoever fails to render assistance to a person who is in immediate danger to life although he could do so without danger to himself or another shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If as a result of failure to render assistance serious impairment of health or other serious bodily injury of the person who was in immediate danger to life has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(3) If as a result of failure to render assistance the death of the person who was in immediate danger to life has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST FREEDOMS AND RIGHTS OF MAN AND CITIZEN
Violation of the right to use language and script

Article 158

Whoever, contrary to regulations on the use of language and script of peoples or members of minority peoples and other minority national communities living in Montenegro, denies or restricts a citizen from using the language or script they use when exercising their rights or when addressing bodies or organizations, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of Equality

Article 159

(1) Whoever, on the basis of national or ethnic affiliation, affiliation to race or religion or due to the absence of such affiliation or due to differences in political or other conviction, sex, language, education, social position, social origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, property status or any other personal characteristic, denies or restricts another person's human rights and freedoms established by the Constitution, laws or other regulations or general acts or ratified international treaties, or on the basis of this difference grants them privileges or benefits, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed due to hatred towards a member of a group determined on the basis of race, colour, religion, origin, state or national affiliation, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 2 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Violation of Freedom to Express National or Ethnic Affiliation

Article 160

Whoever prevents another from expressing their national or ethnic affiliation or culture shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever forces another to declare their national or ethnic affiliation.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Violation of Freedom of Confession of Religion and Performance of Religious Rites

Article 161

(1) Whoever prevents or restricts freedom of belief or confession of religion shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever prevents or obstructs the performance of religious rites.
(3) Whoever forces another to declare their religious conviction shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) An official person who commits the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Unlawful Deprivation of Liberty

Article 162

(1) Whoever unlawfully confines, keeps confined or otherwise unlawfully deprives or restricts another person's freedom of movement shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person by abuse of their position or authority, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the unlawful deprivation of liberty lasted longer than thirty days or was carried out in a cruel manner or if the health of the person unlawfully deprived of liberty was seriously impaired as a result or other serious consequences occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article resulted in the death of the person unlawfully deprived of liberty, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(5) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Violation of Freedom of Movement and Residence

Article 163

(1) Whoever unlawfully denies or restricts another person's freedom of movement or residence on the territory of Montenegro shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Kidnapping

Article 164

(1) Whoever by force, threat, deception or in another manner takes away or detains a person with the intention of extorting money or any other property benefit from them or another person or of forcing them or another person to do something, not do something or endure something, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever, in order to achieve the goal of kidnapping, threatens to kill or cause serious bodily injury to the kidnapped person shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the kidnapped person was detained for longer than ten days or was treated in a cruel manner or their health was seriously impaired or other serious consequences occurred, or whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article against a minor, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article resulted in the death of the kidnapped person or if the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Coercion

Article 165

(1) Whoever by force or threat coerces another to do something or not do something or endure something shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article in a cruel manner or by threatening to kill or cause serious bodily injury or kidnapping shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article resulted in serious bodily injury or other serious consequences, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article resulted in the death of the coerced person or if the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Extortion of Statement

Article 166

(1) An official person who in the performance of duty uses force or threat or another impermissible means or impermissible manner with the intention of extorting a statement or any other declaration from the accused, witness, expert or another person shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If the extortion of a statement or declaration was accompanied by serious violence or if the extorted statement resulted in particularly serious consequences for the accused in criminal proceedings, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Ill-treatment
Article 166a
(1) Whoever ill-treats another or treats them in a manner that offends human dignity shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) An attempt of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished.
Torture

Article 167

(1) Whoever inflicts great pain or severe suffering on another, whether physical or mental, with the aim of obtaining from them or a third person a confession or other information, or of unlawfully punishing them or intimidating them, or of exerting pressure on them, or of intimidating or exerting pressure on a third person, or for any other reason based on discrimination, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty or if the act was committed with their explicit or tacit consent, or if the official person incited another person to commit the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Endangering Security

Article 168

(1) Whoever endangers the safety of a person by threatening to attack the life or body of that person or a person close to them, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article against multiple persons or if the act has caused public disturbance or other serious consequences or was committed out of hatred, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Stalking
Article 168a
(1) Whoever persistently stalks another in a manner that can significantly endanger their life, health, body or way of life, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed against a former marital or extramarital partner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) The perpetrator who commits the act against a minor, a pregnant woman or a person with a disability shall be punished by the penalty from paragraph 2 of this Article.
(4) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has caused danger to the life, health or body of another person or a person close to them, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(5) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has resulted in the death of another person or a person close to them, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(6) It is considered that someone persistently stalks another person within the meaning of this Article when, in a certain period of time, they:
1) unlawfully follow or undertake other actions aimed at physical approach to that person;
2) attempt to establish contact with that person against their will directly, through a third person or by means of communication;
3) misuse personal data of that person for the purpose of ordering goods or services;
4) threaten to attack the life, body or freedom of that person or a person close to them;
5) undertake other similar actions towards that person.
Violation of inviolability of dwelling

Article 169

(1) Whoever unlawfully enters another's dwelling or another's closed premises or does not leave that dwelling or premises at the request of an authorized person, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) An attempt of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished.
Unlawful search

Article 170

An official person who, in the performance of duty, unlawfully conducts a search of a dwelling, premises or person, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized disclosure of a secret

Article 171

(1) A lawyer, doctor or other person who unlawfully discloses a secret they learned in the performance of their profession, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) A person who discloses a secret in the public interest or in the interest of another person, which is more important than the interest of keeping the secret, shall not be punished for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article.
Violation of secrecy of letters and other mail

Article 172

(1) Whoever unlawfully opens another's letter, telegram or any other closed written document or mail or otherwise violates their secrecy or whoever unlawfully withholds, conceals, destroys or delivers to another person another's letter, telegram or other mail or whoever violates the secrecy of electronic mail, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever communicates to another the content they learned by violating the secrecy of another's letter or any other written document or mail, telegram or any other closed written document or mail or uses that content, shall also be punished by the penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized eavesdropping and recording

Article 173

(1) Whoever, by special devices, unlawfully eavesdrops or records a conversation, statement or any communication not intended for them, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever enables an unknown person to become acquainted with a conversation, statement or communication that was unlawfully eavesdropped or audio recorded, shall also be punished by the penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized photographing

Article 174

(1) Whoever unlawfully makes a photographic, film, video or other recording of a person and thereby significantly intrudes into their private life or whoever delivers or shows such a recording to a third person or otherwise enables them to become acquainted with it, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized publication and display of another's document, portrait and recording

Article 175

(1) Whoever publishes or displays a document, portrait, photograph, film or phonogram of a personal nature without the consent of the person who composed the document or to whom the document relates, or without the consent of the person depicted in the portrait, photograph or film or whose voice is recorded on the phonogram or without the consent of another person whose consent is required by law and thereby significantly intrudes into the private life of that person, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized collection and use of personal data

Article 176

(1) Whoever unlawfully obtains, communicates to another or uses data on identity that is collected, processed and used on the basis of law for a purpose for which it is not intended, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever, contrary to law, collects data on the identity of citizens or uses data collected in such a manner, shall also be punished by the penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) Whoever unlawfully assumes the identity of another person and under the name of that person uses some of their rights or acquires for themselves or another a benefit or by using their identity intrudes into the private life of that person or violates their personal dignity or causes them any damage, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Exclusion of existence of criminal offences from Articles 172 to 176 of this Code
Article 176a
A person who, by undertaking an act of commission of one of those offences, prevents or discovers a criminal offence for which a penalty of imprisonment of five years or a more severe penalty may be imposed by law, shall not be punished for the act from Articles 172 to 176 of this Code.
Violation of the right to submit a legal remedy

Article 177

(1) Whoever prevents another from exercising the right to submit a request, report, lawsuit, appeal, objection, other legal remedy, as well as other submission, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Violation of freedom of speech and public appearance

Article 178

(1) Whoever unlawfully denies or restricts another's freedom of speech or public appearance, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Prevention of printing and distribution of printed materials and broadcasting of programs

Article 179

(1) Whoever unlawfully prevents or obstructs the printing, recording, sale or distribution of books, magazines, newspapers, audio and video cassettes or other similar printed or recorded materials, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever unlawfully prevents or obstructs the broadcasting of radio and television programs shall also be punished by the penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Prevention of publication of reply and correction

Article 180

Whoever, contrary to a final court decision, refuses or prevents the publication of a response or correction of a published inaccurate fact or notification that violates someone's right or interest, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Preventing a Public Assembly

Article 181

(1) Whoever by force, threat, deception or in another manner prevents or obstructs a public assembly that is organized in accordance with the law, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person in the performance of duty, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Preventing Political, Trade Union and Other Organizing and Activity

Article 182

Whoever by deliberate violation of the law or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs political, trade union or other organizing or activity of citizens or the activity of their political, trade union or other organizations, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Prosecution for Criminal Offences against Freedoms and Rights of Man and Citizen

Article 183

Prosecution for the act from Art. 169 paragraph 1, 172 paragraphs 1 and 2, 173 paragraphs 1 and 2, 174 paragraph 1, 175 paragraph 1, 176 paragraphs 1 and 2 and 177 paragraph 1 of this Code shall be undertaken by private action, except when the injured party is a person from Article 42a paragraph 2 of this Code.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST ELECTORAL RIGHTS
Violation of the Right to Candidacy

Article 184

Whoever by violation of the law or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs candidacy in elections, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of the Right to Vote

Article 185

(1) Whoever, with the intention to prevent another from exercising the right to vote, unlawfully fails to register them in the voter list, deletes them from that list or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs them from voting, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, with the intention to enable another to vote, unlawfully registers them in the voter list or in another unlawful manner enables them to vote although they have no right to do so.
Violation of Freedom of Choice in Voting

Article 186

(1) Whoever by force or threat compels another or in another unlawful manner influences them to exercise or not exercise the right to vote in elections or in a referendum or to vote for or against a particular candidate, electoral list or proposal, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever requests or receives a gift or other benefit or accepts a promise of a gift or other benefit for themselves or another to vote or not vote or to vote in favour of or against a particular person.
(3) The accepted gift or other benefit shall be confiscated.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by a member of an electoral board or another person in the performance of duties related to voting, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(5) Whoever, after elections have been held or in a referendum, calls a voter to account in relation to voting or demands that they say how they voted or why they voted or did not vote, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Abuse of the Right to Vote

Article 187

(1) Whoever in elections or in a referendum votes instead of another person under their name or votes more than once in the same voting or uses more than one ballot paper, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) A member of an electoral board who enables another to commit the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Compiling Inaccurate Voter Lists

Article 188

Whoever, with the intention of influencing the results of elections or in a referendum, compiles an inaccurate voter list, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Preventing the Holding of Voting

Article 189

(1) Whoever by force, threat or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs the holding of voting at a polling station, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever obstructs voting by causing disorder at a polling station as a result of which voting is interrupted, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Preventing the Monitoring of Voting

Article 190

A member of an electoral administration body who prevents or obstructs the monitoring of the course of voting or the determination of voting results by a person who has that right under the law or based on a decision of a competent state authority, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of Voting Secrecy

Article 191

(1) Whoever in elections or a referendum violates the secrecy of voting, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by a member of an electoral board or another person in the performance of duties related to voting, they shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Falsification of Voting Results

Article 192

A member of an electoral administration body for conducting elections or a referendum or another person performing duties related to voting, who by adding or removing ballot papers or votes during counting or in another manner alters the number of ballot papers or votes or announces an untrue voting result, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Destruction of Voting Documents

Article 193

(1) Whoever destroys, damages, takes away or conceals a ballot paper or any other document on voting in elections or in a referendum, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by a member of an electoral board or another person in the performance of duties related to voting, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Unauthorized Use of State Property for Electoral Purposes
Article 193a
An official person who for the presentation of an electoral list uses or enables the use of property of state authorities, public institutions, public enterprises and funds, local self-government units and business entities in which the state has an ownership share, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Violation of Freedom of Choice in Financing Political Subjects and Electoral Campaigns
Article 193b
Whoever by force or threat or in another unlawful manner influences that monetary, non-monetary or other resources be given to a political subject for financing an electoral campaign or financing a political subject, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by an official person, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Acceptance of Contributions from Prohibited Sources
Article 193v
A responsible person in a political subject who could have and was obliged to know that the resources, contribution or other benefit represent income obtained through criminal activity, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, and could have and was obliged to know that the resources, contribution or other benefit represent income obtained through criminal activity, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
The accepted resources, contribution or other benefit shall be confiscated.
Serious Acts against Electoral Rights

Article 194

(1) If as a result of the act from Art. 185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192 and 193 of this Code there has been a disturbance of public order and peace and endangerment of property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros or the life of several persons has been endangered, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If as a result of the act from Art. 185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192 and 193 of this Code serious bodily injury to a person or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(3) If as a result of the act from Art. 185, 186, 187, 189, 190, 191, 192 and 193 of this Code the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to eighteen years.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST HONOUR AND REPUTATION
Art. 195 and 196
(deleted)
Disclosure of Personal and Family Circumstances

Article 197

(1) Whoever discloses or spreads something from the personal or family life of a person that may harm their honour or reputation shall be punished by a fine from three thousand to ten thousand euros.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through media or similar means or at a public gathering, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine from five thousand to fourteen thousand euros.
(3) If what was disclosed or spread has led or could have led to serious consequences for the injured party, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine of at least eight thousand euros.
(4) For disclosing or spreading personal or family circumstances committed in the performance of official duty, journalistic profession, defence of a right or in the protection of justified interests, the perpetrator shall not be punished if they prove the truthfulness of their assertion or if they prove that they had reasonable grounds to believe in the truthfulness of what they disclosed or spread.
(5) The truthfulness or untruthfulness of what is disclosed or spread from the personal or family life of a person may not be proven, except in cases from paragraph 4 of this Article.
Violation of the reputation of Montenegro

Article 198

Whoever publicly exposes to ridicule Montenegro, its flag, coat of arms or anthem shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of the reputation of peoples, minority peoples and other minority national communities

Article 199

Whoever publicly exposes to ridicule a people, minority people and other minority national community living in Montenegro shall be punished by a fine from three thousand to ten thousand euros.
Violation of the reputation of a foreign state or international organisation

Article 200

(1) Whoever publicly exposes to ridicule a foreign state with which Montenegro has diplomatic relations, its flag, coat of arms or anthem shall be punished by a fine from three thousand to ten thousand euros.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever publicly exposes to ridicule the United Nations, the International Red Cross or another international organisation of which Montenegro is a member.
Non-punishment for criminal offences from Articles 198 to 200

Article 201

The perpetrator shall not be punished for the act from Articles 198 to 200 of this Code if the exposure was given in the framework of serious criticism in a scientific, literary or artistic work, in the performance of official duty, journalistic profession, political activity, in the defence of a right or protection of justified interests, if it is evident from the manner of expression or from other circumstances that they did not do so with the intention of disparagement or if they prove the truthfulness of their assertion or that they had reasonable grounds to believe in the truthfulness of what they disclosed or spread.
Prosecution for criminal offences against honour and reputation

Article 202

(1) Prosecution for the act from Article 197 of this Code shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
(2) If the act from Article 197 of this Code was committed against a deceased person, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint of the spouse or person who lived with the deceased in a permanent extramarital union, relatives in direct line, adopter, adoptee, brother or sister of the deceased person.
(3) Prosecution for the criminal offence from Article 200 of this Code shall be undertaken with the approval of the Supreme State Prosecutor of Montenegro.
Public announcement of judgment for criminal offences against honour and reputation

Article 203

(1) Upon conviction for acts from Articles 197 to 200 of this Code committed through media, the court shall impose the security measure of public announcement of judgment (

Article 77)

If it concerns a criminal offence from Article 197 of this Code, the consent of the person against whom the act was committed is required for the imposition of this measure.
(2) The court shall exempt from punishment the perpetrator of the criminal offence from Article 197 of this Code and impose the security measure of public announcement of judgment if it assesses that the imposition of that measure is sufficient for achieving the general purpose of criminal sanctions.
(3) In cases from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the judgment shall be published in the same medium on the same page of the press, or in the same broadcast of electronic media in which the information containing the elements of the criminal offence was published or in the main news broadcasts. The court may decide that the judgment be published in other media as well.
(4) The court shall determine whether the judgment shall be published in its entirety or in extract.
(5) If an extract is published, it must contain notification of the rendering of the judgment with the operative part and the part of the reasoning of the judgment as decided by the court.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST SEXUAL FREEDOM
Rape

Article 204

(1) Whoever commits sexual intercourse or an act equivalent thereto with another person without their consent shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever forces another person into sexual intercourse or an act equivalent thereto by use of force or threat to directly attack the life or body of that or another person shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article was committed by threat to reveal something for that or another person that would harm their honour or reputation or by threat of other serious harm, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of this Article serious bodily injury of the person against whom the act was committed occurred or if the act was committed by several persons or in a particularly cruel or particularly humiliating manner or against a minor or the act resulted in pregnancy, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of this Article the death of the person against whom the act was committed occurred or the act was committed against a child, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Sexual intercourse with a helpless person

Article 205

(1) Whoever commits sexual intercourse or an act equivalent thereto with another person by exploiting mental illness, retarded mental development, other mental disorder, helplessness or any other condition of that person due to which they are incapable of resistance shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury of the helpless person occurred or if the act was committed by several persons or in a particularly cruel or particularly humiliating manner or was committed against a minor or the act resulted in pregnancy, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of the person against whom the act was committed occurred or if the act was committed against a child, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten.
Sexual intercourse with a child

Article 206

(1) Whoever commits sexual intercourse or an act equivalent thereto with a child shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury of the child against whom the act was committed occurred or the act was committed by several persons or the act resulted in pregnancy, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of the child occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten.
(4) The perpetrator shall not be punished for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article if there is no significant difference between them and the child in their mental and physical maturity.
Sexual intercourse by abuse of position

Član 207

(1) Whoever, by abusing their position, induces into sexual intercourse or an equivalent act a person who is in a relationship of subordination or dependence to them, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) A teacher, educator, guardian, adopter, parent, stepfather, stepmother or other person who, by abusing their position or authority, commits sexual intercourse or an equivalent act with a minor entrusted to them for learning, education, care or custody, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 2 of this Article was committed against a child, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article resulted in pregnancy, the perpetrator shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 by imprisonment from six months to five years, for the act from paragraph 2 by imprisonment from two to twelve years, and for the act from paragraph 3 by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(5) If the death of a child occurred as a result of the act from paragraph 3 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Unlawful Sexual Acts

Član 208

(1) Whoever, under the conditions from Article 204 paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, Article 205 paragraphs 1 and 2, Article 206 paragraph 1 and Article 207 paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Code, commits some other sexual act, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article resulted in serious bodily injury to the person against whom the act was committed, or if the act was committed by several persons or in a particularly cruel or particularly humiliating manner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article resulted in the death of the person against whom the act was committed, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Procuring and Enabling Sexual Intercourse

Član 209

(1) Whoever procures a minor for the purpose of committing sexual intercourse, an equivalent act or other sexual act, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever enables the commission of sexual intercourse, an equivalent act or other sexual act with a minor, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Mediation in Prostitution

Član 210

(1) Whoever induces or incites another to prostitution or participates in handing over a person to another for the purpose of prostitution, or whoever propagates or advertises prostitution through public information media and other similar means, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to two years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed against a minor or was committed by several persons in an organized manner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) The penalty from paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be imposed on a person who uses the sexual services of a minor.
(4) Mediation in prostitution is, within the meaning of this Article, the use of a person for sexual activities whereby money or any other form of compensation or reward is given or promised as payment for engaging that person in sexual activities, regardless of whether that payment, promise or reward is given to that person or to a third party.
Child Pornography

Član 211

(1) Whoever sells, gives, shows or makes available to a child by public display, through information and communication technologies or in any other manner, pictures, texts, audiovisual or other objects of pornographic content, or shows them a pornographic performance, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) Whoever induces or exploits a child for the production of pictures, audiovisual or other objects of pornographic content (child pornography) or for a pornographic performance, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) The penalty from paragraph 2 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever unlawfully records, produces, offers, makes available, distributes, imports, exports, procures for themselves or another, sells, gives, shows, publicly displays or possesses pictures, audiovisual or other objects of pornographic content (child pornography).
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed against a minor, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(5) If the act from paragraph 2 of this Article was committed using force or threat, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(6) The objects from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall be confiscated and destroyed.
(7) Child pornography, within the meaning of this Article, is considered to be any material that visually depicts a child engaged in real or simulated sexually explicit conduct and any depiction of a child's sexual organs for primarily sexual purposes.
Inducing a Minor to Witness the Commission of Criminal Offences Against Sexual Freedom
Član 211a
(1) Whoever induces a child to witness rape, sexual intercourse or an equivalent act, or other unlawful sexual act, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed against a minor using force or threat, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed using force or threat, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Luring a Child for the Purpose of Committing Criminal Offences Against Sexual Freedom
Član 211b
An adult person who, with the intention of committing a criminal offence from Article 204 paragraph 5, Article 205 paragraph 3, Article 206, Article 207 paragraph 3, Article 208 paragraph 1, Article 209, Article 210 paragraph 1 and Article 211 paragraphs 1 and 4 of this Code, using information and communication technology means or in any other manner, arranges a meeting with a child and undertakes actions for that meeting to take place, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Prosecution for Criminal Offences Against Sexual Freedom

Član 212

(deleted)
CHAPTER NINETEEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST MARRIAGE AND FAMILY
Bigamy

Član 213

(1) Whoever enters into a new marriage while already being in a marriage, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever enters into marriage with a person whom they know is already in a marriage.
Conclusion of a Void Marriage

Član 214

(1) Whoever, when concluding a marriage, conceals from the other party a fact due to which the marriage is void, or misleads the other party or maintains them in error about that fact, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever forces another person to conclude a marriage by force or threat, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) Whoever induces another person to go abroad or takes them abroad with the intention of committing the criminal offence from paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(4) Prosecution for the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article may be undertaken only if the marriage thus concluded has been annulled.
Enabling the Conclusion of an Unlawful Marriage

Član 215

An official authorized to conclude marriages who, in the performance of their official duty, knowingly permits the conclusion of a marriage that is prohibited or void by law, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Extramarital Union with a Minor

Član 216

(1) An adult person who lives in an extramarital union with a minor shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a parent, adopter or guardian who enables a minor to live in an extramarital union with another person or induces them to do so.
(3) If the act from paragraph 2 of this Article was committed by force, threat or for gain, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years..
(4) If a marriage is concluded, prosecution shall not be undertaken, and if it has been undertaken, it shall be discontinued.
Abduction of a Minor

Article 217

(1) Whoever unlawfully detains or takes away a minor from a parent, adoptive parent, guardian or other person, or institution, to whom the minor has been entrusted, or prevents the execution of a decision by which the minor has been entrusted to a certain person, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever prevents the execution of a decision of the competent authority determining the manner of maintaining personal relations of a minor with a parent or other relative, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed out of greed or other base motives, or if as a result of the act the health, upbringing or education of the minor was seriously endangered, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(4) The perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article who voluntarily hands over the minor to the person or institution to whom the minor has been entrusted, or enables the execution of the decision on entrusting the minor, may be exempted from punishment by the court.
(5) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to hand over the minor within a specified period to the person or institution to whom the minor has been entrusted, or to enable the execution of the decision by which the minor has been entrusted to a certain person or institution, or the decision determining the manner of maintaining personal relations of the minor with a parent or other relative.
Change of family status

Article 218

(1) Whoever by substitution, exchange or in another manner changes the family status of a child, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever by exchange or in another manner through negligence changes the family status of a child, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(3) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Abandonment and abuse of a minor

Article 219

(1) A parent, adoptive parent, guardian or other person who by gross neglect of their duty of care and upbringing abandons a minor for whom they are obliged to care, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) A parent, adoptive parent, guardian or other person who abuses a minor or forces them to excessive work or work that does not correspond to the age of the minor, or to begging, or out of greed induces them to perform other actions that are harmful to their development, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Domestic violence or violence in the family community

Article 220

(1) Whoever by application of gross violence violates the physical or mental integrity of a member of their family or family community, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If in the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a weapon, dangerous tool or other means capable of seriously injuring the body or seriously damaging health was used, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious damage to health occurred, or they were committed against a minor, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(4) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article the death of a family member or member of the family community occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(5) Whoever violates measures of protection from domestic violence imposed on them by a court or other state authority on the basis of law, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Failure to provide maintenance

Article 221

(1) Whoever fails to provide maintenance for a person whom they are obliged by law to maintain, and this obligation has been established by an enforceable court decision or enforceable settlement before a court or other competent authority, in the amount and manner as established by the decision or settlement, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) The perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be punished if for justified reasons they did not provide maintenance.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious consequences for the maintained person occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) In the court decision, the court imposes an obligation on the perpetrator to settle due obligations and to regularly provide maintenance.
Violation of family obligations

Article 222

(1) Whoever by violation of family obligations established by law leaves in a difficult situation a family member who is not able to take care of themselves, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious damage to the health of a family member occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of a family member occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to perform their family obligations established by law.
Incest

Article 223

An adult person who commits sexual intercourse or an equivalent sexual act with a minor blood relative in the direct line or with a minor brother or sister, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
CHAPTER TWENTY
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST RIGHTS ARISING FROM EMPLOYMENT
Violation of rights arising from employment

Article 224

(1) Whoever knowingly fails to comply with laws or other regulations, collective agreements and other general acts on rights arising from employment and on special protection at work of youth, women and persons with disabilities, and thereby denies or restricts another's right to which they are entitled, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever terminates the employment contract of an employee who, due to justified suspicion that a criminal offence with characteristics of corruption was committed, filed a report or contacted competent persons or authorities, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Violation of equality in employment

Article 225

Whoever by knowingly violating regulations or in another unlawful manner denies or restricts the right of citizens to free employment on the territory of Montenegro under equal conditions, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unlawful employment
Article 225a
Whoever employs a foreigner who is not a citizen of a member state of the European Union, nor enjoys the right of freedom of movement in the European Union, and who is illegally residing on the territory of Montenegro, under working conditions that are exploitative, or knowing that they are a victim of human trafficking, or younger than eighteen years, or for a longer period, or re-employs them, or simultaneously employs such persons in larger numbers, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Violation of the right to management

Article 226

(1) Whoever by force, threat, knowingly violating regulations or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs the decision-making of a management body or a member of a management body from participating in the work and decision-making in that body, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed by an official or responsible person by abuse of position or authority, they shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Violation of the right to strike

Article 227

(1) Whoever by force, threat or in another unlawful manner prevents or obstructs employees from organizing a strike, participating in it or otherwise exercising the right to strike in accordance with law, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever terminates the employment contract of one or more employees because of their participation in a strike that was organized and conducted in accordance with law, collective agreement, or applies other measures against them that violate their rights arising from employment.
Abuse of the right to strike

Article 228

Whoever organizes or leads a strike contrary to law or other regulations and thereby endangers the life or health of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, or if as a result thereof other serious consequences occurred, unless thereby the elements of another criminal offence are realized, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Violation of rights arising from social insurance

Article 229

Whoever knowingly fails to comply with laws or other regulations or general acts on social insurance and thereby denies or restricts a person's right to which they are entitled, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Abuse of social insurance rights

Article 230

Whoever by simulating or causing illness or incapacity for work or in another unlawful manner achieves recognition of a right from social insurance to which they are not entitled under law or other regulations or general acts, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of rights during temporary unemployment

Article 231

Whoever knowingly fails to comply with laws or other regulations or general acts on the rights of citizens during temporary unemployment and thereby denies or restricts another person's right to which they are entitled, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Failure to undertake occupational safety measures

Article 232

(1) A person responsible for undertaking occupational safety measures who knowingly fails to comply with laws or other regulations or general acts on occupational safety measures as a result of which danger to the life or health of employees may occur, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If a suspended sentence is pronounced, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to comply with regulations on occupational safety measures within a specified period.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Violation of moral rights of authors and performers

Article 233

(1) Whoever under their own name or the name of another publishes in whole or in part, places in circulation copies of another's copyrighted work or performance, or in another manner publicly communicates another's copyrighted work or performance, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever under their own name publishes in whole or in part another's copyrighted work on the basis of which they are elected to a scientific or teaching-scientific title, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to four years.
(3) Whoever without the author's permission alters or adapts another's copyrighted work or alters another's recorded performance, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) Whoever places in circulation copies of another's copyrighted work or performance in a manner that offends the honour or reputation of the author or performer, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(5) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
(6) Prosecution for the offence from paragraph 4 of this Article shall be undertaken upon private action.
Unauthorised exploitation of copyrighted work or subject matter of related rights

Article 234

(1) Whoever without authorisation publishes, records, reproduces or in another manner publicly communicates or makes available, in whole or in part, a copyrighted work, performance, phonogram, videogram, broadcast or database, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply to whoever places in circulation or, with the intention of placing in circulation, holds unauthorisedly reproduced or unauthorisedly placed in circulation copies of a copyrighted work, performance, phonogram, videogram, broadcast or database.
(3) If the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed with the intention of acquiring material gain for oneself or another, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(4) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
Unauthorised circumvention of protection measures intended to prevent violations of copyright and related rights and information about rights

Article 235

(1) Whoever manufactures, imports, places in circulation, sells, leases, advertises for the purpose of sale or leasing, or holds for commercial purposes devices or means whose primary or predominant purpose is the removal, circumvention or frustration of technological measures intended to prevent violations of copyright and related rights, or whoever uses such devices or means for the purpose of violating copyright or related rights, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
Unauthorised removal or alteration of electronic information about copyright and related rights

Article 236

(1) Whoever without authorisation removes or alters electronic information about copyright and related rights or places in circulation, imports, broadcasts or in another manner publicly communicates or makes available a copyrighted work or subject matter of related rights protection from which electronic information about rights has been unauthorisedly removed or altered, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
Unauthorised use of another's patent

Article 237

(1) Whoever without authorisation manufactures, imports, exports, offers for placing in circulation, places in circulation, stores or uses in commercial circulation a product or process protected by a patent, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If by the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article material gain has been acquired or damage caused in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) Whoever without authorisation publishes or in another manner makes available the essence of another's filed invention before this invention has been published in the manner prescribed by law, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(4) Whoever without authorisation files a patent application or in the application fails to state or falsely states the inventor, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(5) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
Unauthorised use of another's design

Article 238

(1) Whoever on their product in circulation uses without authorisation, in whole or in part, another's filed or protected product design, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever without authorisation publishes or in another manner makes available to the public the subject matter of another's design application before it has been published in the manner prescribed by law, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(3) Objects of commission of the criminal offence and objects that were used or intended for commission of the criminal offence from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be confiscated, and objects of commission of the criminal offence shall be destroyed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Theft

Article 239

(1) Whoever takes away another's movable thing from another with the intention of acquiring unlawful material gain for oneself or another by appropriating it, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) An attempt of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Aggravated theft

Article 240

(1) The perpetrator of the offence of theft (

Article 239) shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years, if the theft was committed

1) by breaking into or burglary of closed buildings, rooms, safes, cabinets or other closed spaces or by overcoming other major obstacles;
2) by several persons who have joined together for the purpose of committing thefts;
3) in a particularly dangerous or particularly audacious manner;
4) by a person who had on them any weapon or dangerous tool for the purpose of attack or defence;
5) during a fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster;
6) by exploiting the helplessness or other difficult situation of a person;
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on the perpetrator of the act of theft if the value of the stolen items exceeds the amount of three thousand euros or the stolen item represents a cultural or natural asset.
(3) If the value of the stolen items exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Robbery theft

Article 241

(1) Whoever is caught in the act of theft and, with the intention of retaining the stolen item, uses force against a person or threatens to directly attack life or body, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If the value of the stolen items exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the value of the stolen items exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article was committed by a group or if serious bodily injury was intentionally inflicted on a person, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years,
(5) If during the commission of the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article a person was intentionally deprived of life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(6) If the value of the stolen items from paragraph 1 of this Article does not exceed the amount of one hundred and fifty euros, and the perpetrator intended to obtain a small pecuniary gain, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(7) An attempt of the act from paragraph 6 of this Article shall be punished.
Robbery

Article 242

(1) Whoever by using force against a person or by threatening to directly attack life or body takes away another's movable property with the intention of obtaining unlawful pecuniary gain for themselves or another by appropriating it, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) If the value of the taken items exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If the value of the taken items exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article was committed by a group or if serious bodily injury was intentionally inflicted on a person, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(5) If during the commission of the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article a person was intentionally deprived of life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(6) If the value of the stolen items from paragraph 1 of this Article does not exceed the amount of one hundred and fifty euros, and the perpetrator intended to obtain a small pecuniary gain, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(7) An attempt of the act from paragraph 6 of this Article shall be punished.
Embezzlement

Article 243

(1) Whoever with the intention of obtaining unlawful pecuniary gain for themselves or another appropriates another's movable property that has been entrusted to them, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If the value of the embezzled items exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(3) If the value of the embezzled items exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros or the embezzled item represents a cultural asset, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) Whoever unlawfully appropriates another's movable property that they found or came upon by chance with the intention of obtaining pecuniary gain for themselves or another, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) For the acts from paragraphs 1 and 4 of this Article, if the embezzled items are in private ownership, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
Fraud

Article 244

(1) Whoever with the intention of obtaining unlawful pecuniary gain for themselves or another leads someone into error by false representation or concealment of facts or maintains them in error and thereby induces them to do or not do something to the detriment of their own or another's property, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article solely with the intention of harming another, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(3) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article pecuniary gain was obtained or damage was caused in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article pecuniary gain was obtained or damage was caused in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Arranging the outcome of a competition
Article 244a
(1) Whoever arranges the outcome of a sports or other competition with the intention of obtaining gain for themselves or another, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If by the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article pecuniary gain was obtained whose value exceeds the amount of ten thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If by the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article pecuniary gain was obtained whose value exceeds the amount of forty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(4) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Unjustified obtaining and use of credit and other benefits

Article 245

(1) Whoever by false representation of facts or their concealment obtains for themselves or another a credit, subsidy or other benefit although they do not meet the prescribed conditions, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever uses the obtained credit, subsidy or other benefit for a purpose other than that for which the credit, subsidy or other benefit was approved, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(3) For the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the prescribed penalty shall also be imposed on the responsible person in a business company or other business entity if the credit, subsidy or other benefit was obtained for the business company or other business entity or if they were used for unintended purposes by these entities.
Petty theft, embezzlement and fraud

Article 246

(1) Whoever commits petty theft, embezzlement or fraud, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) Theft, embezzlement and fraud are considered petty if the value of the stolen or embezzled item, or the damage caused by fraud does not exceed the amount of one hundred and fifty euros, and the perpetrator intended to obtain a small pecuniary gain, or to cause small damage.
(3) For the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, if it was committed to the detriment of private property, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
Taking away another's property

Article 247

(1) Whoever without the intention of obtaining pecuniary gain unlawfully takes away another's movable property, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) If the value of the taken or appropriated item exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to two years.
(3) If the value of the taken or appropriated item exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros or the item represents a cultural asset, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(4) For the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, if the taken item is in private ownership, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
Taking away a vehicle

Article 248

(1) Whoever unlawfully takes another's motor vehicle with the intention of using it for driving shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article negligently caused damage to the taken vehicle exceeding the amount of one thousand euros or enables another to do so, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(3) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Abuse of trust

Article 249

(1) Whoever, representing the property interests of a person or taking care of their property, abuses the powers given to them with the intention of thereby acquiring a property benefit for themselves or another or damaging the person whose property interests they represent or whose property they take care of, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired or damage was caused in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(3) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired or damage was caused in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article is committed by a guardian or lawyer, they shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 by imprisonment from six months to five years, for the act from paragraph 2 by imprisonment from one to eight years, and for the act from paragraph 3 by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Extortion

Article 250

(1) Whoever, with the intention of acquiring an unlawful property benefit for themselves or another, by force or threat compels another to do or not do something to the detriment of their own or another's property, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished from two to ten years.
(3) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) Whoever engages in committing the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article or the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Blackmail

Article 251

(1) Whoever, with the intention of acquiring an unlawful property benefit for themselves or another, threatens another that they will disclose something about them or a person close to them that would harm their honor or reputation and thereby compels them to do or not do something to the detriment of their own or another's property, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a property benefit was acquired in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) Whoever engages in committing the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article or the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Usury

Article 252

(1) Whoever lends money or other consumable things and thereby contracts a disproportionate property benefit, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years and a fine.
(2) Whoever, for lending money or other consumable things to a person, receives or contracts for themselves or another a disproportionate property benefit, while exploiting the difficult financial situation, difficult circumstances, necessity, recklessness or insufficient capacity for reasoning of the injured party, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious consequences occurred for the injured party or the perpetrator acquired a property benefit in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, they shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine.
(4) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article a property benefit was acquired in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years and a fine.
Destruction and damage to another's property

Article 253

(1) Whoever destroys, damages or renders unusable another's property, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article damage was caused in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(3) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article damage was caused in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) For acts from paragraph 1 of this Article, if the damaged property is privately owned, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
Destruction and damage to cultural property
Article 253a
(1) Whoever damages, destroys or renders unusable a cultural property, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Smuggling of cultural property
Article 253b
(1) Whoever, without permission from the competent authority, imports or exports from Montenegro a cultural property, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever alienates a cultural property that they exported from Montenegro without permission from the competent authority, shall be punished by imprisonment up to five years.
(3) Whoever engages in committing the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years and a fine.
(4) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Unlawful occupation of land

Article 254

(1) Whoever unlawfully occupies another's land, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the occupied land is part of a protected forest, national park or other land with a special purpose, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Damage to another's rights

Article 255

(1) Whoever, with the intention of preventing the realization of rights to a thing, alienates, destroys, damages or takes away their own thing on which another has a lien or right of use and thereby damages them, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, with the intention of preventing the satisfaction of a creditor during enforcement proceedings, alienates, destroys, damages or conceals parts of their property and thereby damages the creditor.
(3) For acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, if citizens are injured, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private complaint.
Concealment

Article 256

(1) Whoever conceals, disposes of, purchases, receives in pledge or otherwise acquires a thing which they know was obtained by a criminal act or what was obtained for it by sale or exchange, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years, provided that the penalty cannot be greater than the penalty prescribed for the act by which the thing was obtained.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, and could have and was obliged to know that the thing was obtained by a criminal act, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(3) If the perpetrator engages in committing the criminal act from paragraph 1 of this Article or the act was committed by several persons in an organized manner or the value of the concealed things exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, they shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Appropriation, concealment and destruction of archival material
Article 256a
(1) Whoever appropriates, conceals, damages to a greater extent, destroys or otherwise renders unusable registry material or archival material or exports them to another state without prior approval from the competent authority or enables another to do so, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in relation to registry material or archival material of great significance, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
Prosecution in cases where the perpetrator is in a close relationship with the injured party

Article 257

For criminal offences from Articles 239, 240, 244, 248, 249 paragraphs 1 to 3 and 256 of this code, if committed against a spouse, a person with whom the perpetrator lives in a permanent extramarital union, a blood relative in direct line, a brother or sister, an adopter or adoptee or other persons with whom the perpetrator lives in a common household, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private action.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST PAYMENT TRANSACTIONS AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Counterfeiting Money

Article 258

(1) Whoever makes counterfeit money with the intention of putting it into circulation as genuine or whoever with the same intention alters genuine money, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) Whoever obtains, holds or transfers counterfeit money with the intention of putting it into circulation as genuine or whoever puts counterfeit money into circulation, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article counterfeit money has been made, altered, put into circulation or obtained in an amount exceeding fifteen thousand euros, or the corresponding amount in foreign currency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(4) Whoever puts into circulation counterfeit money which he received as genuine, and having learned that it is counterfeit, or whoever knows that counterfeit money has been made or that counterfeit money has been put into circulation, and fails to report it, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) Counterfeit money shall be confiscated.
(6) Counterfeit money, within the meaning of this criminal offence, shall also include money made in the manner and from the material as genuine money, contrary to the regulations governing the production of money.
Counterfeiting Securities

Article 259

(1) Whoever makes counterfeit securities or alters genuine securities with the intention of using them as genuine or giving them to another for use or whoever uses such counterfeit securities as genuine or obtains them with that intention, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) If the total amount for which the counterfeited securities from paragraph 1 of this Article are issued exceeds three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the total amount for which the counterfeited securities from paragraph 1 of this Article are issued exceeds thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) Whoever puts into circulation counterfeit securities which he received as genuine, and having learned that they are counterfeit, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) Counterfeit securities shall be confiscated.
Counterfeiting and Misuse of Credit Cards and Cards for Cashless Payment

Article 260

(1) Whoever makes a counterfeit payment card or whoever alters a genuine payment card with the intention of using it as genuine, or whoever obtains, holds or transfers such a counterfeit payment card or another person's genuine payment card that has been unlawfully obtained for the purpose of use or uses such a card, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has obtained unlawful material gain by using the card, he shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has obtained unlawful material gain in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, he shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has obtained unlawful material gain in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, he shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(5)
(deleted)
Counterfeiting Value Tokens

Article 261

(1) Whoever makes counterfeit or alters genuine value tokens with the intention of using them as genuine or giving them to another for use or whoever uses such counterfeit tokens as genuine or obtains them with that intention, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the total value of the tokens from paragraph 1 of this Article exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the total value of the tokens from paragraph 1 of this Article exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) Whoever by removing the stamp by which value tokens are cancelled or by any other means attempts to give these tokens the appearance of not having been used for the purpose of reuse or whoever reuses used tokens or sells them as valid, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) Counterfeit value tokens shall be confiscated.
Making, Obtaining and Giving to Another Means and Materials for Counterfeiting

Article 262

(1) Whoever makes, obtains, sells, holds for use or gives to another for use means and materials for making counterfeit money, payment cards or counterfeit securities, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, for the purpose of making counterfeit money, makes, obtains, sells, holds for use, holds or gives to another holograms or other components of money that serve to protect against counterfeiting.
(3) Whoever makes, obtains, sells, holds for use or gives to another for use means for making counterfeit value tokens, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(4) The means from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall be confiscated.
Issuing Checks and Means of Cashless Payment Without Cover

Article 263

(1) Whoever uses a credit card knowing that he will not provide cover within the agreed period, and thereby obtains for himself or another unlawful material gain exceeding five hundred euros, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever issues or puts into circulation a check, bill of exchange, any guarantee or any other means of payment or security for payment, although he knows that there is no cover for it and thereby obtains for himself or another unlawful material gain in an amount exceeding five hundred euros.
(3) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article material gain has been obtained in an amount exceeding three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article material gain has been obtained in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Tax and Contribution Evasion

Article 264

(1) Whoever, with the intention that he or some other natural or legal person completely or partially avoids payment of taxes, contributions or other prescribed levies, gives false information about lawfully acquired income, about objects or other facts that are relevant for determining such obligations or whoever with the same intention, in case of mandatory reporting, fails to report lawfully acquired income, or objects or other facts that are relevant for determining such obligations or whoever with the same intention in another way conceals information relating to the determination of the stated obligations, and the amount of the obligation whose payment is avoided exceeds one thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years and a fine.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed to the detriment of the financial interests of the European Union, the perpetrator shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for that act.
(3) If the amount of the obligation from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article whose payment is avoided exceeds ten thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years and a fine.
(4) If the amount of the obligation from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article whose payment is avoided exceeds one hundred thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years and a fine.
Smuggling

Article 265

(1) Whoever engages in transporting goods across the customs line while avoiding customs control measures or whoever transports goods across the customs line while avoiding customs control measures while armed, in a group or using force or threat, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine.
(2) Whoever transports across the customs line, while avoiding customs control measures, a large quantity of weapons or ammunition or weapons whose possession is prohibited to citizens or other goods whose production or trade is restricted or prohibited, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years and a fine.
(3) Whoever engages in selling, distributing or concealing non-customs cleared goods or organizes a network of resellers or intermediaries for distributing such goods, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years and a fine.
(4) The goods that are the subject of the offence under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall be confiscated.
(5) A means of transport whose secret or hidden spaces were used for transporting goods that are the subject of the offence under paragraph 1 of this Article or which is intended for the commission of such criminal offences may be confiscated if the owner or user of the vehicle knew or could and should have known this and if the value of the goods that are the subject of the criminal offence exceeds one third of the value of the means of transport at the time of commission of the criminal offence.
Unauthorized Engagement in Economic, Banking, Stock Exchange and Insurance Activities

Article 266

(1) Whoever without registration or authorization or contrary to the conditions under which it was granted engages in economic or other activity or whoever registers a company or registers to perform economic activity as an entrepreneur contrary to the prohibition on registering a company or entrepreneur, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years and a fine.
(2) Whoever without authorization or contrary to the conditions under which it was granted engages in banking, stock exchange or insurance activity, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) For the offence under paragraph 2 of this Article, the responsible person in a legal entity shall also be punished by the prescribed penalty if the legal entity unlawfully engages in any of the specified activities, provided that the responsible person knew or could and should have known this.
Issuing Securities Without Cover

Article 267

(1) A responsible person in a bank, company or other business entity that issues securities, who permits the issuance of securities, although they knew or could and should have known of the impossibility of fulfilling the issuer's obligations arising from the issue, under the conditions, within the time limit and in the manner determined by law or the decision on the issue, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) An official who approves the issuance of securities although they knew or could and should have known of the impossibility of fulfilling the obligations arising from the issue under the conditions, within the time limit and in the manner determined by law or the decision on the issue, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(3) A responsible person in a bank who approves a guarantee for a particular issue of securities although they knew or could and should have known of the impossibility of fulfilling the obligation undertaken by the bank through the guarantee, under the conditions, within the time limit and in the manner provided by law or the guarantee, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
Money Laundering

Article 268

(1) Whoever performs the conversion or transfer of money or other property with knowledge that it was obtained through criminal activity, with the intention of concealing or falsely representing the origin of the money or other property, or whoever acquires, holds or uses money or other property with knowledge at the time of receipt that it originates from the commission of criminal activity, or whoever conceals or falsely represents facts about the nature, origin, place of deposit, movement, disposal or ownership of money or other property which they know was obtained through criminal activity, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on the perpetrator of the offence under paragraph 1 of this Article who is also the perpetrator or accomplice in the criminal offence by which the money or property under paragraph 1 of this Article was obtained or who assists the perpetrator in order to avoid their liability for the committed offence, or with the same purpose undertakes actions to conceal the origin of the money or property under paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the amount of money or value of property under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article exceeds forty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(4) If the offence under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by several persons who have joined together to commit such offences, they shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(5) Whoever commits the offence under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, and could and should have known that the money or property represents proceeds obtained through criminal activity, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(6) The money and property under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall be confiscated.
(7) Property, within the meaning of this Article, includes property rights of any kind, regardless of whether they relate to goods of a material or immaterial nature, movable or immovable things, securities and other documents proving property rights.
Violation of Equality in Conducting Economic Activity

Article 269

(1) Whoever by abuse of their official position or authority restricts the free or independent association of a company or other business entity in conducting economic activity, denies or restricts their right to conduct economic activity in a certain area, places them in an unequal position compared to other business entities regarding business conditions or restricts the free conduct of economic activity, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) The penalty under paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever abuses their social position or influence in order to commit the criminal offence under paragraph 1 of this Article.
Abuse of Monopolistic Position

Article 270

A responsible person in a company or other business entity, who by abusing a monopolistic or dominant position in the market or by concluding a monopolistic agreement causes a disturbance in the market or brings that entity into a privileged position in relation to others, thereby obtaining a material benefit for that entity or for another entity or causing damage to other business entities, consumers or service users, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Unauthorized Use of Another's Firm Name

Article 271

Whoever with the intention of deceiving buyers or service users makes use of another's firm name, another's geographical indication of origin, another's trademark or protective mark or another's special designation of goods or introduces individual features of these designations into their own firm name, their own trademark or protective mark or into their own special designation of goods, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Abuse of Position in Business Operations

Article 272

(1) A responsible person in a company, other business entity or other legal entity who by abusing their position or trust regarding the disposal of another's property, exceeding the limits of their authority or failing to perform their duty obtains for themselves or another an unlawful material benefit or causes material damage to another, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) The penalty under paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, with the intention of obtaining for themselves or another an unlawful material benefit, appropriates money, securities or other movable things entrusted to them at work in a company, other business entity or other legal entity.
(3) If as a result of the offence under paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article a material benefit exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros was obtained, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.

Article 273

(1) A responsible person in a business company or other business entity who, by irrational spending of funds or their alienation for no consideration, excessive indebtedness, assumption of disproportionate obligations, reckless conclusion of contracts with persons incapable of payment, failure to timely collect receivables, destruction or concealment of property or other actions that are not in accordance with conscientious business conduct, causes bankruptcy and thereby damages another, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2)
(deleted)
Causing False Bankruptcy

Article 274

(1) A responsible person in a business company or other business entity who, with the intention that such entity avoids payment of obligations, causes the bankruptcy of that entity by apparent or actual reduction of its property, in a manner that:
1) conceals all or part of the property of the business entity, fictitiously sells it, sells it below market value or transfers it free of charge;
2) concludes fictitious debt contracts or acknowledges non-existent claims;
3) conceals, destroys or alters the business books that the business entity is obliged to keep by law in such a way that the business results or the state of assets or obligations cannot be ascertained from them, or presents this state by creating false documents or in another manner in such a way that bankruptcy can be initiated on the basis thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If serious consequences for the creditor have occurred as a result of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Damaging the Creditor

Article 275

(1) A responsible person in a business company or other business entity who, knowing that such entity has become unable to pay, by repayment of debt or in another manner intentionally places a creditor in a more favourable position and thereby significantly damages another creditor, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) A responsible person referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or an entrepreneur who, knowing that such entity has become unable to pay, and with the intention to deceive or damage a creditor, acknowledges an untrue claim, creates a false contract or by some other fraudulent act damages a creditor, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If by the act referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has been caused to the creditor or if compulsory settlement or bankruptcy proceedings have been initiated against the injured party as a result, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Abuse of Authority in Business

Article 276

(1) A responsible person in a business company or other business entity who, with the intention of acquiring unlawful material benefit for the legal entity in which they are employed, for another legal entity or other business entity:
1) creates or maintains unauthorized monetary, commodity or other valuable funds in the country or abroad;
2) by creating a document with untrue content, assessments or inventorying, or by false presentation or concealment of facts, untruthfully presents the state or movement of assets or business results, and thereby misleads the management bodies in the business company or other legal entity when making decisions on management affairs, or places the business company or other legal entity in a more favourable position when obtaining funds or other benefits that would not be granted to them under existing regulations;
3) uses the funds at their disposal contrary to their intended purpose;
4) in another manner grossly violates the authority regarding the management, disposal and use of property, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If as a result of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article material benefit exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has been acquired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Receiving a Bribe in Business Operations
Article 276a
(1) A responsible or other person who works for or in a business company or other business entity who, for themselves or another, directly or indirectly, demands or receives a bribe or accepts a promise of a bribe to conclude a contract or reach a business agreement or provide a service or to refrain from such action to the detriment or benefit of the business company for which or in which they work or another person, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) The perpetrator of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article who, after the conclusion of a contract or reaching a business agreement or after the provision of a service or refraining from such action, for themselves or another demands or receives a bribe or accepts a promise of a bribe, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(3) The received bribe shall be confiscated.
Giving a Bribe in Business Operations
Article 276b
(1) Whoever gives, offers or promises a bribe to a responsible or other person who works for or in a business company or other business entity to, for themselves or another, conclude a contract or reach a business agreement or provide a service to the detriment or benefit of the business company for which or in which they work or another person, or whoever mediates in such giving of a bribe, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The perpetrator of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article who gave a bribe at the request of a responsible or other person who works for or in a business company or other business entity, and reported the act before learning that it had been discovered, may be exempted from punishment.
(3) The given bribe shall be confiscated.
Damaging Business Reputation and Creditworthiness

Article 277

(1) Whoever, with the intention of damaging the business reputation or creditworthiness of another, presents untrue information about them or untruthfully presents their business operations, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If serious consequences have occurred as a result of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) Prosecution for the acts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be undertaken upon private action.
False Balance Sheet

Article 278

Whoever, with the intention of acquiring some benefit for themselves or another or causing some damage to another, creates in a business company or other business entity a false balance sheet establishing the profit or loss of that entity or establishing the share of each member of the company in the profit or loss, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Abuse of Assessment

Article 279

(1) An authorized assessor who, when assessing the property of a business company or other business entity, abuses their authority and thereby acquires some benefit for themselves or another or causes some damage to another, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article material benefit has been acquired or damage caused exceeding the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article material benefit has been acquired or damage caused exceeding the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Disclosure of Business Secret

Article 280

(1) Whoever without authorization communicates to another, hands over or otherwise makes available data that constitutes a business secret, or whoever obtains such data with the intention of handing it over to an unauthorized person, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) An unauthorized person who uses data that constitutes a business secret obtained in the manner referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be punished by the penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed out of greed or in relation to particularly confidential data or for the purpose of publishing or using the data abroad, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) Whoever commits the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article through negligence shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(5) A business secret shall be considered to be data and documents that have been declared a business secret by law, other regulation or decision of a competent authority adopted on the basis of law, the disclosure of which would cause or could cause harmful consequences for a company or other business entity.
Abuse of Privileged Information

Article 281

(1) Whoever, with the intention of obtaining a material benefit for himself or another or causing damage to another, communicates or otherwise makes available privileged information to an unauthorized person, or using privileged information, for himself or another, directly or indirectly, acquires or disposes of a security or other financial instrument to which that information relates, or whoever recommends to another or induces him to acquire or dispose of a security or other financial instrument to which that information relates, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) An unauthorized person who uses privileged information obtained in the manner referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be punished by the penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by a person who is a member of the board of directors or supervisory body of the issuer or has a share in the capital of the issuer, he shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) If by the offence referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article a material benefit exceeding the amount of three thousand euros was obtained, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(5) If by the offence referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article a material benefit exceeding the amount of thirty thousand euros was obtained, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(6) An attempt of the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Market Manipulation of Securities or Other Financial Instruments
Article 281a
(1) Whoever, with the intention of obtaining a material benefit for himself or another or causing damage to another, acts contrary to regulations on the securities market, in such a way that:
1) he concludes a transaction or gives a trading order which gives or may give false or misleading information about the supply, demand or price of securities or other financial instruments, or by which a person or persons acting jointly maintain the price of one or more securities or other financial instruments at an unrealistic level;
2) when concluding a transaction or giving a trading order, he retains, increases, decreases or causes changes in the market price of securities or other financial instruments through purchase or sale or a fictitious transaction which does not result in a change of ownership of that security or other financial instrument;
3) through the media, the internet or in another manner, he disseminates or transmits false or misleading information which may cause deception about securities or other financial instruments, and he knew that such information was false or misleading and could mislead the user of the information, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine.
(2) If by the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit exceeding the amount of thirty thousand euros was obtained, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years and a fine.
Preventing the Performance of Control

Article 282

Whoever prevents an inspection or other authority performing control from carrying out an inspection of business books or other documentation, or prevents the inspection of objects, premises or other facilities, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorized Production

Article 283

(1) Whoever without authorization produces or processes goods for the production or processing of which the approval of a competent authority is required shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever produces or processes goods the production or processing of which is prohibited shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(3) The goods and means of production or processing shall be confiscated.
Unauthorized Trade

Article 284

(1) Whoever, not having authorization for trade, for the purpose of sale acquires goods or other objects of general use in a value exceeding the amount of three thousand euros, or whoever without authorization and on a larger scale engages in trade or intermediation in trade or representation of organizations in domestic or foreign trade of goods and services, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever engages in the sale of goods the production of which he organized without authorization shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) A person who without authorization sells, purchases or exchanges goods or objects the circulation of which is prohibited or restricted shall also be punished by the penalty referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.
(4) If the perpetrator of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article organized a network of resellers or intermediaries or obtained a material benefit exceeding the amount of three thousand euros, he shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(5) If the perpetrator of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article obtained a material benefit exceeding the amount of thirty thousand euros, he shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(6) The goods and objects of unauthorized trade shall be confiscated.
Deceiving Customers

Article 285

Whoever, with the intention of deceiving customers, places on the market products with a label containing data that does not correspond to the content, type, origin or quality of the product, or places on the market products which by their quantity or quality do not correspond to what is normally assumed for such products, or places on the market products without a label on the content, type, origin or quality of the product when such a label is prescribed, or when placing products on the market uses obviously false advertising, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years and a fine.
Falsification of Marks for Labelling Goods

Article 286

(1) Whoever, with the intention of using them as genuine, makes false seals, stamps, marks or other signs for labelling domestic or foreign goods with which gold or other precious metal, wood, livestock or any other goods are stamped, or whoever with the same intention alters such genuine signs, or whoever uses such false or altered signs as genuine, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) False signs shall be confiscated and destroyed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST HUMAN HEALTH
Failure to Comply with Health Regulations for Combating Dangerous Infectious Diseases

Article 287

Whoever fails to comply with regulations, decisions, orders or instructions by which measures for combating or preventing a dangerous infectious disease are determined shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Transmission of a Dangerous Infectious Disease

Article 288

Whoever fails to comply with regulations, decisions, orders or instructions for combating or preventing a dangerous infectious disease, and as a result the transmission of that disease occurs, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Transmission of HIV Virus Infection

Article 289

(deleted)
Negligent Provision of Medical Assistance

Article 290

(1) A physician who, when providing medical assistance, applies a manifestly unsuitable means or manifestly unsuitable method of treatment, or fails to apply appropriate hygienic measures, or generally acts in a manifestly negligent manner and thereby causes deterioration of the health condition of a person, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on other health workers who, when providing medical assistance or care or when performing other health activities, act in a manifestly negligent manner and thereby cause deterioration of the health condition of a person.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unlawful Performance of Medical Experiments and Drug Testing

Article 291

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, performs medical or other similar experiments on humans shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever performs interventions aimed at creating a human being that is genetically identical to another human being (cloning) or performs experiments for that purpose.
(3) Whoever, contrary to regulations, performs clinical testing of a drug shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Failure to Provide Medical Assistance

Article 292

(1) A physician who, contrary to their duty, refuses to provide medical assistance to a person who needs such assistance and who is in immediate danger to life or danger of occurrence of serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If, as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the person to whom medical assistance was not provided suffers serious bodily injury or their health is seriously impaired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to four years.
(3) If, as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the death of the person to whom medical assistance was not provided has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Quackery

Article 293

Whoever, without appropriate professional qualifications, engages in treatment or provision of other medical services shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Unlawful Removal of Human Organs or Body Parts
Article 293a
(1) Whoever, without written consent or approval in the sense of regulations governing organ transplantation, removes an organ or body part from a living or deceased person shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever removes an organ or body part from a living or deceased person outside the framework of the domestic transplantation system or if the removal is performed in violation of the basic principles and rules established by regulations governing organ transplantation, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) Whoever, in exchange for a removed organ or body part, offers or gives property or any other benefit, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) If, as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, death or serious impairment of health has occurred, or the act was committed by multiple persons in an organized manner or by abuse of official position, or was committed against a minor, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Storage, Transport, Import and Export of Human Organs or Body Parts
Obtained by Commission of a Criminal Offense
Article 293b
(1) Whoever prepares, stores or warehouses human organs or body parts obtained by commission of the criminal offense from Article 293a of this law shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever transports, exchanges, receives, imports or exports human organs or body parts obtained by commission of the criminal offense from Article 293a of this law.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed by multiple persons in an organized manner or by abuse of official position, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.

Article 294

(1) A physician who, before transplanting a body part, does not obtain in written form the consent of the recipient, or their parent, adoptive parent or guardian, if the recipient is a minor or mentally incompetent person, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a responsible person in a health institution if they remove or transplant parts of the human body or examine compatibility for transplantation, and the institution does not meet the prescribed conditions for that.
Unauthorized Removal of Body Parts for Transplantation

Article 295

(1) A physician who, for the purpose of transplantation, removes a body part from a living, adult, mentally healthy and legally competent person without previously obtained written consent of that person, or if they remove a body part from a living person who is not an adult, who is mentally incompetent or is legally incompetent without previously obtained written consent of the parent, adoptive parent or guardian, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to four years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a physician who, for the purpose of transplantation, removes a body part from a deceased person whose death has not been determined in the manner and procedure according to regulations on transplantation of parts of the human body.
(3) A physician who, for the purpose of transplantation, removes a body part from a deceased person who, during their lifetime, explicitly objected in written form to the removal of body parts, or if they remove a body part from a deceased minor or mentally incompetent person without prior written consent of the parent, adoptive parent or guardian, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) Whoever removes or transplants a human organ, tissue, cell, embryo or fetus if they knew or could have and should have known that the donor received monetary compensation or other benefit for it, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Trafficking in Parts of the Human Body
Article 295a
(1) Whoever, by use of force or threat, deception, fraud, abduction, abuse of position or relationship of dependence, procures, possesses, transports, transfers, stores or receives a human organ, tissue, cell, embryo, fetus or body of a deceased person for the purpose of removing body parts, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever unlawfully procures a human organ, tissue, cell, embryo, fetus or body of a deceased person shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) The punishment from paragraph 2 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever, with the intention of obtaining property benefit, induces another or assists them in giving their own organ, tissue, cell, embryo or fetus for monetary compensation or other benefit.
Advertising Trafficking in Parts of the Human Body
Article 295b
Whoever advertises the purchase or sale of a human organ, tissue, cell, embryo, fetus or body of a deceased person shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Negligent Conduct in Preparation and Dispensing of Drugs

Article 296

(1) A person authorized to dispense drugs for use in medicine who dispenses a different drug instead of the prescribed or requested drug, if the substitution is not permitted, or who does not prepare the drug in the prescribed proportion or quantity, or who acts in a manifestly negligent manner when dispensing drugs and thereby causes deterioration of the health condition of a person, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorized Placing on the Market of Hormonal Substances
Article 296a
Whoever, contrary to regulations, places on the market drugs or substances containing hormones or other growth stimulants shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Production and Placing on the Market of Harmful Products

Article 297

(1) Whoever produces for sale, sells or places on the market foodstuffs, food or drink or other products harmful to human health shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever places on the market the products from paragraph 1 of this Article without an inspection performed by an authorized person, when such inspection is prescribed by regulations, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) The objects from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be confiscated.
Negligent Performance of Inspection of Foodstuffs

Article 298

(1) An authorised person who negligently carries out an inspection of livestock for slaughter, meat intended for consumption and other foodstuffs or contrary to regulations fails to carry out an inspection and thereby enables meat or other foodstuffs harmful to human health to be placed on the market, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Contamination of drinking water and foodstuffs

Article 299

(1) Whoever contaminates with any harmful substance water that serves people for drinking or foodstuffs, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorised production, possession and placing on the market of narcotic drugs

Article 300

(1) Whoever unauthorisedly produces, processes, sells or offers for sale or for the purpose of sale purchases, possesses or transfers or mediates in the sale or purchase or in any other way unauthorisedly places on the market substances that have been declared narcotic drugs or plants containing such substances, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) Whoever with the intention of committing the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article brings into Montenegro substances that have been declared narcotic drugs or plants containing such substances, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If the perpetrator of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has organised a network of resellers or intermediaries, he shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(4) The penalty referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever sells, offers for sale or without compensation for the purpose of further placing on the market gives narcotic drugs to a minor, a mentally ill person, a person who is temporarily mentally disturbed, a person who is severely mentally retarded or a person who is being treated for addiction to narcotic drugs, or whoever places on the market a narcotic drug mixed with a substance that may lead to serious impairment of health, or whoever commits the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in an educational or training institution or in its immediate vicinity or in an institution for the execution of criminal sanctions or in a public premises or at a public event, or if the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by an official, doctor, social worker, priest, teacher or educator by exploiting his position or whoever uses a minor to commit that offence.
(5) The perpetrator of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article who reveals from whom he obtains the drug may be exempted from punishment.
(6) Whoever unauthorisedly manufactures, procures, possesses, transports or makes available for use equipment, material or substances which he knows are intended for the production of narcotic drugs, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(7) Narcotic drugs and means for their manufacture shall be confiscated and destroyed.
Enabling the use of narcotic drugs

Article 301

(1) Whoever induces another to use a narcotic drug or gives him a narcotic drug for him or another person to use or makes premises available for the use of a narcotic drug or in any other way enables another to use a narcotic drug, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed against a minor, a mentally ill person, a person who is temporarily mentally disturbed, a person who is severely mentally retarded or a person who is being treated for addiction to narcotic drugs, or against several persons, or whoever commits that offence in an educational or training institution or in its immediate vicinity or in an institution for the execution of criminal sanctions or in public premises or at a public event, or if that offence is committed by an official, doctor, social worker, priest, teacher or educator by exploiting his position, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) Narcotic drugs shall be confiscated and destroyed.
Serious offences against human health

Article 302

(1) If as a result of the offence referred to in Articles 287 and 290 paragraphs 1 and 2, 291, 293, 296 paragraph 1, 297 paragraphs 1 and 2, 298 paragraph 1 and 299 paragraph 1 of this Code, any person is seriously bodily injured or his health is seriously impaired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If as a result of the offence referred to in Articles 287 and 290 paragraphs 1 and 2, 291, 293, 296 paragraph 1, 297 paragraphs 1 and 2, 298 paragraph 1 and 299 paragraph 1 of this Code the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If as a result of the offence referred to in Articles 290 paragraph 3, 296 paragraph 2, 297 paragraph 3, 298 paragraph 2 and 299 paragraph 2 of this Code any person is seriously bodily injured or his health is seriously impaired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to four years.
(4) If as a result of the offence referred to in Articles 290 paragraph 3, 296 paragraph 2, 297 paragraph 3, 298 paragraph 2 and 299 paragraph 2 of this Code death has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT AND SPATIAL PLANNING
Pollution of the environment

Član 303

(1) Whoever, in violation of regulations on the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment, discharges, introduces or deposits a certain quantity of matter or ionizing radiation into the air, water or soil, thereby causing danger to the life, body or health of people or danger of occurrence of significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or to animal or plant life, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the act from paragraph 3 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(6) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(7) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for acts from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment within a specified period.
Zagađenje životne sredine otpadom
Član 303a
(1) Whoever, by collecting, transporting, processing, disposing or removing waste, causes danger to the life, body or health of people or danger of occurrence of significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or to animal or plant life, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article while exercising supervision over activities of collecting, transporting, processing, disposing or removing waste or while performing subsequent maintenance of waste disposal sites or through waste trading or by organizing processing or removal of waste on behalf of others, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(5) If the act from paragraph 4 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(6) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(7) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
Oštećenje ozonskog omotača
Član 303b
Whoever produces or contrary to regulations imports, exports, places on the market or uses substances that damage the ozone layer, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Nepreduzimanje mjera zaštite životne sredine

Član 304

(1) A person responsible for undertaking measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment who fails to undertake prescribed measures for the protection of the environment, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) If the act from paragraph 3 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(5) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for acts from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment within a specified period.
(6) i (7)
(brisano)
Protivpravna izgradnja, stavljanje u pogon i rad objekata i postrojenja koja zagađuju životnu sredinu

Član 305

(1) An official or responsible person who, contrary to regulations on the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment, permits the construction, putting into operation, use or operation of a facility or installation in which a hazardous activity is carried out or in which hazardous substances or preparations are stored or used, and thereby causes outside that facility or installation danger to the life, body or health of people or danger of occurrence of significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or to animal or plant life, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(4) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(5) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment within a specified period.
Oštećenje objekata i uređaja za zaštitu životne sredine

Član 306

(1) Whoever damages, destroys, removes or otherwise renders unusable facilities or devices for the protection of the environment, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) If the act from paragraph 3 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(5) If it pronounces a suspended sentence for acts from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment within a specified period.
(6) i (7)
(brisano)
Oštećenje životne sredine

Article 307

(1) Whoever, by violating regulations, through the use of natural resources, construction of facilities, performance of any works or in any other manner causes damage to the environment to a greater extent or over a wider area, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(3) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article there has been destruction or damage to animal or plant life on a large scale or pollution of the environment to such an extent that its elimination requires a long time or great expense, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article there has been destruction or damage to animal or plant life on a large scale or pollution of the environment to such an extent that its elimination requires a long time or great expense, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(5) If a suspended sentence is imposed for the offences referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for the protection, preservation and improvement of the environment within a specified period.
Abuse of Genetically Modified Organisms
Article 307a
(1) Whoever, by violating regulations, produces for sale, sells or places on the market products that contain, consist of or are derived from genetically modified organisms and thereby endangers the environment, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) Whoever does not destroy waste that contains, consists of or is derived from genetically modified organisms in such a manner that the genetically modified organism is no longer capable of reproduction or transfer of genetic material to other organisms, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
Destruction of Plants

Article 308

(1) Whoever, by violating regulations, destroys or damages plants to a greater extent or over a wider area, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article was committed against specially protected plant species, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
(4) If the offence referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(5) Whoever unlawfully possesses plants belonging to a specially protected plant species or takes samples of that species, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
Killing and Torturing Animals and Destroying Their Habitat

Article 309

(1) Whoever, by violating regulations, kills, injures or tortures an animal, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) Whoever kills or injures animals belonging to specially protected animal species, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) The penalty referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever significantly damages or destroys the habitat of animals within a protected area.
(4) Whoever unlawfully possesses animals belonging to a specially protected animal species or takes samples of that species, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
Destruction and Damage of Protected Natural Property

Article 310

(1) Whoever destroys or damages protected natural property, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
Theft of Protected Natural Property

Article 311

(1) Whoever commits theft (

Article 239) of protected natural property, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years

(2) If the protected natural property was taken by means of aggravated theft or robbery or if the value of the stolen protected natural property exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) Whoever, during the performance of construction, mining, water management, agricultural or other works, appropriates natural property that has characteristics by virtue of which it may be declared protected natural property, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.
Export and Import of Protected Natural Property and Specially Protected Plants and Animals and Trading in Them

Article 312

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, exports or takes abroad or imports or brings into Montenegro protected natural property or a specially protected plant or animal, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever unlawfully trades in specially protected plants or animals or their parts or products derived from them.
(3) An attempt to commit the offences referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be punished.
Export and Import of Hazardous Materials

Article 313

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, exports or takes abroad or imports or brings into Montenegro nuclear or radioactive material or other hazardous material or hazardous waste or whoever transports such materials across the territory of Montenegro, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) Whoever, by abuse of their official position or authority, permits or enables the export or taking abroad or import or bringing into Montenegro of the substance, material or waste referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(5) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(6) An attempt to commit the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Unlawful Handling of Hazardous Materials

Article 314

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, uses, produces, processes, keeps, disposes of, collects, stores, obtains, utilizes, transports, gives to another or dispatches nuclear or radioactive material or other hazardous material or hazardous waste, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) Whoever, by abuse of their official position or authority, permits or enables the use, production, processing, keeping, disposal, collection, storage or dispatch of the substance, material or waste referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has caused significant damage in relation to the quality of air, water or soil or there has been destruction or significant damage to animal or plant life, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious bodily injury or serious impairment of health of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(5) If as a result of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(6) An attempt to commit the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
(7) If a suspended sentence is imposed for the offences referred to in paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, the court may impose an obligation on the perpetrator to undertake certain prescribed measures for protection against ionizing radiation or other prescribed protection measures within a specified period.
Unlawful Construction of Nuclear Facilities

Article 315

Whoever, contrary to regulations, approves or proceeds with the construction of a nuclear power plant, a facility for the production of nuclear fuel or a facility for the processing of spent nuclear fuel, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Failure to Execute Decision on Environmental Protection Measures

Article 316

(1) An official or responsible person who fails to act upon a decision of the competent authority regarding the undertaking of environmental protection measures shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) If a suspended sentence is imposed for the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the court may determine an obligation for the perpetrator to undertake, within a specified period, the measures determined by the competent authority.
Violation of the Right to Information on the State of the Environment

Article 317

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, withholds data or provides false data on the state of the environment and phenomena that are necessary for assessing danger to the environment and undertaking measures to protect the life and health of people shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) The penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever publicly discloses false data on the state of the environment and thereby causes panic or significant disturbance among citizens.
Transmission of Contagious Diseases in Animals and Plants

Article 318

(1) Whoever, during an epidemic of an animal disease that may endanger livestock, fails to act in accordance with regulations, decisions or orders determining measures for combating or preventing the disease shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(2) The penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, during the existence of a danger from diseases and pests that may endanger animal and plant life, fails to act in accordance with regulations, decisions or orders determining measures for combating or preventing diseases or pests, respectively.
(3) If, as a result of the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, death of animals, destruction of plants or other substantial damage whose value exceeds the amount of three thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(4) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(5) Whoever, contrary to regulations, conceals the existence of a contagious disease in animals or fails to report to the public veterinary service, a veterinarian engaged in private practice or the authority competent for veterinary affairs that there are signs indicating that such a disease exists, and as a result the spread of a contagious disease or death of animals or other substantial damage whose value exceeds the amount of three thousand euros occurs, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
Negligent Provision of Veterinary Assistance

Article 319

(1) A veterinarian or authorised veterinary worker who, when providing veterinary assistance, prescribes or applies a manifestly unsuitable remedy or a manifestly unsuitable method of treatment or generally acts negligently in treating animals and thereby causes death of animals or other substantial damage whose value exceeds the amount of three thousand euros shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
Quackery in Veterinary Medicine

Article 320

Whoever, without appropriate professional qualifications, engages in treating animals or providing other veterinary services for remuneration shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
Production of Harmful Remedies for Treating Animals

Article 321

(1) Whoever produces for sale or places on the market remedies for treating or preventing contagion in animals that are dangerous to their life or health shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has caused death of animals or other substantial damage whose value exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
Contamination of Food and Water for Feeding or Watering Animals

Article 322

(1) Whoever contaminates with any harmful substance food or water used for feeding or watering animals and thereby endangers their life or health shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) The penalty referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever contaminates with any harmful substance water in a fish pond, lake, river, canal or sea or by stocking from infected waters causes danger to the survival of fish or other aquatic animals.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has caused death of animals or other substantial damage whose value exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(4) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
Devastation of Forests

Article 323

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations or orders of competent authorities, carries out felling or clearing of forest, or damages trees or otherwise devastates forests or fells one or more trees in a park, tree-lined avenue or other place where felling is not permitted shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) Whoever commits the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in a protective forest, national park or other forest with a special purpose shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Forest Theft

Article 324

(1) Whoever, for the purpose of theft, fells in a forest, park or tree-lined avenue one or more trees, and the quantity of felled timber is greater than one cubic metre, shall be punished by a fine and imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed with the intention of selling the felled timber, or if the quantity of felled timber is greater than five cubic metres or if the offence has been committed in a protective forest, national park or other forest with a special purpose, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine.
(3) An attempt to commit the offence referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished.
Illegal Hunting

Article 325

(1) Whoever hunts game during the closed season or in an area where hunting is prohibited shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to six months.
(2) Whoever hunts without authorisation in another person's hunting ground and kills or wounds game or captures it alive shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(3) If the offence referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article has been committed in relation to large game, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(4) Whoever hunts game whose hunting is prohibited or hunts without a special permit a particular species of game for whose hunting such a permit is required or hunts by means or methods that result in mass destruction of game shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(5) The hunted game and hunting equipment shall be confiscated.
Illegal Fishing

Article 326

(1) Whoever fishes or hunts other aquatic animals during the closed season or in waters where fishing is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) Whoever fishes or hunts other aquatic animals with explosives, electric current, poison, stunning agents or in a manner harmful to the reproduction of those animals or by which those animals are destroyed en masse, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(3) The penalty from paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever fishes or hunts aquatic animals of greater biological value or in larger quantities or destroys a larger quantity of fish or other aquatic animals during fishing.
(4) The catch and fishing equipment shall be confiscated.
Construction of a facility without notification and construction documentation
Article 326a
Whoever, contrary to regulations on spatial planning and construction of facilities, commences construction of a facility without previously submitted notification and construction documentation or constructs a facility contrary to the revised main project or the decision of the competent authority prohibiting construction, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Construction of a complex engineering facility without a building permit
Article 326b
Whoever, contrary to regulations on spatial planning and construction of facilities, commences construction of a complex engineering facility without a building permit or constructs a facility contrary to the building permit and revised main project or the decision of the competent authority prohibiting construction, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Unlawful connection to infrastructure
Article 326c
Whoever, contrary to regulations on spatial planning and construction of facilities, connects or permits the connection to infrastructure of a construction site, a facility under construction or a constructed facility, for which no construction notification and documentation has been submitted, or building permit and construction documentation for a complex engineering facility, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST GENERAL SAFETY OF PEOPLE AND PROPERTY
Causing general danger

Article 327

(1) Whoever by fire, flood, explosion, poison or poisonous gas, radioactive or other ionising radiation, electric energy, motor power or any other generally dangerous act or generally dangerous means causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on an official or responsible person who fails to install prescribed devices for protection against fire, flood, explosion, poison or poisonous gas, radioactive or other ionising radiation, electric energy or other dangerous means or fails to maintain these devices in proper condition or fails to put them into operation when necessary or fails to act in accordance with regulations or technical rules on protection measures and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros.
(3) If the offences from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article are committed in a place where a large number of people are gathered, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(4) If the offence from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Destruction and damage to public facilities

Article 328

(1) Whoever destroys, damages, alters, renders unusable or removes a public facility for water, heat, gas, electric or other energy or communication system devices or other public facility or obstructs their use, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article a significant disruption in the use of these facilities has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(4) If the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 329

(1) Whoever in mines, factories, workshops, at construction sites or at another place of work damages or removes protective devices and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a responsible person in a mine, factory, workshop, at a construction site or at another place of work who fails to install protective devices or fails to maintain them in proper condition or fails to put them into operation when necessary or fails to act in accordance with regulations or technical rules on occupational safety measures and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros.
(3) If the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(4) If a suspended sentence is imposed for the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article, the court may determine the obligation of the perpetrator to ensure the installation, maintenance or use of protective devices within a specified period.
Improper and irregular execution of construction works

Article 330

(1) A person responsible for design, revision of technical documentation, execution of works and expert supervision over construction of a facility, who in performing these tasks fails to act in accordance with regulations on spatial planning and construction of facilities or generally recognised technical rules and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Damage to dams and water management facilities

Article 331

(1) Whoever damages, destroys and renders unusable a dam or other water management facility or device for protection against natural disasters, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed against a facility or device of greater importance, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article is committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Destruction, damage and removal of signs warning of danger

Article 332

(1) Whoever destroys, damages or removes a sign warning of any danger, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever destroys, damages or removes a traffic device, means, sign or device for signalling or protective and crash barrier serving traffic safety.
Misuse of telecommunication signals

Article 333

(1) Whoever misuses or unnecessarily sends an internationally agreed signal for calling for help or a signal that danger is imminent or whoever deceives by telecommunication signal that safety exists or whoever misuses an internationally agreed communication signal, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article danger to human life or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Failure to eliminate danger

Article 334

(1) Whoever fails to report to the competent authority, or other competent entity, that there is a fire, flood, explosion, traffic accident or some other danger to the life or body of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros or fails to take measures to eliminate that danger, although he could have done so without danger to himself or another, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever prevents another from taking measures to eliminate fire, flood, explosion, traffic accident or other danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Unauthorised handling of explosive and flammable materials

Article 335

(1) Whoever, contrary to regulations, stores, keeps, transports or hands over for transport by public means of transport explosive or highly flammable material or personally carries such material using public means of transport, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever unlawfully brings explosive or highly flammable material into a room or other facility where a large number of people gather or whoever brings such material to a place where a large number of people are gathered or where such gathering is imminent.
(3) Whoever brings or attempts to bring highly flammable material or other items whose introduction into such a pit or facility is prohibited into a pit with methane or other flammable gas or dangerous coal dust or into a facility at an oil or gas field, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(4) The penalty from paragraph 3 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever does not comply with the prescribed protective measures when entering a warehouse, storage facility or depot of explosive devices.
(5) The penalty from paragraph 3 of this Article shall be imposed on a person in whose vessel explosives are found for which the vessel owner does not possess previously obtained permits, in accordance with regulations on the transport or storage of explosives.
(6) If the act from paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorized Acquisition and Disposal of Nuclear Materials

Article 336

(deleted)
Endangering the Safety of Nuclear Materials

Article 337

(1) Whoever, by threatening to use nuclear material, endangers the safety of people, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed with the intention of forcing someone to do or not do something, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article carried out the threat as a result of which serious bodily injury or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article carried out the threat as a result of which the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Serious Acts Against General Safety

Article 338

(1) If, as a result of the act from Articles 327 paragraphs 1 to 3, 328 paragraphs 1 and 2, 329 paragraphs 1 and 2, 330 paragraph 1 and 333 of this Code, serious bodily injury to a person or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If, as a result of the act from Articles 327 paragraphs 1 to 3, 328 paragraphs 1 and 2, 329 paragraphs 1 and 2, 330 paragraph 1 and 333 of this Code, the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If, as a result of the act from Articles 327 paragraph 4, 328 paragraphs 3 and 4, 329 paragraph 3 and 330 paragraph 2 of this Code, serious bodily injury to a person or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to four years.
(4) If, as a result of the act from Articles 327 paragraph 4, 328 paragraphs 3 and 4, 329 paragraph 3 and 330 paragraph 2 of this Code, the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE SAFETY OF PUBLIC TRANSPORT
Endangering Public Transport

Article 339

(1) A participant in road transport who does not comply with traffic regulations and thereby endangers traffic in such a way as to endanger the life or body of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, and as a result of which another person suffers minor bodily injury or causes property damage to another exceeding the amount of three thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever does not comply with traffic regulations and thereby endangers railway, ship, bus transport or cable car transport in such a way as to endanger the life or body of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to six years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Endangering Transport by Dangerous Act and Dangerous Means

Article 340

(1) Whoever, by destroying, removing or seriously damaging traffic devices, means, signs or signalling or protective and defensive barriers devices serving the safety of public road transport, giving false signs or signals, placing obstacles on traffic routes or in another similar manner, endangers public transport in such a way as to endanger the life or body of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever, in the manner from paragraph 1 of this Article, endangers railway, ship, bus or cable car transport and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Endangering the Safety of Air Transport

Article 341

(1) Whoever, by improper or incorrect flight management of an aircraft, omission of duty or supervision in connection with the safety of air transport, giving inaccurate information of significance for the safe flight of an aircraft or in another manner, endangers the safety of air transport, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence or by negligent destruction or damage to navigation devices or by negligently causing other damage to an aircraft, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) Whoever commits an act of violence directed against a person at an airport for international civil air transport which causes or could cause serious bodily injury or death of a person, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) The penalty from paragraph 3 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever destroys or damages devices at an airport for international civil air transport or an aircraft not in service but located at that airport or interrupts the operation of services at that airport, if such an act endangers or could endanger safety at that airport.
Endangering the Safety of Air or Maritime Transport or a Fixed Platform

Article 342

(1) Whoever, by violence against a person in an aircraft, ship or fixed platform, or their cargo in the epicontinental zone, by placing or introducing into an aircraft, ship or fixed platform an explosive or other dangerous device or substance or by destroying or damaging or interfering with navigation devices or by causing other damage to an aircraft, ship or fixed platform, endangers the safety of air transport or maritime navigation or the safety of a fixed platform, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) If, as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, serious bodily injury to a person occurred or damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros was caused, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If, as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the death of one or more persons occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Hijacking of Aircraft, Ship and Other Means of Transport

Article 343

(1) Whoever by force or threat to use force or other serious harm commits hijacking of an aircraft in flight or takes control of an aircraft in flight, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply to whoever by force or threat to use force or other serious harm commits hijacking of a ship or other public means of transport during travel.
(3) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article against a fixed platform in the epicontinental zone, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious bodily injury to a person has occurred or damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has been caused, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Failure to Provide Assistance to a Ship or Other Vessel and Persons in Danger at Sea and Inland Waters

Article 344

(1) The commander of a ship, boat or other vessel participating in navigation, a person replacing him or a person who alone operates any of the mentioned vessels, who contrary to regulations does not undertake rescue at sea or inland waters of a ship, boat or other vessel, person or property in danger, if he could have undertaken rescue without danger to his own ship, boat or other vessel, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The person from paragraph 1 of this Article who contrary to regulations does not remove from the waterway on inland waters a vessel with which the vessel he commands or operates has collided, and could have done so without danger to that vessel, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Piracy

Article 345

(1) A crew member or passenger of a private ship or private aircraft who on the high seas or in a place not subject to the authority of any state commits violence or robbery against persons on another ship or aircraft or detains, seizes, damages or destroys another ship or aircraft or goods located on them or causes damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is committed by a crew member or passenger of a warship or other state ship or warship or other state aircraft whose crew has mutinied and taken control of the ship or aircraft, he shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for that act.
Negligent Supervision of Public Traffic

Article 346

(1) An official or responsible person entrusted with supervision over the condition and maintenance of traffic routes and facilities on them, means of transport or public traffic or over the fulfilment of prescribed conditions for drivers' work, or entrusted with traffic management, who by negligent performance of his duty causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply to a responsible person who issues an order for travel or permits travel, although he knows that the driver due to fatigue, influence of alcohol or other reasons is not able to safely operate the vehicle or that the vehicle is not in proper condition and thereby causes danger to the life or body of people or to property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Failure to Provide Assistance to a Person Injured in a Traffic Accident

Article 347

(1) A driver of a motor vehicle or other means of transport who leaves without assistance a person injured by that means of transport or whose injury he caused with that means, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) If as a result of failure to provide assistance serious bodily injury to the injured person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(3) If as a result of failure to provide assistance the death of the injured person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to four years.
Serious Offences Against the Safety of Public Traffic

Article 348

(1) If as a result of the act from Articles 339 paragraphs 1 and 2, 340 paragraphs 1 and 2, 341 paragraph 1, 344 and 346 paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Code serious bodily injury to a person or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If as a result of the act from Articles 339 paragraphs 1 and 2, 340 paragraphs 1 and 2, 341 paragraph 1, 344 and 346 paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Code the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(3) If as a result of the act from Articles 339 paragraph 3, 340 paragraph 3, 341 paragraph 2 and 346 paragraph 3 of this Code serious bodily injury to a person or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to four years.
(4) If as a result of the act from Articles 339 paragraph 3, 340 paragraph 3, 341 paragraph 2 and 346 paragraph 3 of this Code the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE SECURITY OF COMPUTER DATA
Damage to Computer Data and Programs

Article 349

(1) Whoever without authorization deletes, alters, damages, conceals or otherwise renders unusable computer data or a program, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article damage in an amount exceeding three thousand euros has been caused, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article damage in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros has been caused, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(4) Devices and means by which the criminal offence from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article has been committed, if they are the property of the perpetrator, shall be confiscated.
Interference with Computer System

Article 350

(1) Whoever enters, destroys, deletes, alters, damages, conceals or otherwise renders unusable computer data or a computer system with the intent to interfere with the operation of a computer system, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed in relation to data and programs that are of significance for state authorities, public services, institutions, business entities or other subjects, he shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) Devices and means by which the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has been committed, if they are the property of the perpetrator, shall be confiscated.
Creation and Introduction of Computer Viruses

Article 351

(1) Whoever creates a computer virus with the intent to introduce it into another's computer system, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the perpetrator has introduced a computer virus into another's computer system and thereby caused damage, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(3) Devices and means by which the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has been committed shall be confiscated.
Computer Fraud

Član 352

(1) Whoever enters, modifies, deletes, omits the entry of accurate data or otherwise conceals or falsely presents computer data or performs any interference with the operation of a computer system and thereby influences the result of electronic processing, data transmission and functioning of a computer system with the intention of acquiring unlawful material gain for himself or another and thereby causes material damage to another, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has resulted in the acquisition of material gain exceeding the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has resulted in the acquisition of material gain exceeding the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article solely with the intention of causing damage to another, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Unauthorized Access to a Computer System

Član 353

(1) Whoever unlawfully accesses a computer system as a whole or any part thereof, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the perpetrator has committed the act from paragraph 1 of this Article by violating computer system protection measures or unlawfully accesses a computer system that is of importance to state authorities, local self-government authorities and institutions entrusted with the exercise of public powers, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(3) The penalty from paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever performs unauthorized interception of computer data, regardless of the manner of their transmission, which are not of a public nature, to a computer system, from it or within the system itself, including electromagnetic emissions.
(4) Whoever uses data obtained in the manner provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(5) If serious consequences for another have resulted from the act from paragraph 4 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Misuse of Devices and Programs

Član 354

(1) Whoever produces, sells, procures for use, imports, distributes and otherwise makes available:
1) devices and computer programs designed or adapted primarily for the purpose of committing any of the acts from Articles 349 to 353 of this Code,
2) computer passwords or similar data by which access to a computer system as a whole or any part thereof can be obtained with the intention that it be used for the purpose of committing any of the acts from Articles 349 to 353 of this Code, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever possesses any of the means from paragraph 1 of this Article, with the intention of using them for the purpose of committing any of the acts from Articles 349 to 353, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Čl. 355 i 356
(deleted)
GLAVA DVADESET DEVETA
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER AND SECURITY OF MONTENEGRO
Endangering Independence

Član 357

Whoever in an unconstitutional manner attempts to bring Montenegro into a position of subordination or dependence on another state, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Recognition of Capitulation or Occupation

Član 358

A citizen of Montenegro who signs or recognizes capitulation or accepts or recognizes the occupation of Montenegro or any part thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
Endangering Territorial Integrity

Član 359

(1) Whoever by force or in another unconstitutional manner attempts to secede any part of the territory of Montenegro or to annex that part of the territory to another state, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2)
(deleted)
Attack on the Constitutional Order

Član 360

Whoever by force or threat of use of force attempts to change the constitutional order of Montenegro, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Overthrow of the Highest State Authorities

Član 361

Whoever by force or threat of use of force attempts to overthrow any of the highest state authorities of Montenegro or representatives of those authorities, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Incitement to Violent Change of the Constitutional Order

Član 362

(1) Whoever with the intention of endangering the constitutional order or security of Montenegro calls for or incites the violent change of its constitutional order, the overthrow of the highest state authorities or representatives of those authorities, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article with assistance from abroad, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) Whoever with the intention of distribution produces or reproduces material which by its content calls for or incites the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article or whoever sends or transfers such material to the territory of Montenegro or holds a larger quantity of such material with the intention that he or another distributes it, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Murder of the Highest Representatives of Montenegro

Član 363

Whoever with the intention of endangering the constitutional order or security of Montenegro takes the life of the President of Montenegro, the President of the Parliament of Montenegro, the President of the Government of Montenegro, the President of the Constitutional Court of Montenegro, the President of the Supreme Court or the Supreme State Prosecutor, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
Armed Rebellion

Član 364

(1) Whoever participates in an armed rebellion directed at endangering the constitutional order, security or territorial integrity of Montenegro, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) The organizer or ringleader of the rebellion shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Terrorism

Član 365

(deleted)
Sabotage

Član 366

Whoever with the intention of endangering the constitutional order or security of Montenegro by demolition, arson or in another manner destroys or damages an industrial, agricultural or other economic facility, means of transport, device or installation, communications system device, device for public use for water, heat, gas or energy, dam, warehouse, building or any other facility of greater importance for the security or supply of citizens or for the economy or for the functioning of public services, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Sabotage

Član 367

Whoever with the intention of endangering the constitutional order or security of Montenegro in a covert, insidious or other similar manner in the performance of his official duty or work obligation causes damage exceeding the amount of fifteen thousand euros to the state authority or organization in which he works or to another state authority or another organization, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
Espionage

Član 368

(1) Whoever communicates, hands over or makes accessible secret data or documents to a foreign state, foreign organization or person serving them, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) Whoever creates or manages an intelligence service in Montenegro for a foreign state or organization, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) Whoever joins a foreign intelligence service, collects data for it or otherwise assists its work, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4) Whoever obtains secret data or documents with the intention of communicating or handing them over to a foreign state, foreign organization or person serving them, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(5) If serious consequences for the security, economic or military power of the country have resulted from the acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(6) Secret data means data marked with one of the following degrees of secrecy: "top secret", "secret", "confidential", "internal", the disclosure of which would cause or could cause harmful consequences for the security, defense or political or economic interests of Montenegro.
Disclosure of Secret Data

Član 369

(1) Whoever without authorization communicates, hands over or makes available secret data entrusted to him or which he obtained in another manner to an uninvited person, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in relation to secret data marked as "strictly confidential" or the act was committed during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(4) Secret data means data marked with one of the following degrees of secrecy: "strictly confidential", "secret", "confidential", "internal", the disclosure of which would cause or could cause harmful consequences for the security, defense or political or economic interests of Montenegro.
(5) Secret data within the meaning of this Article does not include data aimed at endangering the constitutional order and security of Montenegro, at serious violations of fundamental human rights, as well as data aimed at concealing a committed criminal offense for which imprisonment of five years or a more severe punishment may be imposed by law.
Incitement of national, racial and religious hatred

Član 370

(1) Whoever publicly incites violence or hatred towards a group or member of a group determined on the basis of race, color, religion, origin, state or national affiliation, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever publicly approves, denies the existence or significantly diminishes the gravity of criminal offenses of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed against a group or member of a group determined on the basis of race, color, religion, origin, state or national affiliation, in a manner that may lead to violence or incite hatred towards a group of persons or a member of such group, provided that these criminal offenses have been established by a final judgment of a court in Montenegro or an international criminal court.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed by coercion, abuse, endangering security, exposing to ridicule national, ethnic or religious symbols, damaging another's property, desecrating monuments, memorial sites or graves, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) Whoever commits the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article by abuse of position or if these acts resulted in disorder, violence or other serious consequences for the common life of peoples, national minorities or ethnic groups living in Montenegro, shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article by imprisonment from one to eight years, and for the act from paragraphs 2 and 3 by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Violation of territorial sovereignty

Član 371

Whoever, violating the rules of international law, enters the territory of Montenegro, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Association for unconstitutional activity

Član 372

(1) Whoever creates a group or other association of persons for the purpose of committing criminal offenses from Articles 357 to 363, Articles 365 to 367 of this Code, shall be punished by the punishment prescribed for the act for the commission of which the association was organized.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever agrees with another to commit any of the acts specified in paragraph 1 of this Article, and may be punished more leniently.
(3) Whoever becomes a member of an association from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) The perpetrator of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article who, by disclosing the association or in another manner, prevents the commission of criminal offenses provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years, and may be released from punishment.
(5) A member of the association from paragraph 3 of this Article who discloses the association before committing any criminal offense provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article within it or for it, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year, and may be released from punishment.
Preparation of acts against the constitutional order and security of Montenegro

Član 373

(1) Whoever prepares the commission of a criminal offense from Articles 357 to 367 and Article 368 paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Code, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) Whoever directs or transfers to the territory of Montenegro persons or weapons, explosives, poisons, equipment, ammunition or other material for the purpose of committing one or more criminal offenses from this chapter, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) Preparation from paragraph 1 of this Article consists of procuring or preparing means for committing a criminal offense, removing obstacles to committing a criminal offense, agreeing, planning or organizing with another the commission of a criminal offense, or other actions by which conditions are created for the direct commission of a criminal offense.
Serious acts against the constitutional order and security of the Republic of Montenegro

Član 374

(1) For a criminal offense from Articles 359 to 361 and Articles 364 to 367 of this Code which resulted in the death of one or more persons or caused danger to human life or was accompanied by serious violence or great destruction or led to endangering the security, economic or military strength of the country, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(2) If, in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator intentionally deprived one or more persons of life, he shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by long-term imprisonment.
(3) The punishment from paragraph 2 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever commits a criminal offense from Article 357, Articles 359 to 362, Articles 364 to 368, Articles 372 and 373 paragraph 2 of this Code during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency.
GLAVA TRIDESETA
CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST STATE AUTHORITIES
Preventing an official person from performing an official act

Član 375

(1) Whoever by force or threat to immediately use force prevents an official person from performing an official act undertaken within his authority or in the same manner compels him to perform an official act, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If, in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator insults or abuses the official person or inflicts minor bodily injury on him or threatens to use a weapon, he shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) Whoever commits the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article against a judge or state prosecutor in the performance of their judicial or prosecutorial duty, respectively, or an official person in the performance of public or state security duties or duties of maintaining public order and peace, preventing or detecting a criminal offense, apprehending the perpetrator of a criminal offense or guarding a person deprived of liberty, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) An attempt of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished.
(5) If the perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article was provoked by unlawful or rough conduct of the official person, he may be released from punishment.
Attack on an official person in the performance of official duty

Član 376

(1) Whoever attacks or threatens to attack an official person in the performance of official duty shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If, in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, minor bodily injury was inflicted on the official person or the use of a weapon was threatened, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed against a judge or state prosecutor in connection with the performance of their judicial or prosecutorial duty, respectively, or an official person in connection with the performance of public or national security duties, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
(5) The perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article who was provoked by unlawful or rough conduct of the official person may be released from punishment.
Participation in a group that prevents an official person from performing an official act

Article 377

(1) Whoever participates in a group of people who by joint action prevent an official person from performing an official act or in the same manner compel them to perform an official act, shall be punished for mere participation by imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Attempt shall be punished.
(3) The ringleader of a group that commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Incitement to Resistance

Article 378

(1) Whoever incites others to resistance or disobedience to lawful decisions or measures of state authorities or to an official person in the performance of an official act, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article there has been non-implementation or significant obstruction of the implementation of a lawful decision or measure of state authorities, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Failure to Comply with Order to Disperse

Article 379

(1) Whoever does not disperse from a group of people which an authorised official person or authorised military person has called to disperse in circumstances where public order is threatened, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three months.
(2) The ringleader of a group who commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Non-Participation in Elimination of General Danger

Article 380

Whoever contrary to the order of the competent authority, or other competent entity, without justified reason, refuses to participate in the elimination of danger arising from fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three months.
Removal and Damage of Official Seal and Mark

Article 381

(1) Whoever removes or damages an official seal or mark which an authorised official person has placed for the purpose of securing an object or premises or whoever, without removing or damaging the seal or mark, enters such premises or opens an object on which an official seal or mark has been placed, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Attempt shall be punished.
Seizure and Destruction of Official Seal and Official Document

Article 382

(1) Whoever unlawfully seizes, conceals, destroys, damages or otherwise renders unusable an official seal, book, document or instrument belonging to a state authority, commercial company, institution or other entity exercising public powers or located with them, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Attempt shall be punished.
False Representation

Article 383

(1) Whoever with the intention of obtaining some benefit for themselves or another or of causing some harm to another, falsely represents themselves as an official or military person or unauthorisedly wears any insignia of an official or military person, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever performs any act which only a specific official or military person is authorised to perform.
Taking the Law into One's Own Hands

Article 384

(1) Whoever arbitrarily secures some right of their own or a right which they believe belongs to them, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed using force or threat, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by threat of murder or serious bodily injury, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(4) Whoever commits the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article for another, shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for that act.
(5) If the act from paragraph 1 and paragraph 4 in connection with paragraph 1 of this Article is committed to the detriment of citizens, prosecution shall be undertaken upon private action.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
Failure to Report Preparation of a Criminal Offence

Article 385

(1) Whoever knows that the commission of a criminal offence for which five years' imprisonment or a more severe penalty may be imposed by law is being prepared, and at a time when it was still possible to prevent its commission does not report it, and the offence is attempted or committed, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) If the preparation of a criminal offence for which a penalty of long-term imprisonment may be imposed by law has not been reported, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) The person shall not be punished for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article if the perpetrator is their spouse, a person with whom the perpetrator lives in a permanent extramarital union, a blood relative in direct line, brother or sister, adoptive parent or adoptee, as well as the spouse of any of the mentioned persons, or a person who lives with any of them in a permanent extramarital union.
Failure to Report a Criminal Offence and Perpetrator

Article 386

(1) Whoever knows that a person has committed a criminal offence for which a penalty of long-term imprisonment may be imposed by law or knows only that such an offence has been committed and does not report it before the offence or the perpetrator is discovered, shall be punished by imprisonment up to two years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on an official or responsible person who deliberately fails to report a criminal offence of which they became aware in the performance of their duty, if for that offence five years' imprisonment or a more severe penalty may be imposed by law.
(3) The person shall not be punished for failure to report a criminal offence or perpetrator from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article if the perpetrator is their spouse or with whom they live in a permanent extramarital union, a blood relative in direct line, brother or sister, adoptive parent or adoptee, as well as the spouse of any of the mentioned persons, or a person who lives with any of them in a permanent extramarital union, as well as the defence counsel, physician or religious confessor of the perpetrator.
Assistance to Perpetrator After Commission of a Criminal Offence

Article 387

(1) Whoever conceals the perpetrator of a criminal offence or helps them not to be discovered by concealing the means by which the offence was committed, traces or in another manner or whoever conceals a convicted person or undertakes other actions aimed at preventing the execution of an imposed penalty, security measure or the application of educational measures of commitment to an educational institution or educational-correctional home, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever provides assistance to the perpetrator of a criminal offence for which a penalty of imprisonment over five years is prescribed, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) Whoever provides assistance to the perpetrator of a criminal offence for which a penalty of long-term imprisonment is prescribed, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) The penalty for the act from paragraph 1 of this Article may not be more severe either in type or in degree than the penalty prescribed for the criminal offence committed by the person to whom assistance was provided.
(5) The person shall not be punished for the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article if the perpetrator is their spouse, a person with whom the perpetrator lives in a permanent extramarital union, a blood relative in direct line, brother or sister, adoptive parent or adoptee, as well as the spouse of any of the mentioned persons, or a person who lives with any of them in a permanent extramarital union.

Article 388

(1) Whoever reports a specific person as having committed a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio, knowing that person is not the perpetrator of that offence, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever by planting traces of a criminal offence or in another manner causes the initiation of criminal proceedings for a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio against a person whom they know is not the perpetrator of that offence.
(3) Whoever reports themselves as having committed a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio, although they know they did not commit it, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(4) The penalty from paragraph 3 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever reports that a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio has been committed, although they know that offence has not been committed.
Giving False Testimony

Article 389

(1) A witness, expert witness, translator or interpreter who gives false testimony before a court, in disciplinary, misdemeanour or administrative proceedings or in other proceedings prescribed by law, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) The punishment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply to a party who, during the taking of evidence by hearing of parties in court or administrative proceedings, gives false testimony, and a decision rendered in those proceedings is based on that testimony.
(3) If false testimony is given in criminal proceedings, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(4) If particularly serious consequences for the accused have resulted from the offence referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(5) If the perpetrator voluntarily retracts the false testimony before a final decision is rendered, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to three months, and may also be exempted from punishment.
Preventing Evidence

Article 390

(1) Whoever gives, offers or promises a gift or other benefit to a witness or expert witness or other participant before a court or other state authority, or to a member of his family or household, or uses force or threat against him with the intention that such person influences the outcome of the proceedings by giving false testimony or by not giving testimony, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) Whoever, with the intention of preventing or impeding the presentation of evidence, conceals, destroys, damages or renders partially or completely unusable another person's document or other objects that serve as evidence, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(3) The punishment referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article shall also apply to whoever, with the intention referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, removes, destroys, damages, moves or displaces any boundary stone, surveying mark or in general any mark of ownership of immovable property or of the right to use water, or whoever, with the same intention, falsely places such a mark.

Article 391

(1) Whoever unlawfully discloses what he has learned in court, misdemeanour, administrative or other proceedings prescribed by law, which by law may not be published or has been declared secret by a decision of a court or other competent authority, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) The punishment referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply to whoever, without the permission of the court, publishes the course of criminal proceedings conducted against a juvenile or a decision rendered in those proceedings, or whoever publishes the name of the juvenile against whom the proceedings were conducted or data from which it can be determined which juvenile is concerned.
(3) Whoever unlawfully discloses data on the identity or personal data of a person protected in criminal proceedings or by a special protection programme shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(4) If serious consequences for the protected person have resulted from the offence referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, or if criminal proceedings were prevented or significantly impeded, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Mutiny of Persons Deprived of Liberty

Article 392

(1) Persons who are deprived of liberty on the basis of law who gather with the intention of forcibly freeing themselves or jointly attacking persons to whose supervision they are entrusted, or of forcing them by force or by threat to immediately use force to do or omit something contrary to their duty, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
(2) The perpetrator of the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article who uses force or threat shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Escape of a Person Deprived of Liberty

Article 393

A person deprived of liberty on the basis of law who escapes by using force against a person or by threatening to immediately attack life or body shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Enabling Escape of a Person Deprived of Liberty

Article 394

(1) Whoever by force, threat, deception or in another manner enables the escape of a person who is deprived of liberty on the basis of law shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is committed by several persons acting jointly, or if the escape of several persons is enabled, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Non-Execution of a Court Decision

Article 395

(1) An official or responsible person who refuses to execute a final and enforceable court decision shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
(2) If the person referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article executes the final and enforceable court decision, prosecution shall not be undertaken, and if it has been undertaken, it shall be discontinued.
Violation of a Prohibition Determined by an Imposed Security Measure
Article 395a
Whoever violates a prohibition determined by a security measure imposed by a final court decision under Articles 73, 76, 77a and 77b of this Code, or does not comply with the imposed security measure, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
Unlawfully Enabling the Performance of Certain Professions, Functions, Duties, Jobs and Activities

Article 396

Whoever enables a person to perform certain professions, functions, duties, jobs or activities although he knew that the performance thereof was prohibited to that person by a final decision imposing an appropriate security measure or protective measure, or such prohibition arose as a legal consequence of conviction, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
Obstruction of Justice
Article 396a
(1) Whoever by force or threat or in another manner seriously obstructs or prevents a judge, state prosecutor, his deputy, notary or public enforcement agent in the performance of duties to render or not render a decision shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) Whoever, while committing the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, threatens to use a weapon or inflicts light bodily injury on the persons referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Unauthorized Practice of Law

Article 397

Whoever, without appropriate professional qualifications, engages in providing legal assistance for remuneration shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to two years.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND PEACE
Causing Panic and Disorder

Article 398

(1) Whoever, by disseminating or spreading false news or allegations, causes panic, or serious disturbance of public order or peace, or frustrates or significantly impedes the implementation of decisions and measures of state authorities or organizations exercising public powers, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) If the offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is committed through the media or other means of public information or similar means, or at a public gathering, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment for up to three years.
Violent Behaviour

Article 399

Whoever, by grossly insulting or abusing another, committing violence against another, provoking a fight, or by insolent or reckless behaviour, endangers the peace of citizens or disturbs public order and peace, if this is committed in a group or if a person has been inflicted a minor bodily injury or if serious humiliation of citizens has occurred, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Violent behaviour at a sporting event or public gathering
Article 399a
(1) Whoever physically attacks or physically confronts participants of a sporting event or public gathering, provokes or commits violence, brings into a sports facility or throws onto the sports field, among spectators or participants of a public gathering objects, pyrotechnic devices or other explosive, flammable or harmful substances that may cause bodily injuries or endanger the health of participants of a sporting event or public gathering, unlawfully enters the sports field or part of the stands intended for opposing fans and provokes violence, damages a sports facility, its equipment, devices and installations, by their behaviour or slogans at a sporting event or public gathering incites national, racial, religious or other hatred or intolerance based on some discriminatory ground as a result of which violence or physical confrontation with participants occurs, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever physically attacks or physically confronts participants of a sporting event or public gathering, provokes or commits violence or damages property whose value exceeds the amount of ten thousand euros when arriving at or leaving a sporting event or public gathering.
(3) The ringleader of a group that commits the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment from three to twelve years.
(4) If the commission of the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article has resulted in disorder in which a person has been inflicted a serious bodily injury or property whose value exceeds the amount of forty thousand euros has been damaged, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(5) An official or responsible person who, when organising a sporting event or public gathering, does not undertake security measures in order to prevent or avert disorder, and as a result the life or body of a large number of people or property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros is endangered, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine.
Agreement to commit a criminal offence

Article 400

Whoever agrees with another to commit a specific criminal offence for which a sentence of five years' imprisonment or a more severe penalty may be imposed, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Criminal association

Article 401

(1) Whoever organises a group or other association that has as its aim the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of one year or a more severe penalty may be imposed, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article relates to an association that has as its aim the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of five years or a more severe penalty may be imposed, the organiser of the association shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years, and a member of the association by imprisonment up to two years.
(3) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article relates to an association that has as its aim the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of fifteen years may be imposed, the organiser of the association shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years, and a member of the association by imprisonment up to three years.
(4) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article relates to an association that has as its aim the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of twenty years or a sentence of long-term imprisonment may be imposed, the organiser of the association shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment, and a member of the association by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(5) The organiser of an association from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article who, by revealing the association or in another manner, prevents the commission of criminal offences for the commission of which the association was organised, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years, and may also be released from punishment.
(6) A member of an association from paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article who reveals the association or contributes to its revelation may be released from punishment.
(7) The organiser and member of an association who commits a criminal offence as part of the association shall also be punished for that criminal offence.
Creation of a criminal organisation
Article 401a
(1) Whoever organises a criminal organisation that has as its aim the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of four years or a more severe penalty may be imposed by law, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) A member of a criminal organisation from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) The organiser of a criminal organisation who, by revealing the criminal organisation or in another manner, prevents the commission of criminal offences for which the organisation was created, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years, and may also be released from punishment.
(4) A member of a criminal organisation who reveals the criminal organisation or contributes to its revelation shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year, and may also be released from punishment.
(5) The organiser and member of a criminal organisation who commits a criminal offence as part of the criminal organisation shall also be punished for that criminal offence.
(6) A criminal organisation from paragraph 1 of this Article means an organisation consisting of three or more persons whose aim is the commission of criminal offences for which a sentence of imprisonment of four years or a more severe penalty may be imposed by law, for the purpose of obtaining unlawful gain or power, provided that at least three of the following conditions are met:
1) that each member of the criminal organisation had a predetermined or obviously determinable task or role;
2) that the activity of the criminal organisation is planned for a longer time or for an unlimited period of time;
3) that the activity of the criminal organisation is based on the application of certain rules of internal control and discipline of members;
4) that the activity of the criminal organisation is planned and carried out in international dimensions;
5) that violence or intimidation is applied in the activity of the criminal organisation or that there is readiness for their application;
6) that economic or business structures are used in the activity of the criminal organisation;
7) that money laundering or unlawfully obtained gain is used in the activity of the criminal organisation or
8) that there is influence of the criminal organisation or its part on political power, public information media, legislative, executive or judicial power or on other important social or economic factors.
Manufacturing and procuring weapons and means intended for the commission of a criminal offence

Article 402

(1) Whoever manufactures, procures or enables another to obtain weapons, explosive materials, means necessary for their manufacture or poison, knowing that they are intended for the commission of a criminal offence, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) Whoever makes or transfers to another a means for breaking or burglary, although knowing that it is intended for the commission of a criminal offence, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorised possession of weapons and explosive materials

Article 403

(1) Whoever unlawfully manufactures, sells, procures, exchanges, carries or possesses firearms, ammunition or explosive materials, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months.
(2) Whoever unlawfully possesses, carries, manufactures, repairs, converts, sells, procures, exchanges, transports or otherwise places into circulation firearms, ammunition, explosive materials, bursting or gas weapons whose possession is prohibited to citizens, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If the object of the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article is a large quantity of weapons or means or if the weapons or other means in question are of great destructive power, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Participation in a group that commits a criminal offence

Article 404

(1) Whoever participates in a group of people who by joint action deprive a person of life or inflict serious bodily injury, commit arson, damage property whose value exceeds the amount of twenty thousand euros or commit another criminal offence for which five years of imprisonment or a more severe punishment may be imposed or who attempts to commit any of these acts, shall be punished for mere participation by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) Whoever unlawfully possesses, carries, manufactures, repairs, modifies, sells, procures, exchanges, transports or otherwise places in circulation firearms, ammunition, explosive materials, explosive or gas weapons whose possession is prohibited to citizens, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Unauthorised crossing of the state border and smuggling of people

Article 405

(1) Whoever without the prescribed permit crosses or attempts to cross the border of Montenegro, armed or using violence, shall be punished by imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever engages in the unauthorised transfer of other persons across the border of Montenegro or whoever for the purpose of acquiring financial or other benefit enables another to cross the border unlawfully or to stay or transit unlawfully shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 2 of this Article was committed by several persons in an organised manner, by abuse of official position or in a manner that endangers the life or health of the person whose unauthorised border crossing, stay or transit is enabled or if a larger number of people were smuggled, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(4) The means intended for or used in the commission of the acts from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall be confiscated.
Abuse of the sign for help and the sign for danger

Article 406

Whoever abuses the sign for help or the sign for danger or unjustifiably calls for help and thereby causes the undertaking of unnecessary measures by state authorities, fire-fighting or other competent organisation or causes disruption in traffic, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to six months.
Unauthorised organisation of games of chance

Article 407

(1) Whoever without the approval of the competent authority organises games of chance, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever unlawfully engages in the sale of lottery tickets or the receipt of payments for games of chance organised abroad, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years
(3) The organiser of a game of chance or participant in the game from paragraph 1 of this Article who uses deception, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(4) The means intended for or used in the commission of the acts from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, as well as money and other objects used in the game of chance, shall be confiscated.
Unauthorised engagement in a certain occupation

Article 408

Whoever unlawfully and for remuneration engages in a certain occupation for the performance of which, according to law or other regulations adopted on the basis of law, the approval of the competent authority or competent entity is required, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Unauthorised possession and use of a radio and television station

Article 409

Whoever contrary to regulations on the communications system possesses or uses a radio or television station, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of a corpse

Article 410

Whoever unlawfully exhumes, removes, conceals or destroys a corpse, part of a corpse or ashes or other mortal remains of the deceased, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of a grave

Article 411

(1) Whoever unlawfully digs up, demolishes, damages or grossly violates a grave or other place where the deceased is buried, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever unlawfully destroys, damages or removes or grossly violates a monument or other memorial to a deceased person.
(3) If by the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the characteristics of a more serious criminal offence are realised, the perpetrator shall be punished for that offence.
Violation and unauthorised erection of a memorial
Article 411a
Whoever damages, destroys, unlawfully alters, modifies, relocates, replaces or removes a memorial, or erects or organises the erection of a memorial whose erection is not permitted, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to three years.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST LEGAL TRANSACTIONS
Forgery of a document

Article 412

(1) Whoever makes a false or issues an untrue document or alters a genuine document with the intention that such a document be used as genuine or whoever uses such a false or untrue document as genuine or procures it for use, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in respect of a public document, testament, bill of exchange, cheque, public or official book or other book that must be kept on the basis of law, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) An attempt of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished.
Special cases of forgery of a document

Article 413

It shall be considered that the act of forgery of a document is committed and shall be punished according to Article 412 of this Code:
1) whoever unlawfully fills in paper, a blank or other object on which a person has placed their signature with a statement that has value for legal relations;
2) whoever deceives another about the content of a document and the latter places their signature on that document, believing that they are signing another document or another content;
3) whoever issues a document in the name of another person without their authorisation or in the name of a person who does not exist;
4) whoever as the issuer of a document adds to their signature that they have a position or rank or title although they do not have such a position, rank or title, and this has a material influence on the probative value of the document;
5) whoever makes a document in such a way that they unlawfully use a genuine seal or sign.
Forgery of an official document

Article 414

(1) An official person who enters untrue data in an official document, book or file or fails to enter important data or with their signature or official seal certifies an official document, book or file with untrue content or who with their signature or official seal enables the making of an official document, book or file with untrue content, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on an official person who uses an untrue official document, book or file in service as if they were true, or who destroys, conceals, damages to a greater extent or otherwise renders unusable an official document, book or file.
(3) A responsible person in a commercial company, institution or other entity who commits the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article shall be punished by the punishment prescribed for that act.
Inducing certification of untrue content

Article 415

(1) Whoever by misleading induces the competent authority to certify in a public document, record or book anything untrue that can serve as evidence in legal transactions, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever uses such a document, record or book although they know that they are untrue.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST OFFICIAL DUTY
Abuse of official position

Article 416

(1) An official person who by unlawful exploitation of their official position or authority, exceeding the limits of their official authority or failure to perform their official duty procures for themselves or another a benefit, inflicts damage on another or more seriously violates the rights of another, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If by the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit in the amount exceeding three thousand euros was procured, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the value of the procured material benefit exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Negligent work in service

Article 417

(1) An official who, by violating laws or other regulations or general acts, by omitting supervisory duties or in another manner, acts manifestly negligently in the performance of duty, although he was aware or was obliged and could have been aware that as a result thereof a serious violation of another's right or property damage may occur, and such violation, that is, damage in an amount exceeding three thousand euros does occur, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If as a result of the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a serious violation of another's right has occurred or property damage in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) A responsible person in an institution or other entity, except those engaged in economic activity, who commits the act referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for that act.
Unlawful Collection and Payment

Article 418

An official who collects from someone something that he is not obliged to pay or collects more than he is obliged to pay or who, upon payment or delivery of any things, pays less, that is, delivers less, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to three years.
Fraud in Office

Article 419

(1) An official who, in the performance of duty, with the intention of acquiring for himself or another an unlawful material benefit, by submitting false accounts or in another manner, misleads an authorised person to make an unlawful payment, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit in an amount exceeding three thousand euros has been acquired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros has been acquired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(4)
(deleted)
Embezzlement

Article 420

(1) Whoever, with the intention of acquiring for himself or another an unlawful material benefit, appropriates money, securities or other things entrusted to him in office or at work in a state body, institution or other entity not engaged in economic business, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit in an amount exceeding three thousand euros has been acquired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If by the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article a material benefit in an amount exceeding thirty thousand euros has been acquired, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Unauthorised Use

Article 421

Whoever without authorisation uses money, securities or other things entrusted to him in office or at work in a state body, commercial company, institution or other entity or business or gives these things to another without authorisation for use, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Petty Fraud in Office, Embezzlement and Unauthorised Use
Article 421a
(1) Whoever commits petty fraud in office, embezzlement or unauthorised use shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Fraud in office, embezzlement and unauthorised use are considered petty if the amount of the unlawful payment, the value of the acquired unlawful material benefit or the value of the embezzled things or things which the perpetrator used does not exceed the amount of one hundred and fifty euros, and with the intention of acquiring a small material benefit.
Unlawful Influence

Article 422

(1) Whoever directly or through a third person demands or receives a bribe or accepts a promise of a bribe for himself or another to use his official or social position or actual or presumed influence to mediate for an official act to be performed or not performed, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever, using his official or social position or actual or presumed influence, mediates or undertakes to mediate for an official act to be performed which should not be performed or for an official act not to be performed which should be performed, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If for the mediation referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article a bribe has been received, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) The received bribe shall be confiscated.
Inducement to Unlawful Influence
Article 422a
(1) Whoever directly or through a third person gives, offers or promises to an official or other person a gift or other benefit for himself or another to use his official or social position or actual or presumed influence to mediate for an official act to be performed or not performed, shall be punished by imprisonment up to two years.
(2) Whoever directly or through a third person gives, offers or promises to an official or other person a gift or other benefit for himself or another to use his official or social position or actual or presumed influence to mediate for an official act to be performed which should not be performed or for an official act not to be performed which should be performed, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) The perpetrator of the act referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article who reported the act before he learned that it had been discovered may be exempted from punishment.
(4) The received gift and other benefit shall be confiscated.
Receiving a Bribe

Article 423

(1) An official who directly or indirectly demands or receives a bribe or who accepts a promise of a bribe for himself or another to perform an official or other act which he should not perform or not to perform an official or other act which he should perform, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) An official who directly or indirectly demands or receives a bribe or who accepts a promise of a bribe for himself or another to perform an official or other act which he should perform or not to perform an official or other act which he should not perform, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to eight years.
(3) An official who commits the act referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2 of this Article in connection with the detection of a criminal offence, the initiation or conduct of criminal proceedings, the imposition or execution of a criminal sanction, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(4) An official who, after the performance, that is, non-performance of the official or other act referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, and in connection with it, demands or receives a bribe, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(5) If a responsible or other person in an institution or other entity not engaged in economic business commits the act referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 of this Article, he shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for that act.
(6) The received bribe shall be confiscated.
Giving a Bribe

Article 424

(1) Whoever directly or indirectly gives, offers or promises a bribe to an official for him or another for the official to perform an official or other act which he should not perform or not to perform an official or other act which he should perform or whoever mediates in such giving of a bribe to an official, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) Whoever directly or indirectly gives, offers or promises a bribe to an official for him or another for the official to perform an official or other act which he should perform or not to perform an official or other act which he should not perform or whoever mediates in such giving of a bribe to an official, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) The perpetrator of the act referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article who reported the act before he learned that it had been discovered may be exempted from punishment.
(4) The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article shall also apply when a bribe is given, offered or promised to a responsible or other person in an institution or other entity not engaged in economic business.
Disclosure of Official Secret

Article 425

(deleted)
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST HUMANITY AND OTHER GOODS PROTECTED BY INTERNATIONAL LAW
Genocide

Član 426

Whoever, with the intent to wholly or partially destroy a national, ethnic, racial or religious group, orders the commission of murders or serious bodily injuries or serious impairment of the physical or mental health of members of the group, or that the group be placed in such living conditions that lead to the complete or partial extermination of the group, or that measures be applied to prevent births among members of the group, or that forced transfer of children to another group be carried out, or whoever with the same intent commits any of the stated acts, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least eight years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
Crime against humanity

Član 427

Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law, as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against a civilian population, orders: the commission of murders; placing the population or a part thereof in such living conditions that lead to their complete or partial extermination; enslavement; forced displacement; torture; rape; forcing into prostitution; coercion into pregnancy or sterilization for the purpose of changing the ethnic composition of the population; persecution or expulsion on political, religious, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, gender or any other grounds; detention or abduction of persons without providing information thereon in order to deny them legal protection; oppression of a racial group or establishment of domination of one such group over another; or other similar inhumane acts by which serious suffering is intentionally caused or health is seriously endangered, or whoever commits any of the stated acts, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
War crime against the civilian population

Član 428

(1) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, orders the commission of an attack on the civilian population, settlement, individual civilians, persons incapacitated for combat or on members or facilities of humanitarian organizations or peace missions; an indiscriminate attack affecting the civilian population or civilian objects under special protection of international law; an attack on military targets knowing that it will cause casualties among the civilian population or damage to civilian objects that is manifestly disproportionate to the anticipated military advantage; that bodily injuries, torture, inhumane treatment, biological, medical or other scientific experiments, removal of tissue or organs for transplantation be carried out against the civilian population, or that other acts be carried out that impair health or inflict great suffering, or orders displacement or resettlement or forced denationalization or conversion to another religion; forcing into prostitution or rape; application of measures of intimidation and terror, taking of hostages, collective punishment, unlawful deprivation of liberty and detention; deprivation of the right to a proper and impartial trial; declaring the rights and actions of citizens of the enemy state prohibited, suspended or inadmissible in judicial proceedings; forcing into service in the armed forces of the enemy power or in its intelligence service or administration; forcing into service in the armed forces of persons younger than eighteen years of age; forcing into forced labour; starvation of the population; unlawful seizure, appropriation or destruction of property of the population on a large scale that is not justified by military necessity; taking unlawful and disproportionately large contributions and requisitions; reducing the value of domestic currency or unlawful issuance of currency, or whoever commits any of the stated acts, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, orders: the commission of an attack on objects specially protected by international law and objects and installations with dangerous force such as dams, embankments and nuclear power plants; targeting of civilian objects under special protection of international law, undefended places and demilitarized zones; long-term and large-scale damage to the environment that may harm the health or survival of the population, or whoever commits any of the stated acts.
(3) Whoever during war, armed conflict or occupation orders that murders be committed against the civilian population or whoever commits such an act, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(4) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war, armed conflict or occupation, as an occupier, orders or carries out the transfer of parts of their own civilian population to the occupied territory, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years.
(5) Whoever threatens to commit one or more acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
War crime against the wounded and sick

Član 429

(1) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war or armed conflict, orders that bodily injuries, torture, inhumane treatment, biological, medical or other scientific experiments, removal of tissue or organs for transplantation or other acts that impair health or inflict great suffering be carried out against the wounded, sick, shipwrecked or medical or religious personnel, or orders unlawful destruction or appropriation on a large scale of materials, means of medical transport and supplies of medical institutions or units that is not justified by military necessity, or whoever commits any of the stated acts, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years.
(2) Whoever during war, armed conflict or occupation orders that murders be committed against the wounded or sick or whoever commits such an act, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
War crime against prisoners of war

Član 430

(1) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law, orders that bodily injuries, torture, inhumane treatment, biological, medical or other scientific experiments, removal of tissue or organs for transplantation be carried out against prisoners of war, or that other acts be carried out that impair health or inflict great suffering, or orders coercion into performing service in the armed forces of the enemy or deprivation of the right to a proper and impartial trial; or whoever commits any of the stated acts, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years.
(2) Whoever during war, armed conflict or occupation orders that murders be committed against prisoners of war or whoever commits such an act, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
Organizing and inciting the commission of genocide and war crimes

Član 431

(1) Whoever agrees with another to commit any of the criminal offences from Articles 426 to 430 of this Code, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) Whoever organizes a group for the purpose of committing criminal offences from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) Whoever becomes a member of the group from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) The perpetrator of the act from paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article who reveals the agreement or group before committing a criminal offence within it or for it, or the perpetrator of the act from paragraph 2 of this Article who prevents the commission of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, may be punished more leniently.
(5) Whoever calls for or incites the commission of criminal offences from Articles 426 to 430 of this Code, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Use of prohibited means of combat

Article 432

(1) Whoever during war or armed conflict orders the use of combat means or methods of warfare that are prohibited by the rules of international law or uses them himself, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article multiple persons have been killed, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(3) Whoever calls for the use or prepares the use of combat means or methods of warfare from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Unauthorized Production of Weapons Whose Use is Prohibited

Article 433

(1) Whoever contrary to law, other regulations or rules of international law produces, purchases, sells, imports, exports or otherwise procures or gives to another, possesses or transports weapons whose production or use is prohibited or means for their production, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) An official or responsible person who orders or enables a legal entity to carry out activities provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Unlawful Killing and Wounding of the Enemy

Article 434

(1) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war or armed conflict, kills or wounds an enemy who has laid down arms or has unconditionally surrendered or has no means of defense, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to fifteen years.
(2) If the murder from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in a treacherous manner or from base motives, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(3) If the murder from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in a cruel manner or from greed or if multiple persons were killed, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(4) The penalty from paragraph 3 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war or armed conflict, orders that there shall be no survivors among enemy combatants in battle or conducts combat against the enemy on that basis.
Unlawful Taking of Property from the Killed

Article 435

(1) Whoever orders the unlawful taking of property from the killed or wounded on the battlefield or whoever carries out such taking, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in a cruel manner or if the value of the taken property exceeds the amount of three thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the value of the property from paragraph 1 of this Article exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Violation of Parliamentarians

Article 436

Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war or armed conflict, insults, abuses or detains a parliamentarian or his escort or prevents their return or otherwise violates their inviolability or orders such acts to be committed, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Cruel Treatment of the Wounded, Sick and Prisoners of War

Article 437

Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law, treats the wounded, sick or prisoners of war cruelly or prevents or obstructs them from exercising the rights to which they are entitled under those rules or orders such acts to be committed, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Unjustified Delay of Repatriation of Prisoners of War

Article 438

Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law, after the end of war or armed conflict, unjustifiably delays the repatriation of prisoners of war or civilians or orders such delay, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Destruction of Cultural Property

Article 439

(1) Whoever, in violation of the rules of international law during war or armed conflict, destroys or uses for military purposes cultural or historical monuments or other cultural property or religious objects or institutions or objects intended for science, art, education or humanitarian purposes or appropriates movable cultural property or orders such acts to be committed, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) If by the act from paragraph 1 of this Article an object that is cultural property under special protection of international law has been destroyed, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Failure to Take Measures to Prevent the Commission of Criminal Offenses Against Humanity and Other Goods Protected by International Law

Article 440

(1) A military commander or a person who actually performs this function or a superior civilian person, who knowing that the forces he commands or controls are preparing or have commenced the commission of a criminal offense from Articles 426 to 430, Article 432, Articles 434 to 437 and Article 439 of this Code, does not take the necessary measures that he could and was obliged to take to prevent the commission of the act, and as a result of this the commission of that act occurs, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
Abuse of International Signs

Article 441

(1) Whoever abuses or without authorization wears the flag or sign of the United Nations or the flag or sign of the Red Cross or signs corresponding to them or other internationally recognized signs used to mark certain objects for protection from military operations or orders such acts to be committed, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article in a zone of military operations, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Crime of Aggression

Article 442

(1) Whoever calls for or incites the commission of an act of aggression, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) Whoever orders the commission of an act of aggression or participates in making a decision to commit an act of aggression, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(3) Whoever prepares the act from paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Racial and Other Discrimination

Article 443

(1) Whoever on the grounds of national or ethnic affiliation, affiliation to a race or religion or on the grounds of absence of such affiliation or on the grounds of differences in political or other conviction, sex, language, education, social position, social origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, property status or some other personal characteristic violates basic human rights and freedoms guaranteed by generally accepted rules of international law and confirmed by international treaties ratified by Montenegro, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) The penalty from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be imposed on whoever persecutes organizations or individuals because of their advocacy for equality of people.
(3) Whoever spreads ideas about the superiority of one race over another or propagates hatred or intolerance on the grounds of race, sex, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or other personal characteristic or incites racial or other discrimination, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(4) Whoever commits the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article by abuse of position or if as a result of those acts disorder or violence has occurred, shall be punished for the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article by imprisonment from one to eight years, and for the act from paragraph 3 of this Article by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Trafficking in Human Beings

Article 444

(1) Whoever by force or threat, by bringing into error or maintaining in error, by abuse of authority, trust, relationship of dependency, difficult circumstances of another, by withholding, taking away or destroying personal documents, by falsifying personal documents, by obtaining or producing falsified documents or by giving or receiving money or other benefit, in order to obtain consent from a person who has control over another person: recruits, transports, transfers, delivers, sells, buys, intermediates in sale, conceals or keeps another person, with the aim of exploiting their labour, forced labour, bringing into the position of servant, slavery or slavery-like relationship, performing criminal activity, prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, begging, use for pornographic purposes, entering into an unlawful marriage, for the purpose of removing body parts for transplantation or for use in armed conflicts, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(2) It is considered that the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed against a minor even when the perpetrator has not used force, threat or any other of the specified methods of commission.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed against a minor or if the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed by an official person in the performance of official duty or if the life of one or more persons has been intentionally endangered, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least three years.
(4) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article serious bodily injury of a person has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to twelve years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(6) Whoever engages in committing the criminal offence from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article or if the act has been committed in an organized manner by several persons, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(7) Whoever uses the services of a person for whom they know that the act from paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed against them, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(8) If the act from paragraph 7 of this Article has been committed against a minor, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(9) The consent of the victim against whom the act from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article has been committed is without effect on the existence of that criminal offence.
Trafficking in minors for adoption

Article 445

(1) Whoever takes away a minor for their adoption contrary to applicable regulations or whoever adopts such a person or intermediates in such adoption or whoever for that purpose buys, sells or delivers another person who has not reached fourteen years of age or transports them, provides them accommodation or conceals them, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) Whoever engages in committing the activity from paragraph 1 of this Article or if the act has been committed in an organized manner by several persons, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least three years.
Establishing slavery relationship and transport of persons in slavery relationship

Article 446

(1) Whoever, violating the rules of international law, places another in slavery or a similar relationship or keeps them in such a relationship, buys, sells, delivers to another person or intermediates in the purchase, sale or delivery of such a person or incites another to sell their freedom or the freedom of a person they support or care for, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(2) Whoever transports persons who are in slavery or a similar relationship from one country to another, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) Whoever commits the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article against a minor, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Terrorism

Article 447

(1) Whoever, with the intention to seriously intimidate citizens or to compel Montenegro, a foreign state or an international organization to do or not do something, or to seriously threaten or damage the fundamental constitutional, political, economic or social structures of Montenegro, a foreign state or an international organization, commits one of the following acts:
1) attack on the life, body or freedom of another,
2) kidnapping or hostage-taking,
3) destruction of state or public facilities, transport systems, infrastructure including information systems, fixed platforms on the continental shelf, public goods or private property which may endanger human lives or cause substantial damage to the economy,
4) hijacking of aircraft, ship, means of public transport or freight transport which may endanger human lives,
5) manufacture, possession, acquisition, transport, supply or use of weapons, explosives, nuclear or radioactive material or devices, nuclear, biological or chemical weapons,
6) research and development of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons,
7) release of hazardous substances or causing fire, explosion or flood or undertaking other generally dangerous actions which may endanger human lives,
8) disruption or suspension of supply of water, electricity or other energy sources which may endanger human lives, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least five years.
(2) Whoever threatens to commit a criminal offense from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred or great destruction has been caused, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(4) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally deprived one or more persons of life, he shall be punished by imprisonment of at least twelve years or by long-term imprisonment.
Public incitement to commit terrorist acts
Article 447a
Whoever publicly calls for or otherwise incites the commission of a criminal offense from Article 447 of this Code shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
Recruitment and training for committing terrorist acts
Article 447b
(1) Whoever, with the intention of committing an act from Article 447 of this Code, recruits another to commit or participate in the commission of that act or to join a group of people or a criminal association or a criminal organization for the purpose of participating in the commission of that criminal offense, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on whoever, with the intention of committing a criminal offense from Article 447 of this Code, gives instructions on the manufacture and use of explosive devices, firearms or other weapons or harmful or dangerous substances or trains another for the commission of or participation in the commission of that criminal offense.
Use of a lethal device
Article 447c
(1) Whoever, with the intention to deprive another of life, inflict serious bodily injury or destroy or substantially damage a state or public facility, public transport system or other facility of greater importance for the security or supply of citizens or for the economy or for the functioning of public services, manufactures, transfers, possesses, gives to another, places or activates a lethal device (explosives, chemical agents, biological agents or poisons or radioactive material) in a public place or in or near a facility, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(2) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally inflicted serious bodily injury on a person or destroyed or substantially damaged a facility, he shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally deprived one or more persons of life, he shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by long-term imprisonment.
Destruction and damage of a nuclear facility
Article 447d
(1) Whoever, with the intention to deprive another of life, inflict serious bodily injury, endanger the environment or cause substantial property damage, destroys or damages a nuclear facility in a manner that releases or there is a possibility of releasing radioactive material, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally inflicted serious bodily injury on a person or destroyed or substantially damaged a nuclear facility, he shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally deprived one or more persons of life, he shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by long-term imprisonment.
Endangering persons under international protection

Article 448

(1) Whoever commits kidnapping or any other violence against a person under international legal protection or a member of his family shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) Whoever attacks the official premises, private residence or means of transport of a person under international legal protection in a manner that may endanger his security and personal freedom shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(4) If in committing the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article the perpetrator intentionally deprived a person of life, he shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by long-term imprisonment.
(5) Whoever endangers the security of a person from paragraph 1 of this Article by a serious threat to attack the life or body of that person or a member of his family, his official premises, private residence or means of transport, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Financing of terrorism

Article 449

(1) Whoever in any manner secures or collects funds with the aim that they be used or with the knowledge that they will be used in whole or in part for financing the commission of criminal offences from Articles 164, 337, 340, 341, 342, 343, 447, 447a, 447b, 447c, 447d, 448 and 449 of this Code or for financing organizations that have as their aim the commission of those offences or members of those organizations or an individual who has as their aim the commission of those offences, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to ten years.
(2) Funds from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be considered all funds, material or immaterial, movable or immovable, regardless of the manner of acquisition and form of document or instrument, including electronic or digital, by which ownership or interest in relation to those funds is proven, including bank credits, traveller's cheques, money orders, securities, letters of credit and other funds.
(3) Funds from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be confiscated.
Terrorist Association
Article 449a
(1) If two or more persons associate for a longer period of time for the purpose of committing criminal offences from Articles 447, 447a, 447b, 447c, 447d, 448 and 449 of this Code, they shall be punished by the penalty prescribed for the offence for the commission of which the association was organized.
(2) The perpetrator of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article who by revealing the association or in another manner prevents the commission of criminal offences from paragraph 1 of this Article, or who contributes to its discovery, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years, and may also be released from punishment.
Participation in Foreign Armed Formations
Article 449b
(1) Whoever contrary to law, other regulations or rules of international law recruits, recruits, prepares, organizes, leads, transports or organizes the transport or trains an individual or group of people with the intention of their joining or participating in foreign armed formations that operate outside Montenegro,
shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) Whoever contrary to law, other regulations or rules of international law departs for the purpose of joining or participating, joins or participates in a foreign armed formation that operates outside Montenegro, individually or in organized groups,
shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) Whoever directly or through a third person offers, gives, secures, seeks, collects or conceals financial funds, funds, material resources or equipment that is in whole or in part intended for the commission of offences from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article,
shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) Whoever publicly calls on others to commit offences from paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article,
shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(5) A person from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article, who by revealing an individual or group prevents the commission of
a criminal offence,
shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years, and may also be released from punishment.
(6) A foreign armed formation, within the meaning of this Article, shall be considered a terrorist
organization, foreign army or police, foreign paramilitary formation or parapolice formation established contrary to law, other regulations or rules of international law.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST THE ARMY OF MONTENEGRO
Evasion of Military Obligation

Article 450

(1) Whoever, without justified reason, during a state of war or state of emergency does not respond to a call for performance of military obligation or evades receipt of a call for performance of that obligation, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) Whoever hides in order to evade military obligation from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) Whoever leaves the country or remains abroad in order to evade performance of military obligation from paragraph 1 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) Whoever calls on or incites several persons to commit offences from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article, shall be punished for the offence from paragraph 1 by imprisonment up to three years, and for the offence from paragraphs 2 and 3 by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(5) The perpetrator of offences from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article who voluntarily reports to the competent state authority may be released from punishment.
Evasion of Registration and Inspection

Article 451

(1) Whoever contrary to the obligation established by law, without justified reason, does not respond to a call by the competent authority for registration or inspection or opposes the registration or inspection of personnel or material resources necessary for the defence of the country or whoever during such registration or inspection gives inaccurate information, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
Non-performance of Work Obligation

Article 452

Whoever contrary to the obligation established by law, without justified reason, during a state of war or state of emergency, does not perform work obligation, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
Articles 453 and 454
(deleted)
Unauthorized Absence and Desertion from the Army of Montenegro

Article 455

(1) A military person who hides in order to evade service in the Army or leaves the country or remains abroad in order to evade service in the Army, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(2) A military person who unauthorizedly leaves their unit or service in the Army during an increased degree of combat readiness of the unit, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(3) The perpetrator of offences from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article who voluntarily reports to the competent state authority for the purpose of performing service in the Army may be punished more leniently.
Non-performance and Refusal to Perform an Order

Article 456

(1) A military person who does not perform or refuses to perform an order of a superior in connection with service, and as a result more serious harmful consequences for the service occur or the service was more seriously endangered, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If as a result of the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article serious consequences for military service have occurred or the order relates to the receipt or use of weapons, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished for the offence from paragraph 1 by a fine or imprisonment up to one year, and for the offence from paragraph 2 by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Resisting a Superior

Article 457

(1) A military person who together with other military persons resists an order of a superior in connection with service in the Army and will not perform it or refuses to perform their duty, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the offence from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed in an organized manner, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(3) If the offence from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed using weapons, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) A military person who in committing the offence from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article deprives another of life through negligence, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(5) The organizer and ringleader of the offence from paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(6)
(deleted)
(7) A military superior who, within their competence, in the case of offences from paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article does not undertake prescribed, ordered or obviously necessary measures to restore order, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
Resisting a Military Person Performing Special Military Service

Article 458

Whoever resists a military person performing sentry, reporting, patrol, duty, guard or other similar service or does not obey their call or does not perform or refuses to perform their order, and as a result more serious harmful consequences for the service occur or the service was more seriously endangered, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Coercion of a Military Person in the Performance of Official Duty

Article 459

Whoever by force or threat to immediately use force prevents a military person in the performance of official duty or in the same manner coerces them to act contrary to official duty, and as a result serious consequences for service in the Army occur, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Attack on a Military Person in the Performance of Service in the Army

Article 460

(1) Whoever attacks or threatens to attack a military person performing service in the Armed Forces shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator inflicted light bodily injury on a military person or threatens to use a weapon, he shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(3) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator inflicted serious bodily injury on a military person or caused serious consequences for the service through negligence, he shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If in committing the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the perpetrator deprived a military person of life through negligence, he shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Exemption from punishment for acts from Articles 456 to 460

Article 461

If the perpetrator of the act from Articles 456 and 457 paragraph 1, 458 and 459 paragraphs 1 and 2 and 460 paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Code was provoked by unlawful and rough conduct of a military person, he may be exempted from punishment.
Abuse of subordinate and lower-ranking person

Article 462

(1) A military superior who in service or in connection with service abuses a subordinate or lower-ranking person or treats them in a manner that offends human dignity shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed against multiple persons, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
Violation of special service in the Armed Forces

Article 463

(1) A military person who acts contrary to regulations on guard, reporting, patrol, duty, watch or other similar service and thereby causes danger to human life or property exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros or other serious consequences have occurred, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury or property damage exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years,
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) If the acts from paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article were committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 by a fine or imprisonment up to one year, for the act from paragraph 2 by imprisonment up to three years, for the act from paragraph 3 by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Violation of state border security

Article 464

(1) An official person who while performing service at the border acts contrary to regulations on guarding the state border, and as a result more serious harmful consequences occur or the service was more seriously endangered, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed during a state of war or state of emergency or while other special circumstances exist or as a result of the act serious bodily injury or property damage exceeding forty thousand euros has occurred or other serious consequences have occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraph 4 of this Article the consequence from paragraph 2 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years, and if the consequence from paragraph 3 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
False official reporting

Article 465

(1) A military person who presents false information of significance for the service to a superior officer, orally or in writing, in an official report or conceals an important fact or forwards such a report although he knows that the information in it is false, and as a result more serious harmful consequences for the service occur or the service was more seriously endangered, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed by submitting a report of particular importance or serious consequences have occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished for the act from paragraph 1 by a fine or imprisonment up to one year, and for the act from paragraph 2 by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Failure to take measures to secure a military unit

Article 466

(1) A military superior who within his competence fails to take prescribed, ordered or other obviously necessary measures to secure the unit, protect the life and health of people entrusted to him, to secure and maintain in proper condition facilities, objects and means serving combat readiness and for proper supply of food or military equipment or to ensure that securing works or security of facilities entrusted to him are carried out on time and properly, and thereby endangers human life or seriously endangers human health or property exceeding the amount of forty thousand euros, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article serious bodily injury or property damage of large scale has occurred or other serious consequences have occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article the death of one or more persons has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(4) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraph 4 of this Article the consequence from paragraph 2 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years, and if the consequence from paragraph 3 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Negligent production and acceptance of armaments and other military equipment

Article 467

(1) A military or other person who in a business company or other legal entity working for defense needs has been entrusted with managing production or other technological processes or supervision over them, who negligently performs the service or duty entrusted to him, and as a result weapons, ammunition or other military equipment are not produced on time or do not meet the specified quality, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a military or other person who negligently performing service accepts armament items or other military equipment that do not meet the conditions or contract.
(3) If as a result of the acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article serious consequences have occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the acts from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article were committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to one year.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraph 4 of this Article the consequence from paragraph 3 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
Improper care of entrusted weapons

Article 468

(1) Whoever improperly holds, keeps or handles entrusted weapons, ammunition or explosives belonging to a military unit or military institution, and thereby causes their damage to a greater extent, destruction or disappearance, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.
(2) A manager of a warehouse of weapons, ammunition, explosives and other combat means who fails to take measures for their security or maintenance, and as a result damage to a greater extent, destruction or disappearance of those combat means occurs, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(3) If as a result of the act from paragraph 2 of this Article property damage of large scale has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(4) If the act from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment up to two years.
(5) If as a result of the act from paragraph 4 of this Article the consequence from paragraph 3 of this Article has occurred, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Unlawful disposal of entrusted weapons

Article 469

Whoever appropriates, alienates, pledges, hands over to another for use, damages or destroys weapons, ammunition or explosives that have been given to them for use and serve the needs of defence, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Theft of weapons and parts of combat equipment

Article 470

(1) Whoever steals weapons, ammunition, explosives, combat equipment or a part of combat equipment that serve the needs of defence, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If the value of the items from paragraph 1 of this Article exceeds the amount of three thousand euros or if the theft was committed by breaking into or burgling closed buildings, rooms, safes, cabinets or other closed premises or by several persons who have joined together to commit theft or in a particularly dangerous or audacious manner or by a person who had on them any weapon or dangerous tool for attack or defence or during a fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(3) If the value of the items from paragraph 1 of this Article exceeds the amount of thirty thousand euros, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
Arts. 471 and 472
(deleted)
Punishment for criminal offences committed during a state of war, armed conflict and state of emergency

Article 473

(1) For a criminal offence from Art. 450 paragraph 1, 455 paras. 1 and 2, 456 paras. 1 and 3, 457 paras. 1 and 7, 458, 459, 460 paras. 1 and 2, 462 paragraph 1, 463 paras. 1 and 4, 465, 466 paras. 1 and 4, 467 paras. 1, 2 and 5, 468 paras. 1, 2, 4 and 5, 469 and 470 paragraph 1 of this code, if committed during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) For a criminal offence from Art. 450 paras. 2 to 4, 455 paragraph 2, 456 paragraph 2, 460 paras. 3 and 4, 462 paragraph 2, 463 paragraph 2, 466 paras. 2 and 5, 467 paragraph 3, 468 paragraph 3, 470 paras. 2 and 3 of this code, if committed during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(3) For a criminal offence from Art. 463 paragraph 3 and 466 paragraph 3 of this code, if committed during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Failure to fulfil duties in implementing mobilisation of the Army

Article 474

(1) A military or official person who, in implementing mobilisation of the Army during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, contrary to their duty, fails to ensure the reception, deployment and accommodation of mobilised personnel, transport and other means or fails to ensure the supply of mobilised people or fails to perform any other duty in connection with mobilisation, as a result of which harmful consequences have occurred or could have occurred, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
(2) If serious consequences have occurred as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
(3) If the act from paragraph 1 of this Article was committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(4) If a serious consequence has occurred as a result of the act from paragraph 3 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to five years.
Undermining military and defence capacity

Article 475

(1) Whoever destroys, renders unusable or enables to pass into the hands of the enemy defence installations, defence facilities, positions, armaments and other military and defence equipment, a ship or aircraft or surrenders a unit to the enemy without a fight or before all means of defence have been exhausted or in another manner obstructs or endangers military or defence measures, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) Whoever commits the act from paragraph 1 of this Article with the intention of helping the enemy, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(3) Whoever prepares the commission of the act from paras. 1 and 2 of this Article, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to six years.
(4) If the acts from paragraph 1 of this Article were committed through negligence, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(5) If the act from paras. 1 and 2 of this Article resulted in the death of one or more persons or caused danger to human life or was accompanied by serious violence or major destruction or led to endangering the security, economic or military strength of the country,
the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.

Article 476

(1) Whoever during war or armed conflict prevents citizens of Montenegro or citizens of its allies from waging a fight against the enemy, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
(2) Whoever during war or armed conflict by propaganda or in another manner dissuades citizens of Montenegro or citizens of its allies from waging a fight against the enemy, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Crossing over and surrender to the enemy

Article 477

(1) A military person who during war or armed conflict crosses over to the ranks of the enemy army, shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years or by a sentence of long-term imprisonment.
(2) A military person who during war or armed conflict surrenders to the enemy before having exhausted all possibilities of defence,
shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Service in the enemy army

Article 478

(1) A citizen of Montenegro who during war or armed conflict serves in the enemy army or other enemy armed formations or participates in war or armed conflict as a combatant against Montenegro and its allies,
shall be punished by imprisonment from three to fifteen years.
(2) Whoever recruits citizens of Montenegro for service in the enemy army or other enemy armed formations or for participation in war or armed conflict against Montenegro or its allies,
shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Assisting the enemy

Article 479

(1) A citizen of Montenegro who during war or armed conflict assists the enemy in implementing requisition, confiscation of food or other goods or in implementing any coercive measures against the population, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a citizen of Montenegro who during war politically or economically cooperates with the enemy.
(3) If the act from paras. 1 and 2 of this Article resulted in the death of one or more persons or caused danger to human life or was accompanied by serious violence or major destruction or led to endangering the security of the economic or military strength of the country,
the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.

Article 480

(1) A military person who during combat or immediately before combat fails to perform their duty and as a result harmful consequences occur for the military unit or for the combat situation, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) The punishment from paragraph 1 of this Article shall also be imposed on a military person who during combat or immediately before combat arbitrarily or fraudulently abandons their duty.
(3) If serious consequences have occurred as a result of the acts from paras. 1 and 2 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Abandoning a position contrary to orders

Article 481

(1) A military commander who contrary to orders abandons a position with the unit entrusted to them, before having exhausted all possibilities of defence, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) If serious consequences have occurred as a result of the act from paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Abandoning a damaged ship and aircraft prematurely

Article 482

(1) The commander of a warship who during war or armed conflict abandons a damaged ship before having performed his duty according to the regulations on ship service, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
(2) A crew member of a warship who during war or armed conflict abandons a damaged ship before the ship's commander has issued an order to abandon, or a crew member of a military aircraft who during war or armed conflict abandons a damaged military aircraft before having performed his duty according to the regulations on flying and use of aircraft, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If serious consequences have resulted from the acts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished for the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article by imprisonment of at least ten years, and for the act referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Weakening of Combat Morale

Article 483

(1) Whoever immediately before combat or during combat, by provoking dissatisfaction among military persons, spreading disturbing news, fleeing, throwing away weapons or ammunition, provoking or spreading fear or in any other manner weakens the combat morale in a unit or causes damage to the combat situation, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to twelve years.
(2) A military superior who does not take necessary measures against a subordinate or junior who during combat or immediately before combat spreads fear among soldiers or in any other manner weakens the combat morale of a unit or causes damage to the combat situation, shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
(3) If serious consequences have resulted from the acts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment of at least ten years.
Unauthorised Access to Military Facility
Article 483a
(1) Whoever unauthorisedly enters a military facility or makes sketches or drawings of military facilities or combat equipment or photographs them or records them in any other manner, or publishes recordings although knowing that it is prohibited, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article has been committed during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from one to eight years.
Failure to Report to Military Authorities

Article 484

(1) A military person who during a state of war, armed conflict or state of emergency does not inform a superior, senior officer or military command of an event which obviously requires immediate undertaking of military measures, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
(2) If serious consequences have resulted from the act referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the perpetrator shall be punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.
Criminal Offence Committed upon Order of a Superior

Article 485

A subordinate shall not be punished if he commits a criminal offence upon an order of a superior which relates to official duty, except if the order related to the commission of a criminal offence for which a punishment of over five years of imprisonment may be imposed, and the subordinate knew that the execution of the order constitutes a criminal offence.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 486

If, until the day of entry into force of this Code, an educational measure of enhanced supervision in another family has been imposed on a juvenile, the court which adjudicated the juvenile in the first instance shall replace that measure with another for which legal conditions exist, but which may not, either by type or by duration, be more severe than the imposed measure.

Article 487

On the day of commencement of application of this Code, all criminal law provisions contained in other laws which are contrary to this Code shall cease to be valid.

Article 488

This Code shall enter into force on the eighth day from the day of publication in the "Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro", and shall be applied three months after the day of entry into force.
Independent Articles of the Law on Amendments and Supplements
to the Criminal Code
("Off. Gazette of MNE", No. 47/2006)

Article 90

The Legislative Committee of the Assembly of the Republic of Montenegro is authorised to establish the consolidated text of this law.

Article 91

This law shall enter into force on the eighth day from the day of publication in the "Official Gazette of the Republic of Montenegro".
Independent Articles of the Law on Amendments and Supplements
to the Criminal Code
("Off. Gazette of MNE", No. 25/2010)

Article 157

Upon entry into force of this law, the provisions of Article 94 of the Law on Protection of Cultural Monuments ("Official Gazette of RMN", No. 47/91) and the provisions of Article 58 paragraph 1 item 7 of the Law on Defence ("Official Gazette of RMN", No. 47/07) shall cease to be valid.

Article 158

This law shall enter into force on the eighth day from the day of publication in the "Official Gazette of Montenegro".
Paragraf Lex MNE d.o.o.
Contact
Return to top  ↑
