LAW No. 641

LAW No. 641

The President of the Republic of Nicaragua To its inhabitants, Know ye:
That,
THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Has ordered the following:
PENAL CODE PRELIMINARY TITLE
ON PENAL GUARANTEES AND THE APPLICATION OF PENAL LAW

Article 1 Principle of legality

No person may be convicted for an action or omission that is not provided for as a crime or misdemeanor by penal law prior to its commission. Security measures and accessory consequences may only be applied when the prerequisites previously established by law are met.

No crime or misdemeanor shall be sanctioned with a penalty, security measure or accessory consequence that is not provided for by the law prior to its commission.

Under no motive or circumstance may indeterminate penalties or accessory consequences be imposed.

Penal laws, insofar as they establish or aggravate penal responsibility, shall not be applied to cases other than those expressly included in them.

Under no motive may the Public Administration impose measures or sanctions that involve deprivation of liberty.

Art. 2 Principle of non-retroactivity

Penal law has no retroactive effect, except when it favors the accused.

If after the commission of a crime or misdemeanor, a new law enters into force, in the particular case being judged, the one most favorable to the accused shall be applied. This principle also governs persons convicted who are pending full or partial completion of their sentence.

Acts committed under the validity of a temporary law shall be judged according to it, unless the subsequent law unequivocally provides otherwise.

Art. 3 Law issued before completion of sentence

If the entry into force of a new law occurs before completion of the sentence and is favorable to the convicted person, the competent Judge or Court must modify the sentence in accordance with it regarding the penalty or security measure.

If the conviction was motivated by an act considered as a crime or misdemeanor by the prior law and the new law does not sanction it as such, the competent Judge or Court must order the immediate release of the accused or convicted person.

In case of doubt about the determination of the most favorable law, the convicted person shall be heard.

Art. 4 Principle of human dignity

The State guarantees that every person to whom a penal crime or misdemeanor is attributed has the right to be treated with the respect due to the dignity inherent to the human being. No penalties or security measures may be imposed that involve torture, procedures or treatment that is inhumane, cruel, infamous or degrading.

Art. 5 Principle of recognition and protection of the victim

The State guarantees every person who has been a victim of a penal crime or misdemeanor the recognition and protection of their rights and guarantees, among them, to be treated by penal justice with the respect due to the dignity inherent to the human being.

Art. 6 Jurisdictional and execution guarantee

No penalty or security measure may be executed except by virtue of a final judgment issued by the competent courts of justice, in accordance with procedural laws.

Nor may any penalty or security measure be executed in any form other than that prescribed by law and the regulations that develop it. The execution of the penalty or security measure shall be carried out under the control of the competent judges and courts, in accordance with the law and its regulations.

Art. 7 Principle of harmfulness

Only conduct that damages or significantly endangers a legal interest protected by penal law may be sanctioned.

Art. 8 Principles of personal responsibility and humanity

A person only responds for their own acts. The penalty does not transcend the person of the convicted.

No penalty or penalties shall be imposed that, individually or collectively, last more than thirty years.

This rule is also applicable to security measures.

Art. 9 Principles of subjective responsibility and culpability

The penalty or security measure shall only be imposed if the action or omission has been committed with intent or imprudence. Consequently, objective responsibility for the result is prohibited.

There is no penalty without culpability. The penalty may not exceed that which is proportionate to the degree of culpability with respect to the crime; consequently, the penalty shall be adjusted according to the lesser culpability.

Art. 10 Extensive interpretation and analogical application

In penal matters, extensive interpretation and analogical application are prohibited for:

a)	Creating crimes, misdemeanors, aggravating circumstances of responsibility, sanctions or security measures and accessory consequences not provided for in the law;

b)	Expanding the limits of the legal conditions that permit the application of a sanction, security measure and accessory consequence;

c)	Expanding the limits of the sanctions, security measures and accessory consequences legally provided for.

On the contrary, provisions that favor the accused may be applied analogically.

Art. 11 Apparent concurrence of laws

Acts susceptible to being qualified according to two or more provisions of this Code, and not included in articles 84 and 85, shall be sanctioned according to the following rules:

a)	The special norm prevails over the general;

b)	The subsidiary provision shall only be applied in default of the principal one, both when such subsidiarity is expressly declared, and when it is tacitly deducible.

c)	The complex provision or the provision whose violation normally implies that of another less serious sanction, shall absorb those that punish the infractions subsumed in it;

d)	When application of any of the three preceding rules is not possible, the penal provision that sanctions most severely shall exclude those that punish with a lesser penalty.

Art. 12 Time and place of commission of the crime

The punishable act is considered committed at the time of the action or omission, even when the time of the result is different. However, for purposes of prescription, in crimes of result the act is considered committed at the time the result occurs.

The punishable act is considered committed both in the place where the criminal activity of the authors and participants was developed, totally or partially, and in the place where the result or its effects occurred or should have occurred.

In pure crimes of omission, the act is considered committed where the omitted action should have taken place.

Art. 13

Application of penal law. Principle of territoriality
Nicaraguan penal laws are applicable to crimes and misdemeanors committed in Nicaraguan territory, except for the exceptions established in international instruments ratified by Nicaragua.

Nicaraguan penal law is also applicable to acts committed on vessels, aircraft and ships flying the Nicaraguan flag.

Art. 14 Personal principle

Nicaraguan penal laws are applicable to acts provided for in them as crimes, even if they were committed outside the territory, provided that those penally responsible are Nicaraguans or foreigners who have acquired Nicaraguan nationality after the commission of the act and the following requirements are met:

a)	That the act is punishable in the place of execution;

b)	That the victim, offended or aggrieved party or the representation of the State files an accusation before the Nicaraguan courts or tribunals;

c)	That the offender has not been acquitted, amnestied or pardoned or has not completed the sentence abroad. If it has only been partially completed, it shall be taken into account to proportionally reduce what corresponds. In the case of pardon, it must meet the requirements of the special law.

Art. 15 Protective or Interest Protection Principle

Nicaraguan criminal laws are applicable to Nicaraguans or foreigners who have committed outside the national territory any of the following offenses:

a)	Offenses against the internal and external security of the State;

b)	Forgery of official signatures or seals or other forgeries that harm the credit or interests of the State;

c)	Counterfeiting of coins, securities or negotiable instruments or bank notes whose issuance is authorized by law;

d)	Those committed in the exercise of their functions by Nicaraguan authorities, officials and public employees residing abroad or accredited to diplomatic missions and offenses against the Nicaraguan public administration and against its officials.

e)	Those committed in the diplomatic missions of Nicaragua abroad.

For all the cases expressed in this article, literal c) contained in article 14 applies.

Art. 16 Principle of Universality

Nicaraguan criminal laws shall also be applicable to Nicaraguans or foreigners who have committed outside the national territory any of the following offenses:
a)	Terrorism;
b)	Piracy;
c)	Slavery and slave trade;
d)	Offenses against the international order;
e)	Counterfeiting of foreign currency and trafficking in such counterfeit currency;
f)	Offenses of migrant smuggling and Trafficking in persons for purposes of slavery or sexual exploitation and labor exploitation;
g)	Offenses of international trafficking in persons;
h)	Offenses of trafficking and extraction of human organs and tissues;
i)	Offenses of trafficking in cultural historical heritage;
j)	Offenses related to narcotics, psychotropic substances and other controlled substances;
k)	Offenses of international trafficking in vehicles; and
l)	Money laundering, property or assets;
m)	Sexual offenses to the detriment of children and adolescents; and,
n)	Any other offense that may be prosecuted in Nicaragua, in accordance with international instruments ratified by the country.

For all the cases expressed in this article, literal c) contained in article 14 applies.

Art. 17 Extradition

Extradition shall take place under the terms and conditions established by the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, the international instruments ratified by the State of Nicaragua and the provisions contained in this Code.

Art. 18 Requirements for Extradition

For extradition to proceed it is necessary that:
a)	The act that motivates it constitutes an offense in the requesting State and also in Nicaragua;
b)	Neither the criminal action nor the penalty has prescribed in either of the two countries;
c)	The person claimed is not subject to trial nor has been tried for the same act by the courts of the Republic;
d)	It does not involve a political offense or common offense connected with it, according to Nicaraguan classification;
e)	The offense prosecuted is punished by Nicaraguan law with a penalty of not less than one year of deprivation of liberty;
f)	The requesting State guarantees that the person claimed will not appear before an exceptional court or tribunal, will not be executed nor subjected to penalties that violate their bodily integrity nor to inhuman or degrading treatment;
g)	The person claimed has not been granted asylum or political refugee status;
h)	The person claimed is not being tried or has been convicted of offenses committed in Nicaragua, prior to the extradition request.
Nevertheless, if declared not guilty or having served the sentence, extradition may be decreed;
i)	The offense has been committed in the territory of the requesting State or produced its effects therein.

Art. 19 Principle of Non-Surrender of Nationals

The State of Nicaragua may under no circumstances surrender Nicaraguans to another State.

Nor may it surrender a person who at the time of commission of the punishable act had Nicaraguan nationality.

In both cases, if extradition is requested, the State of Nicaragua must try the person for the common offense committed. If the person required has served abroad part of the penalty or security measure imposed, they shall be credited by the Judge.

Art. 20 Special Criminal Laws

The provisions of the Preliminary Title and Book One of this Code shall apply to offenses and misdemeanors that are punished by special laws. The remaining provisions of this code shall apply as supplementary provisions for matters not expressly provided for by those laws.

Offenses and misdemeanors committed by members of indigenous peoples and ethnic communities of the Atlantic Coast within them and among community members, whose penalty does not exceed five years of imprisonment, shall be tried according to customary law, which in no case may contradict the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua. Nevertheless, the victim's right to choose the state justice system at the very beginning of the prosecution remains intact and with absolute respect for the prohibition of multiple criminal prosecution.

BOOK ONE

GENERAL PROVISIONS ON OFFENSES, MISDEMEANORS, PENALTIES, SECURITY MEASURES, ACCESSORY CONSEQUENCES OF CRIMINAL INFRACTIONS AND RESPONSIBLE PERSONS

TITLE I CRIMINAL INFRACTION

Art. 21 Offenses and Misdemeanors

CHAPTER I OFFENSES AND MISDEMEANORS

Offenses or misdemeanors are intentional or negligent actions or omissions classified and punished in this Code or in special laws.

Art. 22 Intentional and Negligent Offenses and Misdemeanors

When the law typifies conduct it does so on the basis of intent, unless it expressly establishes liability for negligence.

Art. 23 Omission and Commission by Omission

Offenses or misdemeanors may be committed by action or omission. Those consisting in the production of a result may be understood as committed by omission only when failing to prevent it violates a special legal duty of the perpetrator and is equivalent, according to the strict meaning of the law, to causing the result.

In those omissions that, despite their perpetrator violating a special legal duty, do not amount to the active causation of the result, an aggravated penalty of up to double the maximum limit of the penalty for the omissive offense shall be imposed. Nevertheless, such penalty may not in any case exceed the minimum limit of the penalty assigned to the result offense that would apply if there were commission by omission.

Art. 24 Classification of Punishable Acts by Their Severity

a)	Serious offenses, infractions that the law punishes with a serious penalty;
b)	Less serious offenses, infractions that the law punishes with a less serious penalty;
c)	Misdemeanors, infractions that the law punishes with a minor penalty.

When the penalty, by its extent, may be included simultaneously among those mentioned in the first two numerals of this article, the offense shall be considered, in any case, as serious.

Art. 25 Mistake of Fact

Unavoidable mistake about a fact constituting the criminal infraction excludes criminal liability. If the mistake were avoidable, the infraction shall be punished, as applicable, as negligent.

Mistake about a fact that qualifies the infraction or about an aggravating circumstance shall prevent the application of the qualifying or aggravating circumstance.

Art. 26 Mistake of Law

Unavoidable mistake about the unlawfulness of the act constituting the criminal infraction excludes criminal liability.

If the mistake about the prohibition of the act were avoidable, a mitigated penalty shall be imposed whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty provided by law for the offense or misdemeanor in question and whose minimum limit may be half or one quarter thereof.

Art. 27 Consummated offense, frustrated offense and attempt

The following are punishable: the consummated offense, the frustrated offense and the attempt to commit an offense.

Misdemeanors, except those against persons and property, shall be punished only when they have been consummated.

Art. 28 Consummation, frustration and attempt

a) It is considered consummated when the perpetrator performs all the constituent elements of the offense in question.

b) There is frustration when the person, with the will to commit an offense, performs all the acts of execution that objectively should produce the result, and yet this does not occur due to causes independent of or beyond the will of the subject.

c) There is an attempt when the subject, with the will to commit an offense, begins its execution directly through external acts, but only executes part of the acts that objectively can produce consummation, for any cause other than his own voluntary desistance.

Art. 29 Desistance

A person who effectively desists from the execution or consummation of the offense by his own will shall be exempt from criminal liability for the attempt or frustration. However, he shall be criminally liable for the acts of execution that in themselves already constitute an offense.

If several subjects participate in the act, only that person or those persons who voluntarily desist from the execution and prevent or seriously attempt to prevent consummation shall be exempt from criminal liability.

The exemption provided in the preceding paragraphs shall not extend to liability that may exist if the acts already executed were in themselves constitutive of another offense or misdemeanor.

Art. 30 Impossible offense

The attempt or frustration shall not be punished when consummation of the offense was absolutely impossible.

Art. 31 Conspiracy and proposal

Conspiracy exists when two or more persons agree on the execution of an offense and resolve to execute it.

Proposal exists when a person who has resolved to commit an offense invites another person or other persons to execute it.

Conspiracy and proposal to commit an offense shall only be punished in the special cases expressly provided by law.

Art. 32 Provocation, apology and inducement

Provocation exists when, directly or indirectly, but by means adequate for its effectiveness, incitement to the commission of an offense occurs.

A person who, before a gathering of people, praises the crime or exalts its author and participants, performs, for the purposes of this Code, apology. Apology shall only be criminal as a form of provocation if by its nature and circumstances it constitutes, with the requirements of the preceding paragraph, an incitement to commit an offense. The exercise of freedom of thought, expression and the right to information that does not contravene constitutional precepts and principles and special laws shall not be considered apology.

Provocation shall be punished exclusively in cases where the law so provides. If the provocation has been followed by partial or total execution of the offense, it shall be punished as inducement.

CHAPTER II

CAUSES THAT EXEMPT FROM CRIMINAL LIABILITY

Art. 33 Minority

When a person under eighteen years of age commits an offense or misdemeanor, none of the penalties, measures or accessory consequences provided in this Code shall be applied; but if he is an adolescent, he may be liable in accordance with the provisions of BOOK THREE, SPECIALIZED CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM of the

CODE ON CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.

Art. 34 Exemptions from criminal liability

The following is exempt from criminal liability:

1. A person who, at the time of committing the criminal offense, due to any permanent or transitory mental alteration, cannot understand the unlawfulness of the act or act in accordance with that understanding. Transitory mental disorder shall not exempt from punishment when it has been provoked by the subject for the purpose of committing the offense or he had foreseen or should have foreseen its commission.

2. A person who, at the time of committing the criminal offense, is in a state of disturbance that prevents him from appreciating and understanding the unlawfulness of the act or acting in accordance with that understanding, provided that the state of disturbance has not been sought for the purpose of committing an offense or he had foreseen or should have foreseen its commission.

3. A person who, due to suffering alterations in perception from birth or from childhood, has his awareness of reality seriously altered.

4. A person who acts in legitimate defense of his own or others' person or rights, provided that the following requirements are met.
a) Unlawful aggression; in case of defense of property, an attack on such property that constitutes an offense and places it in grave danger of imminent deterioration or loss shall be considered unlawful aggression. In case of unlawful aggression against the dwelling and its dependencies, improper entry into one or the other shall be considered;
b) Rational necessity of the means employed to prevent or repel the aggression;
c) Lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the defender.

5. A person who, in a state of necessity, injures or endangers a legal interest or breaches a duty, provided that the following requirements are met, that:
a) The harm caused is not greater than that which is sought to be avoided,
b) The situation of necessity has not been intentionally provoked by the subject;
c) The person in need does not have, by his office or position, an obligation to sacrifice himself.

6. A person who acts impelled by insurmountable fear.

7. A person who acts in fulfillment of a legal duty or in the legitimate exercise of a right, office or position. In the case of the National Police, the use of force

and weapons shall be regulated by the respective law.

8. A person who acts or fails to act compelled by absolute external force.

9. A person who, on the occasion of performing a lawful or unlawful conduct, causes harm by mere accident, without intent or negligence.

10. A person who performs an action or omission in circumstances in which it is not rationally possible to demand of him conduct different from that which he performed.

11. A person who acts by virtue of obedience. Due obedience is understood whenever the following requirements are met:
a) That the order emanates from competent authority to issue it and is clothed with the formalities required by law;
b) That the agent is hierarchically subordinate to the person who issues the order; and,
c) That the order does not have the character of an evident punishable offense.

In the cases of the first three numerals of this article, the security measures provided in this Code shall be applied, if applicable.

CHAPTER III

CIRCUMSTANCES THAT MITIGATE CRIMINAL LIABILITY

Art. 35 Mitigating circumstances

The following are mitigating circumstances:
1. Incomplete exemptions. The causes expressed in the preceding chapter, when not all the necessary requirements to exempt from criminal liability in their respective cases are met.
2. Psychic diminution due to disturbance. That the guilty party acts due to a disturbance that does not comprise the exemption established in numeral 2 of article 34.
3. Spontaneous declaration. Having accepted the facts in the first declaration before a competent Judge or Court.
4. State of passion. Acting due to causes or stimuli so powerful that they have produced passion or obfuscation.
5. Diminution or reparation of damage. When the guilty party proceeds to repair the damage caused to the victim, or diminishes its effects, at any moment of the process prior to the oral trial.
6. Discernment and instruction. When the guilty party has scant discernment or such limited instruction that he or she does not know how to read or write. For both cases it is understood that the agent indispensably needed the indicated conditions to appreciate in all its value the imputed act.
7. Minority of age. The perpetrator being a person over eighteen years of age and under twenty-one years of age.
8. Natural penalty. When the offender has suffered, as a consequence of the act imputed to him or her, serious physical or moral damage.

Any other circumstance of equal nature, which in the judgment of the Court should be appreciated by its analogy with the foregoing or by peculiar personal conditions of the active subject of the crime or of his or her environment.

CHAPTER IV

CIRCUMSTANCES THAT AGGRAVATE CRIMINAL LIABILITY

Art. 36 Aggravating circumstances

The following are aggravating circumstances:
1. Treachery. There is treachery when the guilty party commits any of the crimes against life and physical integrity and personal security employing in the execution means, modes or forms that tend directly or especially to ensure it, without the risk that could proceed to his or her person from the defense by the offended party. Likewise, one who takes advantage of the circumstances of defenselessness in which the victim is found at the moment of the attack shall act with treachery.
2. Abuse of superiority. When the act is executed by means of disguise or deceit, with abuse of superiority or taking advantage of the circumstances of place, time or assistance of other persons that weaken the defense of the offended party or facilitate the impunity of the offender.
3. Motive of economic interest. When the act is executed by means of price, reward or remunerative promise.
4. Fire, poison, explosion. When the act is executed on the occasion of or by means of flood, fire, poison, explosion, stranding of a ship, aviation accident, damage caused on purpose, railway derailment, alteration of public order or use of some artifice that can produce great havoc.
5. Discrimination. When the crime is committed for racial motives, or other kind of discrimination referring to the ideology or political option, religion or beliefs of the victim; ethnicity, race or nation to which he or she belongs; sex or sexual orientation; or illness or disability that he or she suffers.
6. Cruelty. Deliberately and inhumanly increasing the suffering of the victim and causing him or her unnecessary suffering for the execution of the crime.
7. Abuse of trust. When to execute the act one takes advantage of the position attained as a consequence of the trust deposited by the victim or injured party, in violation of the principles of loyalty and fidelity derived from the bonds of friendship, kinship or service.
8. Taking advantage. Taking advantage of the character of public official or public employee that the guilty party has or taking advantage of the position of director or employment that one has in a company providing a public service.
9. Recidivism. One who, having been convicted by final judgment in the last five years for an intentional crime, commits another intentional crime comprised within the same Title is a recidivist.
10. Persons protected by international law. Persons who are recognized this status by virtue of international instruments ratified by Nicaragua.
11. Taking advantage by reason of gender. When the act performed is executed taking advantage of a relationship of dependence, authority or affinity, to cause harm to another person by reason of his or her sex; whether those relationships derive from marriage, stable de facto union or other relationship of affinity or employment and even when the relationship has ceased.
The increase of the penalty may not exceed, for any reason, the maximum established for the crime committed.

CHAPTER V

MIXED CIRCUMSTANCE: MITIGATING OR AGGRAVATING

Art. 37 Kinship

It is a circumstance that may be mitigating or aggravating, according to the nature, motives and effects of the crime, that the victim or offended party be the spouse or partner in a stable de facto union of the offender, as well as his or her relatives comprised within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity.

CHAPTER VI GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 38 Authority, official and public employee

For the purposes of this Code, any person who, by immediate provision of law or by direct or indirect election or by appointment, commission of competent authority or contractual link, participates in the exercise of public functions, including members of the Army of Nicaragua and of the National Police or any other agent of authority, shall be deemed an authority, official and public employee. Public function shall be understood as any temporary or permanent activity, remunerated or honorary, performed by a natural person in the name of the State or at the service of the State or its entities and enterprises, at any of its hierarchical levels.

Art. 39 Document

For the purposes of this Code, a document is considered to be any product of a human act, perceptible by the senses, that expresses or incorporates data, facts or narrations, that serve as indirect and representative historical proof of a fact of legal relevance.

Art. 40 Incapacitated persons or persons with disability problems

For the purposes of this Code, any person is considered incapacitated, whether or not his or her incapacitation has been declared, who suffers from a persistent illness that prevents him or her from governing his or her person or property by himself or herself.

TITLE II

PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE FOR CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS

SOLE CHAPTER
PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE FOR CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS

Art. 41 Criminal liability

The perpetrators and the participants are criminally liable for crimes and misdemeanors.

The perpetrators may be direct, intellectual, mediate or co-perpetrators. The participants are the inducers, the necessary cooperators and the accomplices.

The liability of the participant shall in all cases be accessory with respect to the act executed by the perpetrator. In crimes that require a specific quality in the perpetrator that supposes a special duty, the participant, in whom said quality does not concur, shall be liable with a mitigated penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty corresponding to the perpetrator and whose minimum limit shall be half of the latter.

Art. 42 Direct perpetrators, intellectual perpetrators, co-perpetrators or mediate perpetrators

Direct perpetrators are those who perform the typical act by themselves; intellectual perpetrators, those who without directly intervening in the execution of the act, plan, organize and direct the execution thereof; co-perpetrators, those who jointly commit the crime, and mediate perpetrators, those who commit the crime by means of another who acts as an instrument.

Art. 43 Inducers and necessary cooperators

Those who directly induce another or others to execute the act and those who cooperate in its execution with an act without which it would not have been carried out shall be considered as perpetrators for purposes of penalty.

Art. 44 Accomplices

Accomplices are those who intentionally provide any prior or simultaneous assistance in the execution of the act, provided they are not included in the two preceding articles.

Art. 45 Acting on behalf of another

A person who, acting as a director, de facto or de jure administrator or organ of a legal person or in the name or legal or voluntary representation of another, commits an act that, except for the capacity of the perpetrator, is subsumable under the provision corresponding to a felony or misdemeanor, shall be personally liable in accordance therewith, even if the conditions, capacities or relationships that the corresponding felony or misdemeanor requires in order to be an active subject do not exist in that person, if such circumstances exist in the entity or person in whose name or representation they act.

TÍTULO III PENALTIES

CAPÍTULO I

PENALTIES, THEIR CLASSES AND EFFECTS. PENAL GUARANTEE

Art. 46 Penalties

Penalties have a rehabilitative character. The penalties that may be imposed under this Code, either as principal or as accessory penalties, are deprivation of liberty, deprivation of other rights and fines.

Art. 47 Classification by their character

Penalties are classified as principal and accessory:

Principal penalties are:
a)	Imprisonment;
b)	Deprivation of other rights;
c)	Day-fines;
d)	Fine.

Accessory penalties are those that by their nature or by provision of law are attached to other principal penalties, these being:
a)	Deprivation of other rights;
b)	Day-fines;
c)	Fine.

The imposition of any of these penalties must be specified expressly and with reasoning in the corresponding judgment.

Art. 48 Duration of accessory penalties

Accessory penalties shall have the duration that the principal penalty respectively has, unless the law provides otherwise.

Art. 49 Classification of penalty by its severity

Penalties are classified as serious, less serious and minor.
a)	Serious penalties are: penalties of imprisonment and disqualification that are sanctioned at their maximum limit with a penalty of five or more years of imprisonment.

b)	Less serious penalties are: penalties of imprisonment and disqualification from six months up to five years; those of deprivation of the right to drive motorized vehicles and of the right to possess and carry weapons and to reside in a certain place, exceeding one year; proportional fine; fine exceeding ninety days; and community service work exceeding thirty days.
c)	Minor penalties are: deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles or of the right to possess and carry weapons and deprivation of the right to reside in a certain place up to one year; fine up to ninety days; and community service work up to thirty days.

Personal subsidiary liability for failure to pay a fine shall be of a less serious or minor nature, according to that which corresponds to the penalty it replaces.

Art. 50 Non-consideration as penalties

The following shall not be considered penalties:
a)	Detention and preventive imprisonment and other precautionary measures of a criminal procedural nature.
b)	Fines and other corrections that, in the exercise of governmental or disciplinary powers, are imposed on subordinates or those under administration.
c)	Deprivations of rights and remedial sanctions established by civil or administrative laws.

Art. 51 Penalties depriving of liberty

Penalties depriving of liberty are: imprisonment and deprivation of liberty in cases of non-compliance with community service work and failure to pay a fine.

Art. 52 Penalty of imprisonment

The penalty of imprisonment shall have a minimum duration of six months and a maximum of thirty years. It must be served in penitentiary establishments designated for such purpose.

Its enforcement, as well as penitentiary benefits that involve shortening of the sentence, shall be adjusted to the provisions of the laws and of this Code.

Art. 53 Computation of the penalty of imprisonment

When the convict is imprisoned, the duration of principal or accessory penalties shall begin to be computed from the day on which the conviction judgment has become final.

When the convict is not imprisoned, the duration of principal or accessory penalties shall begin to be counted from the time they enter the appropriate establishment for its enforcement.

All of this, without prejudice to the credit for time of deprivation of liberty suffered preventively during the processing of the case.

Art. 54 Penalties depriving of other rights

Penalties depriving of other rights are:
a)	Absolute disqualification.
b)	Special disqualification.
c)	Deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles.
d)	Deprivation of the right to possess and carry weapons.
e)	Deprivation of the right to reside in certain places or to go to them.
f)	Community service work.

Art. 55 Absolute disqualification

The penalty of absolute disqualification shall have a duration of six to twenty years and consists of the loss of public office or employment, even if it comes from a popular election, deprivation of all public honors, as well as incapacity to obtain any other honor, office or public employment and loss of the right to elect and be elected during the time of the sentence.

Art. 56 Special disqualification

The penalty of special disqualification may consist of:
a)	Deprivation of the right to exercise a profession, trade, industry or commerce or any other activity.
This penalty shall be applied whenever the crime is committed by abusing the profession, trade or activity or involves a serious or repeated violation of the duty of care or expertise required by the profession, trade or activity. Special disqualification may consist of the prohibition to engage in commerce or to be part of the organs of a legal person, when the crime was committed in the exercise of commercial activity or involves violation of good faith in business.
b)	Deprivation of the right to exercise passive suffrage or to be elected to public office.
The duration of the special disqualification referred to in paragraphs a) and b) deprives the convicted person of the power to exercise the indicated rights during the time of the sentence, unless the law provides otherwise.

Art. 57 Disqualification to exercise employment or public office

The penalty of special disqualification to exercise employment or public office produces the deprivation of the employment or office upon which it falls and of the honors attached thereto for a period of six months to twenty years. It also produces incapacity to obtain the same or similar ones during the time of the sentence. The judgment must specify the employments, offices or honors upon which this disqualification falls.

Art. 58

Special disqualification for the exercise of rights derived from the mother, father and children relationship, guardianship or custody
Special disqualification for the exercise of rights derived from the mother, father and children relationship, guardianship or custody, consists of the deprivation of the convicted person of the exercise of these rights during the time of the sentence, unless the law provides otherwise.

Art. 59 Deprivation of the right to drive and to carry weapons

The penalty of deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles and deprivation of the right to possess and carry weapons revokes the required authorization or license, prohibits obtaining a new one and the exercise of such activities from three months to ten years.

Art. 60

Deprivation of the right to reside in a certain place or to approach or communicate with certain persons
The deprivation of the right to reside in or go to certain places shall have a duration of one month to five years and this prevents the convicted person from returning to the place where he committed the offense, or to the place where the victim or his family resides, if they are different.

The prohibition on approaching the victim, his family members or other persons determined by the Judge or Court, prevents the convicted person from approaching them in any place where they may be, as well as approaching their home, their places of work or any other place they regularly frequent.

The prohibition on communicating with the victim, his family members or other persons determined by the Judge or Court, prevents the convicted person from establishing written, verbal or visual contact with them, whatever the means employed. The deprivation of this right shall have a duration of three months to ten years.

Art. 61 Community service work

Community service work may not be imposed without the consent of the convicted person and consists of providing his unpaid cooperation in certain physical or intellectual activities of social utility. It must also be observed that they do not violate the dignity of the convicted person and its duration may be from one day to one year.

The daily working day of this work may not exceed eight hours and shall

be carried out in public or private establishments of social utility, at places and times determined by the corresponding Judge or court, and under the control of its authorities, so that it is appropriate to his capacity. For purposes of calculation, it shall be understood that months are thirty days and the year is three hundred and sixty.

Community service work shall be facilitated by the municipal administration, public entity or association of general interest in which the services are provided.

Art. 62 Non-compliance with community service work

If the convicted person incurs three unjustified absences from work, the corresponding Judge shall order that the sentence be executed uninterruptedly until completion of the sentence, computing in such case one day of deprivation of liberty for every two daily eight-hour working days not completed. The Judge shall proceed in the same manner when the penalty of community work has been imposed as a principal penalty.

Art. 63 Circumstances of execution

The other circumstances of execution of the penalty shall be established by regulation in accordance with the provisions of the penitentiary legislation, whose provisions shall apply supplementarily in matters not expressly provided for in this Code.

Art. 64 Day-fine penalty

The day-fine penalty shall consist of the payment of a sum of money to be fixed in day-fines. Its minimum limit shall be ten days and its maximum limit shall be one thousand days. This maximum limit shall not apply when the fine is imposed as a substitute for another penalty.

Judges and courts shall fix the number of day-fines to be imposed within the limits established for each offense or misdemeanor, taking into account the gravity of the act, the circumstances of manner, time and place, as well as the characteristics of the perpetrator that are directly related to the criminal conduct.

The sum of money corresponding to each day-fine shall be fixed by judges and courts, in a reasoned judgment, according to the economic situation of the accused, taking into account all his daily income and reasonable expenses to meet his needs and those of his family. One day-fine shall be calculated on the basis of one-third of the daily income of the convicted person. If that income cannot be determined, the minimum wage of the industrial sector shall be taken as the basis. It shall be for the parties to demonstrate to the Judge the true economic situation of the accused.

The fine shall be fulfilled by paying the amount indicated for the benefit of the Penitentiary System for quality of life, infrastructure and treatment programs

for the prison population.

For purposes of application of this Code, the wage to be considered shall be that in force at the time the offense or misdemeanor is committed.

The convicted person must pay the total amount of the fine within thirty days after the judgment becomes final; however, at the request of the interested party, even after the judgment is rendered, the Judge or Court may authorize a longer period, or payment in installments or successive quotas, taking into account the economic situation of the obligor. These benefits may be modified, and even revoked, in case of significant variations in his economic condition.

If the convicted person has his own property, the Judge or Court may require that security be provided on it; in the event that he does not pay the fine within the corresponding period, the creditor of the unfulfilled obligation shall seek its judicial enforcement.

From the fine penalty imposed shall be deducted the proportional part that has been satisfied with another penalty or with any precautionary measure of a personal nature.

Art. 65

Liability for non-payment of day-fines and fine. Commutation
If voluntarily, by way of enforcement or for lack of economic capacity, the convicted person does not satisfy the fine imposed by the Judge or Court, he shall be subject to two hours of community service work for one day-fine not satisfied.

In the event that the convicted person fails to comply with or does not accept the commutation established in the preceding paragraph, the custodial penalty shall be imposed at the rate of one day of imprisonment for every eight hours of community service work not completed.

When the fine penalty is expressed in liquid amounts, determined or determinable, in this Code or special laws, the fine shall be commuted at the rate of one day of imprisonment for the equivalent of one month of the minimum wage of the industrial sector not paid.

Art. 66 Accessory penalties

Disqualification penalties are accessory in cases where, without specifically imposing them, the law declares that other penalties carry them with them.

The penalty of imprisonment equal to or greater than ten years shall carry with it absolute disqualification during the time of the sentence, unless it is already provided as a principal penalty for the case in question.

In penalties of imprisonment of up to ten years, judges or courts may

impose, taking into account the gravity of the offense, as accessory penalties any of the following: special disqualification for the right of passive suffrage during the time of the sentence or special disqualification for public employment or office, profession, trade, industry, commerce or any other related activity, if these had a direct relationship with the offense committed, this connection having to be expressly determined in the judgment, unless it is already provided as a principal penalty for the case in question.

The penalties established in this article may also be imposed for a period of time not exceeding three months, for the commission of an infraction classified as a misdemeanor against persons.

Art. 67 Prohibition of presence

Judges or courts, taking into account the seriousness of the facts or the danger represented by the offender, may order in their judgments, within the period of time that they determine, the imposition of one or more of the following prohibitions, which in no case shall exceed the duration of the penalty imposed as principal.
a)	The prohibition of approaching or communicating with the victim, their relatives or other persons determined by the Judge or Court; or
b)	The prohibition of returning to the place where the crime was committed or of going to the place where the victim or their family resides, if they are different.
The prohibitions established in this article may also be imposed for a period not exceeding three months for the commission of an infraction classified as a minor offense against persons.

Art. 68 Credit for term of preventive detention

The time of deprivation of liberty or arrest suffered preventively during the processing of the criminal proceedings shall be credited in its entirety for the fulfillment of the penalty or penalties imposed in the case in which said deprivation was ordered or, failing that, those that could be imposed against the accused in others, provided that they related to acts prior to entry into prison.

Likewise, the deprivations of rights ordered as precautionary measures shall be credited in their entirety for the fulfillment of the imposed penalty.

Art. 69 Different nature

When the precautionary measures suffered and the penalty imposed are of different nature, the Judge or Court shall order that the imposed penalty be considered executed in that part which it deems compensated.

Art. 70 Suspension of custodial sentence

When, after a final judgment has been pronounced, a lasting situation of serious mental disorder is found in the convicted person, arising in prison, that prevents them from understanding the meaning of the penalty, or they suffer from another serious or terminal illness, upon opinion issued by the Institute of Legal Medicine, the execution of the custodial sentence that has been imposed shall be suspended, with the Judge or Court guaranteeing that they receive the necessary medical care.

Once the health of the convicted person is restored, they shall serve the sentence if the penalty has not prescribed.

CAPÍTULO II APPLICATION OF PENALTIES

Art. 71 Guarantee of execution

No penalty may be executed except by virtue of an enforceable judgment.

Art. 72 Penalty for perpetrators, inciters and necessary accomplices

When the law establishes a penalty, it is understood to impose it on the perpetrators of the completed offense.

Inciters and necessary accomplices shall be imposed the same penalty as the perpetrators of the completed crime or, as the case may be, that provided for the perpetrators of frustrated crime or attempt.

Art. 73 Penalty for frustration

The perpetrator of the frustrated crime, taking into account the seriousness of the act and the culpability of the subject, at the discretion of the Judge, shall be imposed a mitigated penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty that the completed crime deserves and whose minimum limit shall be half of this.

Art. 74 Penalty for attempt

The perpetrator of the attempt shall be imposed, at the discretion of the Judge, who must take into account the seriousness of the act and the culpability of the subject, a mitigated penalty, whose maximum shall be half of the lower limit of the penalty established for the perpetrator of the completed crime and whose minimum shall be half of this.

Art. 75 Penalty for accomplices

An accomplice to a completed, frustrated or attempted crime, taking into account the seriousness of the act and the participation of the subject, at the discretion of the Judge, shall be imposed a mitigated penalty whose maximum shall be the lower limit of the penalty that the perpetrator of the crime deserves and whose minimum limit shall be half of this.

Art. 76 Inapplicability

The foregoing rules shall not apply in cases where frustration, attempt or complicity are specially punished by law.

Art. 77 Communicability of circumstances

Aggravating or mitigating circumstances that consist of the moral disposition of the offender, their particular relations with the victim or another personal cause, shall serve to aggravate or mitigate the responsibility only of those in whom they occur.

Those that consist of the material execution of the act or the means employed to carry it out, shall serve only to aggravate or mitigate the responsibility of those who had knowledge of them at the time of the action or their cooperation in the crime.

Art. 78 Rules for the application of penalties

Judges and courts shall determine the penalty within the maximum and minimum that the law establishes for the crime or minor offense, taking into consideration the following rules:
a)	If no aggravating and mitigating circumstances occur or when some and others occur, the personal circumstances of the offender and the greater or lesser seriousness of the act shall be taken into account.
b)	If there are only aggravating circumstances, the medium penalty up to its upper limit shall be applied, unless the personal circumstances of the subject advise against it.
c)	If only some mitigating circumstance occurs, the penalty shall be imposed in its lower half.
d)	If several mitigating circumstances or a single highly qualified one occur, a mitigated penalty may be imposed, whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty provided in the law for the crime or minor offense in question, and whose minimum limit may be half or a quarter of this, taking into account in setting its extent, the nature and number of mitigating circumstances.

Judges and courts must, under penalty of nullity, reason or justify in the grounds of the judgment the application of the penalty.

Art. 79 Inapplicability of the rules

The rules of the preceding article shall not apply to specific aggravating or mitigating circumstances that the law has taken into account in describing or sanctioning an offense, nor to those that are so inherent to the crime that without their occurrence it could not be committed.

Art. 80 Lower penalty for incomplete exemptions

When not all the necessary requirements to establish the exemption for permanent or transitory psychic alteration occur, the Judges or Courts shall impose a mitigated penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty provided in the law for the crime or minor offense in question, and whose minimum limit may be half or a quarter of this, and to apply it to the extent they deem appropriate, they shall consider the number and quantity of the

requirements that are missing or occur, the personal circumstances of the perpetrator and, as the case may be, the rest of the mitigating or aggravating circumstances.

Art. 81 Penalty above and below the maximum and minimum limits

The determination of penalties must be established between the maximum and minimum that the law assigns to the crime or misdemeanor. Judges in the sentence have the obligation to express the reasons on which they based their decision to impose it. The penalty may never be greater than the maximum nor less than the minimum established by law, except in the cases mentioned in the following paragraphs.

When in application of a legal penalty it is appropriate to impose a penalty below the minimum limit of the corresponding penalty, the judges or courts shall not be limited by the minimum amounts indicated in the law for each class of penalty, but may reduce them in the manner resulting from the application of the corresponding rule.

Notwithstanding, when by application of said rules it is appropriate to impose a prison sentence of less than six months, it shall in all cases be substituted in accordance with the provisions of article 94, without prejudice to the suspension of execution of the sentence in cases where appropriate.

When in application of the conditional agreement the accused or defendant collaborates effectively with the administration of justice, the Judge shall set the agreed penalty, which in no case may be less than half of the minimum limit of the crime or crimes in question.

When in application of any legal rule, it is appropriate to impose a higher penalty that exceeds the maximum limits set for each penalty in this Code, the following shall be considered as immediately higher:

a)	If the determined penalty were imprisonment, the same penalty, with the clause that its maximum duration shall be thirty years;

b)	If it were absolute or special disqualification, the same penalty, with the clause that its maximum duration shall be twenty-five years;

c)	In the case of deprivation of other rights, the same penalties, with the clause that their maximum duration shall be fifteen years;

d)	If it were community service work, the same penalty, with the clause that its maximum duration shall be one and a half years; and

e)	If it were a fine, the same penalty, with the clause that its maximum duration shall be one thousand five hundred days.

Art. 82 Real concurrence

A person responsible for two or more crimes or misdemeanors shall be imposed all

the penalties corresponding to the various offenses for their simultaneous fulfillment, if possible by their nature and effects.

When all or some of the penalties corresponding to the various offenses cannot be fulfilled simultaneously by the convicted person, the order of their respective severity shall be followed for their successive fulfillment, insofar as possible.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraphs, the maximum effective fulfillment of the sentence may not exceed triple the time of the most serious penalty imposed, declaring extinguished those that exceed said maximum which, in no case, may be greater than thirty years of imprisonment, twenty-five years of absolute or special disqualification, one thousand five hundred days fine and one and a half years of community service work days.

Art. 83 Continuing offense

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding article, whoever, in execution of a preconceived plan or taking advantage of an identical occasion, or carries out a plurality of actions or omissions that offend one or several subjects and violate the same criminal provision or provisions of the same or similar nature, shall be punished as author of a continuing crime or misdemeanor, with the penalty established for the most serious offense, which shall be imposed in its upper half.

If they are offenses against property, the penalty shall be imposed and the total damage caused shall be taken into account. In these offenses the Judge or Court shall impose, with reasoning, an aggravated penalty up to double the maximum limit of the corresponding penalty, to the extent it deems appropriate, if the act were of notorious gravity and had harmed a generality of persons.

Offenses against eminently personal interests are excepted from what is established in the preceding paragraphs.

Art. 84 Real and medial concurrence

The provisions for real concurrence and continuing offense are not applicable in the case of ideal concurrence in which a single act constitutes two or more offenses; or in the case of medial concurrence, when one of them is a necessary means to commit the other.

Art. 85 Penalty for ideal and medial concurrence

For ideal and medial concurrence, the penalty provided for the most serious offense in its upper half shall be applied, without being able to exceed that which represents the sum of what would correspond to apply if the offenses were penalized separately.

Art. 86 Express consideration

Whenever judges or courts impose a penalty that carries with it

other accessory penalties, they shall also expressly condemn the offender to the latter.

CHAPTER III

SUBSTITUTE FORMS OF EXECUTION OF CUSTODIAL SENTENCES

Art. 87 Suspension of prison sentence

Sentencing judges or courts may suspend the execution of custodial sentences of up to five years by reasoned resolution; for this they shall attend fundamentally to the criminal dangerousness of the subject.

The suspension period shall be for a probation period of two to five years for custodial sentences of up to five years, and from three months to two years for minor penalties and shall be set by the judges or courts, after hearing the parties, taking into account the personal circumstances of the offender, the characteristics of the act and the duration of the penalty.

The suspension of execution of the penalty shall not be extended to civil liability arising from the crime or misdemeanor punished.

Sentencing judges and courts may grant suspension of the imposed prison sentence without being subject to any requirement in the event that the convicted person suffers from a very serious illness with incurable suffering, unless at the time of commission of the crime he already had another sentence suspended for the same reason.

Art. 88 Conditions for suspension of execution of penalties

The following shall be necessary conditions to suspend the execution of the penalty:

a)	That the convicted person has committed an offense for the first time. For this purpose, previous convictions for negligent crimes shall not be taken into account, nor criminal records that have been cancelled or should be cancelled in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

b)	That the penalty imposed, or the sum of those imposed in a single sentence, does not exceed five years of imprisonment.

c)	That the civil liabilities that have arisen have been satisfied or guaranteed, unless the sentencing Judge or Court, after hearing the parties and the Public Prosecutor, declares the total or partial impossibility of the convicted person to meet them.

d)	In case of very serious and incurable illness, the opinion of a physician designated by the Institute of Legal Medicine shall be required.

Art. 89 Final judgment

Once the judgment is final and the requirements established in the preceding article are proven, the judges or courts shall rule with the greatest urgency on the granting or not of the suspension of execution of the penalty.

Art. 90 Suspension of execution

The suspension of the execution of the sentence shall always be conditioned on the offender not committing an offense within the period set by the Judge or Court. In the event that the suspended sentence is imprisonment, the sentencing Judge or Court, if deemed necessary, may also condition the suspension on compliance with the obligations or duties imposed from among the following:

a) Prohibition from going to certain places;

b) Prohibition from leaving without authorization from the Judge or Court the place where he or she resides;

c) Compliance with other duties that the Judge or Court deems appropriate for the social rehabilitation of the convicted person, with his or her consent, provided that they do not violate his or her dignity as a person; or

d) Subjection to the supervision of the authority, which shall require the convicted person to appear personally on a periodic basis to report on his or her activities and justify them.

Art. 91 Revocation of the suspension of the sentence

The Judge or Court may revoke the suspension of the execution of the sentence when the subject commits an offense during the suspension period set.

If the subject violates during the suspension period the obligations or duties imposed, the Judge or Court may, after hearing the parties, depending on the case:
a) Extend the suspension period, provided that in no case may it exceed five years.

b) Revoke the suspension of the execution of the sentence, if the non-compliance is repeated.

Art. 92 Revocation

Once the suspension is revoked, the execution of the sentence shall be ordered.

Art. 93 Suspension in offenses prosecutable at the instance of a party

In offenses that can only be prosecuted following a complaint or accusation by the injured party, the judges and courts shall hear the latter and, where applicable, his or her representative, before granting the benefits of suspension of the execution of the sentence.

Art. 94 Substitution of the prison sentence

Judges or courts may substitute, after hearing the parties, in the same judgment, or subsequently by reasoned order, before commencing its execution, prison sentences not exceeding one year with a fine, even if the law does not provide for this penalty for the offense in question, when the personal circumstances of the offender, the nature of the act, his or her conduct and, in particular, the effort to repair the damage caused so warrant, provided that they are not habitual offenders. Each day of imprisonment shall be substituted by two days' fine. Each day's fine must be imposed based on article 64. Such prison sentences of less than one year may also be substituted, in view of the circumstances of the offender and the act, by community service, substituting each day of imprisonment for one day of work. In these cases the Judge or Court may also impose on the convicted person compliance with one or more of the obligations or duties provided for in article 90 of this Code.

Judges or courts may exceptionally substitute prison sentences not exceeding two years for convicted persons who are not repeat offenders, when from the circumstances of the act and the offender, it can be inferred that compliance with them would frustrate their purposes of prevention and social reintegration. In these cases, the substitution shall be carried out with the same requirements and in the same terms of conversion established in the preceding paragraph.

In the event of breach or non-compliance, in whole or in part, with the substitute sentence, the imposed prison sentence shall be executed with deduction, where applicable, of the portion of time that has been served, in accordance with the conversion rules respectively established in the preceding paragraphs.

In no case may sentences that are substitutes for other sentences be substituted.

Art. 95 Expulsion

Prison sentences of less than five years, imposed on a foreigner with illegal entry or stay in Nicaragua, may be substituted by his or her expulsion from the national territory at the request of the Public Prosecutor.

The expelled foreigner may not return to Nicaragua for a period of not less than double the sentence imposed for the offense committed, counted from the date of his or her expulsion. If he or she returns, he or she shall serve the sentences that have been substituted.

Art. 96 Conditional release

Conditional release is established for prison sentences exceeding five years, for those sentenced persons in whom the following circumstances concur:
a) That they have served two-thirds of the imposed sentence;

b) That they have observed good conduct and there exists, with respect to them,

an individualized and favorable prognosis of social reintegration, issued by the prison authorities.

The probation period for conditional release shall comprise the time remaining for the completion of the sentence and during it, the convicted person shall be subject to the supervision of the authority, which shall require the convicted person to appear personally on a periodic basis.

If during the probation period the convicted person commits a new offense or violates the duties imposed on him or her, conditional release shall be revoked and the remainder of the sentence that he or she has ceased to serve shall be enforced.

Art. 97 Extraordinary conditional release

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding articles, convicted persons who have reached the age of seventy years or reach it during the execution of the sentence, and meet the requirements established in the preceding article, except for the completion of two-thirds of the sentence, may obtain the granting of conditional release.

Conditional release shall also apply when, according to a forensic medical report, it concerns very seriously ill patients, with incurable and terminal illnesses.

TÍTULO IV SECURITY MEASURES

CAPÍTULO I

SECURITY MEASURES IN GENERAL

Art. 98 Security measures

Security measures are based on the criminal dangerousness of the subject on whom they are imposed, manifested in the commission of an act provided for as an offense. Security measures shall be applied exclusively by the Judge or Court in a judgment, to persons who are in the situations provided for in the following chapter of this Title, provided that these circumstances concur:

a) That the subject has committed an act provided for as an offense, according to a final judgment;

b) That from the act and the personal circumstances of the subject a prognosis of future behavior can be deduced that reveals the probability of commission of new offenses.

Art. 99 Proportionality and necessity

Security measures cannot be more burdensome than the penalty abstractly applicable to the act committed, nor exceed the limit of what is necessary to prevent the dangerousness of the subject. In all cases they must be proportionate to the criminal dangerousness of the subject and to the seriousness of the act committed and of those that he or she is likely to commit.

For such purposes, the Judge or Court shall establish in the judgment with reasoning, the maximum duration limit. In any case, when the penalty that could have been imposed for the offense committed is not custodial, the Judge or Court may only impose one or more of the non-custodial measures.

Custodial security measures may not have a longer duration than the maximum limit of the penalty prescribed by law for the offense committed.

The Judge or Court shall decree the cessation of the measures as soon as the criminal dangerousness of the subject disappears in accordance with the corresponding expert reports.

Art. 100 Classification

The security measures that may be imposed under this Code are deprivations of liberty and deprivations of other rights.

The following are measures depriving of liberty:
a)	Confinement in a psychiatric center;
b)	Confinement in a rehabilitation center;
c)	Confinement in a special educational center; and,
d)	Confinement in a social therapy center.

The following are measures not depriving of other rights:
a)	Subjection to the surveillance of the authority or supervised release, which shall oblige the convicted person to appear personally on a periodic basis;
b)	Prohibition of stay and residence in certain places;
c)	Deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles;
d)	Deprivation of license or permit to carry weapons;
e)	Professional disqualification; and,
f)	Expulsion from the national territory of foreigners not legally resident in Nicaragua.
The others provided for in this Code.

Art. 101 Concurrence of penalties and security measures

In the case of concurrence of penalties and security measures depriving of liberty, the Judge or Court shall order the fulfillment of the measure, which shall be credited toward the penalty. Once the security measure is lifted, the Judge or Court

may, if the execution of the penalty would endanger the effects achieved through the measure, suspend the fulfillment of the remainder of the penalty for a period not exceeding its duration or apply any of the measures provided for in this Code.

Art. 102 Breach

The breach of a security measure of confinement shall give rise to the re-entry of the subject into the same center from which he or she has escaped or into another corresponding to his or her condition.

If it concerns other measures, the Judge or Court may agree to the substitution of the breached measure by that of confinement, if this is provided for the case in question and if the breach demonstrates its necessity.

CHAPTER II

APPLICATION OF SECURITY MEASURES

Art. 103 Of measures depriving of liberty

The subject who is declared exempt from criminal liability pursuant to numeral 1 of article 34, may be subject, if necessary, to the measure of confinement for medical treatment or special education in an establishment appropriate to the type of anomaly or psychic alteration that is assessed.

Alternatively, the Judge or Court may apply any other of the security measures indicated in article 100 of this Code.

The person subject to these measures may not leave the establishment without authorization from the sentencing Judge or Court. The foregoing provisions are applicable to the security measures provided for in the following two articles.

Art. 104 Confinement for rehabilitation

Those exempt from criminal liability pursuant to numeral 2 of article 34 shall be subject, if necessary, to the measure of confinement in a public or private rehabilitation center duly accredited or approved.

Art. 105 Confinement in an educational center

Those who are declared exempt from criminal liability pursuant to numeral 3 of article 34 of this Code, may be subject, if necessary, to the measure of confinement in a special educational center.

Art. 106 Incomplete exemption

In cases of incomplete exemption in relation to numbers 1, 2 and 3 of article 34, the Judge or Court may impose, in accordance with the provisions of article 99, in addition to the corresponding penalty, the measures provided for in articles 103, 104 and 105. However, the measure of confinement shall only be applicable when the penalty imposed is deprivation of liberty.

Art. 107 Of measures depriving of other rights

In the cases provided for in articles 103 to 105 of this Code, the Judge or Court may reasonably agree, from the beginning or during the execution of the sentence, the imposition of the observance of one or more of the following measures, for a time not exceeding five years:

a)	Submission to external treatment in medical centers;
b)	Obligation to reside in a determined place;
c)	Prohibition of residing in the place or territory designated. In this case, the subject shall be obliged to declare the domicile he or she chooses and the changes that occur;
d)	Prohibition of going to certain places or visiting establishments serving alcoholic beverages;
e)	Family custody; the person subject to family custody shall be subject to the care and surveillance of the family member who is designated and who accepts the custody, who shall exercise it in relation to the supervising Judge and without detriment to the school or work activities of the person in custody;
f)	Submission to programs of a formative, cultural, educational, professional, sexual education and other similar nature.

For a time of up to ten years:
a)	Deprivation of the license or permit to carry weapons;
b)	Deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles.

Art. 108 Foreigner with illegal entry or stay

If the subject is a foreigner with illegal entry or stay in Nicaragua, the Judge or Court may agree, after hearing the subject, to expulsion from the national territory as a substitute for the security measures depriving of liberty that are applicable.

The person subject to this measure may not re-enter Nicaragua for a period not less than double the duration of the security measure that would be applicable, without exceeding ten years.

Art. 109 Habitual delinquency

Habitual offenders responsible for crimes punished with a prison sentence whose minimum limit is greater than six years, the Judge or Court shall impose, in addition to the corresponding penalty, a social therapy treatment for their reintegration for the period of their sentence.

For the purposes of this article, the offender who has been convicted of three or more crimes that, not having been cancelled in the registry, make presumable his or her inclination to commit crimes, is considered habitual, according to express declaration of the Judge or Court, following the expert reports that are necessary.

Art. 110 Confinement of women

When the crime has been committed by women they must be confined in prisons intended exclusively for them, or in pavilions of penal establishments duly separated from the cells of men. These prisons and pavilions must be managed by female prison officials, in accordance with the law and regulations on the matter.

CHAPTER III

URGENT PROTECTION MEASURES

Art. 111

Emergency protection measures for victims of intrafamily or domestic violence
When the act or omission has been committed by a family member up to the fourth degree of consanguinity or second degree of affinity within the cohabiting family or in a stable de facto union, the judicial authority of the place where the act occurred, upon request of a party, may apply, as the case may be, the following protection measures:
a)	Order the immediate abandonment of the home by the accused or defendant and, taking into account the will of the victim, reinstate her to the home from which she was removed with violence or intimidation;
b)	Prohibit or restrict the presence of the reported person in the dwelling of the injured party within a minimum radius of one hundred fifty meters;
c)	Order the reinstatement of the injured person to the home from which he or she was removed with violence or intimidation;
d)	Prohibit or limit the presence of the reported person at the workplace of the injured party within a minimum radius of one hundred fifty meters;
e)	Guarantee the injured person medical, psychological or psychiatric care in case it is necessary. The reported person shall undergo the same care if necessary for his or her rehabilitation and to avoid recidivism;
f)	Order the bio-psycho-social examination of minors involved in acts of domestic or intrafamily violence and provide them with due care;
g)	In case of reports of child abuse, the corresponding authority shall be requested to intervene through specialized agencies that conduct the investigation and provide support, protection, advice, counseling and respective follow-up;
h)	The reported person must provide sufficient guarantees as determined by the Judge to compensate for possible damages caused to the injured person;

i)	In case the victim is a minor or a person with disabilities, the competent judicial authority may provisionally entrust protective custody to whomever it considers suitable for such function, if it was entrusted to the aggressor;
j)	Prohibit all forms of harassment that disturb the peace of the injured party including electromagnetic or other means;
k)	Order the seizure of weapons from the reported person.

In the case of indigenous peoples of the Atlantic Coast, the measures shall be applied by the communal authority in accordance with customary law and current laws.

The Judge or Court may order the protection measures referred to in the preceding paragraphs upon becoming aware of the crimes. For their enforcement, it may request the assistance of the National Police.

The National Police and the Public Prosecutor's Office in the investigative stage shall request from the judicial authority the application of the protection measures referred to in this article on a preventive basis, for a period not exceeding ten days.

When the Public Prosecutor's Office decides not to exercise criminal action, the victim or his or her representative may request the criminal judge to apply or maintain the protection measures for the period it takes to resolve the respective appeals.

In case of non-compliance by the accused with the protection measures ordered by the judge, the latter shall proceed to apply a more severe measure, at the request of a party.

TÍTULO V

OTHER ACCESSORY CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

CAPÍTULO ÚNICO CONFISCATION AND OTHER CONSEQUENCES

Art. 112 Confiscation

Any penalty imposed for an intentional crime, negligent crime or misdemeanor shall carry with it the forfeiture of the effects arising therefrom or of property acquired with the value of said effects, of the instruments with which it was executed or had been intended for its execution, or of the profits arising from the criminal offense, whatever transformations they may undergo. Both shall be confiscated, unless they belong to a third party in good faith not responsible for the crime and who has acquired them legally.

The confiscated effects, instruments or profits shall be sold if they are of lawful commerce, applying their proceeds to cover the civil liabilities of the convicted person; if they are not, they shall be given the corresponding destination and, failing that, shall be rendered useless. When they are firearms or weapons of war, they shall be placed at the disposal of the National Police or the Army of Nicaragua, as appropriate.

When the referred effects and instruments are of lawful commerce and their value is not proportionate to the nature or gravity of the criminal offense, or the civil liabilities are completely satisfied, the Judge or Court may not decree confiscation, or decree it partially.

Art. 113 Accessory consequences affecting legal entities

When the criminal act is committed within the scope of a legal entity or for its benefit, the Judge or Court, after hearing the parties or their legal representatives, may impose, with reasoning and when necessary in the specific case, one or more of the following accessory consequences:

a)	Intervention of the company to safeguard the rights of workers or creditors for the necessary time and not exceeding a maximum period of five years;

b)	Closure of the company, its premises or establishments, on a temporary or permanent basis. Temporary closure may not exceed five years;

c)	Dissolution of the company, association or foundation;

d)	Suspension of the activities of the company, enterprise, foundation or association for a period that may not exceed five years;

e)	Prohibition from carrying out in the future activities, commercial operations or business of the kind of those in whose exercise the crime was committed, favored or concealed. This prohibition may be temporary or permanent. If it is temporary, the prohibition period may not exceed five years.
The temporary closure provided for in paragraph b) and the suspension indicated in paragraph d) of the preceding paragraph may also be ordered by the Judge during the proceedings of the case.

The accessory consequences provided for in this article shall be oriented in their imposition and enforcement to prevent the continuity of criminal activity and its effects.

TÍTULO VI

CIVIL LIABILITY DERIVED FROM CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS

CAPÍTULO I CIVIL LIABILITY

Art. 114 Civil liability

The execution of an act described by law as a crime or misdemeanor obliges to repair, in the terms provided by law, the damages and losses caused by it. The procedure to determine civil liability in criminal proceedings is that provided by the Criminal Procedure Code. The injured party may choose, in any case, to demand civil liability before the civil jurisdiction.

Art. 115 Scope

The liability established in the preceding article includes:
a)	Restitution;
b)	Reparation of material or moral damages; or
c)	Indemnification for losses.

Art. 116 Restitution

The same property must be restored, whenever possible, with payment for the deterioration and impairment determined by the Judge or Court. Restitution shall take place even if the property is in the possession of a third party, reserving his or her right of recovery against whomever appropriate and, where applicable, the right to be indemnified by the person civilly liable for the crime or misdemeanor.

This provision does not apply when the third party has acquired the property in the manner and with the requirements established by law to make it non-recoverable.

Art. 117 Reparation of Damage

The reparation of material or moral damages shall consist of the obligation to give, to do, or not to do that the Judge or Court shall establish, in consideration of its nature and the personal and patrimonial conditions of the guilty party, and shall determine whether they must be fulfilled by him or herself or may be executed at his or her expense.

Art. 118 Indemnifications

The indemnification for material and moral damages shall include not only those caused to the aggrieved party, but also those caused to his or her family members or third parties.

Art. 119 Moderation

If the victim had contributed with his or her conduct to the production of the damage or harm suffered, the judges or courts may moderate the amount of his or her reparation or indemnification.

Art. 120 Determination

The judges and courts, upon declaring the existence of civil liability, following the procedure established in the Criminal Procedure Code, shall establish reasonably in their resolutions the bases on which they ground the amount of damages and indemnifications.

CAPÍTULO II

PERSONS CIVILLY LIABLE

Art. 121 Civil Liability

Every person criminally liable for a crime or misdemeanor is also civilly liable if damages or harm derive from the act. If two or more persons are liable for a crime or misdemeanor, the judges or courts shall indicate the share for which each one must respond.

The perpetrators, instigators, necessary cooperators and accomplices, each one within their respective class, shall be jointly and severally liable among themselves for their shares, and subsidiarily for those corresponding to the other liable persons.

Subsidiary liability shall be made effective: first, on the property of the perpetrators, instigators, necessary cooperators, and afterwards, on that of the accomplices.

Both in cases where joint and several liability is made effective and subsidiary liability, the right of recourse of the one who has paid against the others for the shares corresponding to each one shall remain preserved.

Art. 122 Insurers

Insurers who assume the risk of pecuniary liabilities derived from the use or economic exploitation of any property, enterprise, industry or activity, when, as a consequence of an act provided for in this Code, the event that determines the insured risk occurs, shall be directly civilly liable up to the limit of the legally established or contractually agreed indemnification, without prejudice to the right of recourse against whomever it may correspond.

Art. 123 Exemptions Without Exception of Civil Liability

The exemption from criminal liability declared in numerals 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 of article 34, does not include that of civil liability, which shall be made effective in accordance with the following rules:
a)	In the cases of numerals 1 and 3 of article 34, those who have them under their legal or de facto authority or custody are also liable for the acts executed by those declared exempt from criminal liability, provided that there has been imprudence on their part and without prejudice to the direct civil liability that may correspond to the

persons with capacity. The judges or courts shall graduate equitably the measure in which each of said subjects must respond with their property.
b)	Persons who act in accordance with numeral 2 of article 34 are equally liable.
c)	In the case of numeral 5 of article 34, the persons in whose favor the harm has been prevented shall be directly civilly liable, in proportion to the damage that has been avoided for them, if it were estimable or, otherwise, in that which the Judge or Court establishes according to his or her prudent discretion.
When the shares for which the interested party must respond are not equitably assignable by the Judge or Court, not even by approximation, or when liability extends to the Public Administration or to the majority of a population and, in any case, whenever the damage has been caused with the consent of the authority or its agents, indemnification shall be agreed upon, as appropriate, in the manner established by special laws and regulations.
d)	In the case of numeral 6 of article 34, those who have caused the fear shall respond principally, and in their absence, those who have executed the act.
e)	In the case of the second paragraph of article 26, the perpetrators of the act shall be civilly liable.
In all the foregoing cases, the Judge or Court that issues a judgment of not guilty for considering the concurrence of any of the cited exemption causes, shall proceed to fix civil liabilities, unless an express reservation of actions to claim them in the corresponding venue has been made.

Art. 124 Claim

The civil liability referred to in the preceding article may be claimed in criminal proceedings in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code or in civil proceedings, in accordance with the laws of the matter.

Art. 125 Co-liability

Also civilly liable, in default of those who are criminally liable, are:

a)	Natural or legal persons, in cases of crimes or misdemeanors committed in establishments of which they are owners, when on the part of those who direct or administer them, or their dependents or employees, laws, administrative regulations or provisions of authority that are related to the punishable act committed have been intentionally violated, such that it would not have occurred without said violation;

b)	Natural or legal persons engaged in any kind of industry or commerce, for crimes or misdemeanors that their employees or dependents, representatives or managers have committed in the performance of their obligations or services; and

c)	Natural or legal persons who own motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft for the transport of persons or goods susceptible to creating risks for third parties, for crimes or misdemeanors committed in the use of those by their employees, dependents or representatives or authorized persons, when the act occurs due to the lack of foresight, negligence or imprudence of the owner.

Art. 126 Patrimonial Liability of the State

The State responds patrimonially for damages and harm caused by those criminally liable for intentional or imprudent crimes committed by authority, official or public employee in the exercise of their positions or functions, provided that in the criminal proceeding it is determined that the injury is a direct consequence of abuse, negligence or omission in their performance, except in cases of force majeure.

If the civil liability of the authority, agents and contractors thereof, officials or public employees is demanded in the criminal proceeding, the claim must be directed simultaneously against the administration or public entity presumed to be subsidiarily civilly liable.

The injured party may opt, in any case, to demand the liability of the State before the contentious-administrative jurisdiction, without there being, in any case, a duplicity of indemnification.

In turn, the State may seek recourse against the authority, official or public employee who caused the injury.

Art. 127 Limitation

The person who by lucrative title participates in the effects of a crime or misdemeanor, is obligated to the restitution of the thing or to the compensation for the damage up to the amount of his or her participation.

CAPÍTULO III

FULFILLMENT OF CIVIL LIABILITY AND OTHER PECUNIARY LIABILITIES

Art. 128 Fulfillment

When the property of the civilly liable person is not sufficient to satisfy at once all pecuniary liabilities, the Judge or Court, after hearing the parties, may divide its payment into installments, and shall indicate according to his or her prudent discretion and in consideration of the needs of the injured party and the economic possibilities of the liable person, the period and amount of the installments.

Art. 129 Order

Payments made by the convicted person or the subsidiary civil liable party shall be applied in the following order:

a) To the reparation of damage and compensation for harm caused to the victim or injured party;

b) To compensation to the State for the amount of expenses incurred on its account in the case;

c) To the fine.

TITLE VII

EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY AND ITS EFFECTS

CHAPTER I

CAUSES THAT EXTINGUISH CRIMINAL LIABILITY

Art. 130 Extinction

Criminal liability is extinguished by:

a) The death of the accused, defendant or sentenced person;
b) The completion of the sentence;
c) Pardon, whose effect is limited to the total or partial extinction of the penalty, shall be determined in each case by the National Assembly. Those sentenced for crimes against the international order are excluded from this benefit;
d) Amnesty, which completely extinguishes principal and accessory penalties and all their effects. Those sentenced for crimes against the international order are excluded from this benefit;
e) The forgiveness of the injured party, when the law so provides;
f) The statute of limitations of the criminal action;
g) The statute of limitations of the penalty;
h) The final application of one of the manifestations of the principle of opportunity; and
i) Other cases expressly indicated by law.

In cases where the law permits it, the forgiveness of the injured party may be granted at any moment of the proceedings and of the execution of the penalty.

In crimes or misdemeanors against girls, boys, adolescents under eighteen years of age or persons with disabilities, the judges or courts, having heard the Public Prosecutor, may reject the effectiveness of the forgiveness granted by their representatives, and order the completion of the sentence or the continuation of the proceedings.

To reject the forgiveness referred to in the preceding paragraph, the Judge or Court must hear again the representative of the children, girls, adolescents or disabled persons.

Art. 131 Statute of limitations of criminal action

The criminal action is barred by limitation:

a) After twenty years, when the maximum penalty prescribed for the crime is imprisonment of fifteen or more years;
b) After fifteen years, when the maximum penalty prescribed by law is imprisonment of more than ten years and less than fifteen years; after ten years, when the maximum penalty prescribed by law is imprisonment of more than five and less than ten years;
c) After five years, the remaining serious crimes;
d) After three years, less serious crimes;
e) Crimes of slander and insult are barred by limitation after thirty days.

Misdemeanors are barred by limitation after three months.

When the penalty prescribed by law is compound, the one requiring the longest time for limitation shall be used for the application of the penalties included in this article.

The criminal action for the crimes indicated in article 16 of this Code shall not be barred by limitation in any case.

When crimes are committed by an authority, official or public employee on the occasion of the exercise of their functions, the limitation period of the criminal action shall be interrupted while the person enjoys immunity or evades justice.

Art. 132 Computation of periods

The periods provided in the preceding article shall be computed from the day on which the punishable offense was committed. In cases of continuing crime and permanent crime, such periods shall be computed respectively from the day on which the last offense was committed and from when the unlawful situation was eliminated.

The limitation shall be interrupted, rendering the elapsed time without effect, when the proceedings are directed against the guilty party, and the limitation period shall begin to run again from when the proceedings are stayed or terminated without conviction, without prejudice to the other grounds established by the Criminal Procedure Code.

In the event that criminal action is not timely exercised in crimes against sexual freedom and integrity, committed to the detriment of children, girls or adolescents, the limitation period of the criminal action shall begin from the day on which the injured party reaches the age of majority.

Art. 133 Statute of limitations of penalties

Penalties imposed by final judgment are barred by limitation:

a) After twenty-five years, those of imprisonment of fifteen or more years;
b) After twenty years, those of disqualification for more than ten years and those of imprisonment for more than ten and less than fifteen years;
c) After fifteen years, those of disqualification for more than six and less than ten years and those of imprisonment for more than five and less than ten years;
d) After ten years, the remaining serious penalties;
e) After five years, less serious penalties.
f) After one year, minor penalties and misdemeanors.

Penalties imposed for the crimes indicated in article 16 of this Code shall not be barred by limitation in any case.

Art. 134 Computation

The time of limitation of the penalty shall be computed from the date of the final judgment, or from the breach of the sentence, if it began to be served; or, from when the conditional execution sentence or conditional release is revoked.

Art. 135 Statute of limitations of security measures

Security measures shall be barred by limitation after ten years, if they are deprivations of liberty exceeding three years, and after five years if they are deprivations of liberty equal to or less than three years or have other content.

The time of limitation shall be computed from the day on which the resolution imposing the measure became final or, in case of successive compliance, from when it should have begun to be complied with.

If the compliance with a security measure is subsequent to that of a penalty, the period shall be computed from the extinction of the latter.

CHAPTER II

CANCELLATION OF CRIMINAL RECORDS

Art. 136 Cancellation of criminal records

Convicted persons who have extinguished their criminal liability have the right to obtain from the respective authority, ex officio or at the request of a party, the cancellation of their criminal records, subject to a report from the sentencing Judge or Court.

For the recognition of this right, the following shall be indispensable requirements:

a) Having satisfied the civil liabilities arising from the offense, except in cases of insolvency declared by the sentencing Judge

or Court, unless the convicted person has come into better fortune.

Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, in the case provided in article 129 it shall be sufficient that the offender is current with the installment payments that have been assigned by the Judge or Court and provides, in the judgment of the latter, sufficient guarantee with respect to the deferred amount.

b) Having elapsed, without the guilty party committing a new crime, the following periods: six months for minor penalties; two years for penalties not exceeding twelve months and those imposed for negligent crimes; three years for the remaining less serious penalties; and five for serious penalties.

These periods shall be counted from the day following that on which the penalty was extinguished, including the case where the conditional sentence is revoked.

Criminal record entries shall not be public. During their validity, certifications shall only be issued in the cases and with the limitations and guarantees provided by law. In any case, those requested by judges or courts shall be issued, whether or not they refer to cancelled entries, expressly stating, if applicable, this latter circumstance.

In cases where, despite meeting the requirements established in this article for cancellation, it has not occurred, the Judge or Court, having verified such circumstances ex officio or at the request of the interested party, shall order the cancellation and shall not take such records into account.

Art. 137 Cancellation of annotations of security measures

Annotations of security measures imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other criminal laws shall be cancelled once the respective measure has been served or has prescribed; in the meantime, they shall only appear in the certifications issued by the respective authority for judges or courts or administrative authorities, in the cases established by law.

BOOK TWO
CRIMES AND THEIR PENALTIES

TITLE I

CRIMES AGAINST LIFE, PHYSICAL INTEGRITY AND PERSONAL SAFETY

CHAPTER I CRIMES AGAINST LIFE

Art. 138 Homicide

Whoever deprives another of life shall be punished with a penalty of ten to fifteen years of imprisonment.

Art. 139 Parricide

Whoever, knowing the relationship that binds them, deprives of life their ascendant, descendant, sibling, spouse or cohabitant in a stable de facto union, shall be punished with a penalty of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment.

If any of the circumstances of murder are present, the penalty shall be twenty to twenty-five years of imprisonment.

Art. 140 Murder

Whoever deprives another of life with any of the following circumstances present:

a)	Treachery;
b)	Cruelty;
c)	Price, reward or remunerative promise.

Shall be imposed a penalty of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment.

When two or more of the circumstances indicated in this article are present, the person responsible for murder shall be punished with imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.

Art. 141 Negligent homicide

Whoever causes a homicide by reckless negligence, understood as the violation of elementary standards of care, shall be punished with a penalty of one to four years of imprisonment.

Whoever causes a homicide by reckless negligence under the effects of pharmaceuticals, toxic drugs, narcotics, psychotropic substances or alcoholic beverages shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years.

In addition to the penalty indicated in this article, special disqualification for the period of the sentence shall be imposed when the death is caused on the occasion of the exercise of a profession or trade; deprivation of the right to drive or obtain a license when it is caused by driving a motor vehicle, or deprivation of the right to possession and carrying of weapons, when it is caused by the use of them.

Art. 142 Inducement or assistance to suicide

Whoever induces another to suicide shall be punished with a penalty of two to six years of imprisonment.

Whoever cooperates with necessary and direct acts in the suicide of another shall be punished with a penalty of two to six years of imprisonment.

Whoever provides any prior or simultaneous assistance in the execution of suicide shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to two years, provided that it is not the conduct provided for in the preceding paragraph.

Whoever causes the death of another at their express request due to an incurable disease or unbearable suffering shall be punished with a penalty of two to six years of imprisonment.

CHAPTER II

ABORTION, GENETIC MANIPULATION AND INJURIES TO THE UNBORN

Art. 143 Abortion

Whoever causes an abortion with the consent of the woman shall be punished with a penalty of one to three years of imprisonment. If it is a medical or health professional, the principal penalty shall simultaneously contain the penalty of special disqualification of two to five years to practice medicine or health trade.

A woman who intentionally causes her own abortion or consents to another person performing it on her shall be imposed a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

Art. 144 Abortion without consent

Whoever intentionally causes an abortion without the consent of the woman shall be punished with imprisonment of three to six years. If it is a health professional, the principal penalty shall simultaneously contain the penalty of special disqualification of four to seven years to practice medicine or health trade.

If the abortion is performed with violence, intimidation or deceit, it shall be punished with a penalty of six to eight years of imprisonment. If it is a health professional, the principal penalty shall simultaneously contain the penalty of special disqualification of five to ten years to practice medicine or health trade.

Art. 145 Negligent abortion

Whoever by reckless negligence causes an abortion to a woman shall be punished with a penalty of six months to one year of imprisonment; if the act occurs on the occasion of the exercise of the health profession, the penalty of special disqualification of one to four years shall also be imposed. The pregnant woman shall not be punished under this provision.

Art. 146 Genetic manipulation and cell cloning

Whoever alters the type of vital structure or genotype by manipulation of human genes, for reasons other than therapeutic, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

Whoever experiments or manipulates genetic material that enables the creation of human hybrids or cloning shall be punished with a penalty of three to six

years of imprisonment. The same penalty shall be imposed on those who experiment or manipulate human genetic material for purposes of race selection.

Whoever artificially fertilizes human ova for any purpose other than human procreation shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of two to five years.

In all cases described in the preceding paragraphs, in addition to the penalty of imprisonment, special disqualification of four to seven years to practice a profession or trade related to health shall be imposed.

Art. 147 Genetic manipulation for production of biological weapons

Whoever uses genetic engineering for the production of biological or exterminating weapons of the human species shall be punished with a penalty of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise public employment or office, profession or trade.

Art. 148 Injuries to the unborn

Whoever, by any means or procedure, causes in the unborn an injury or disease that seriously harms their normal development, or causes in them a serious and permanent physical or psychological injury, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of two to five years and special disqualification to exercise any health profession, or to provide services of any kind in clinics, establishments or gynecological offices, public or private, for a period of two to eight years.

Art. 149 Negligent injuries to the unborn

Whoever by reckless negligence causes in the unborn the injuries described in the preceding article shall be punished with a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment and special disqualification of two to five years to exercise any medical or health profession, or to provide services of any kind in clinics, establishments or public or private gynecological offices, for a period of one to five years. The pregnant woman shall not be punished under this provision.

CHAPTER III INJURIES AND TUMULTUOUS AFFRAY

Art. 150 Injuries

For purposes of this Code, the concept of injury includes wounds, contusions, abrasions, fractures, dislocations, burns and any alteration in health and any other damage to the physical or psychological integrity of persons, provided they are caused by an external cause.

Art. 151 Minor injuries

Whoever causes another person an injury to their physical or psychological integrity that objectively requires, in addition to first medical assistance, medical treatment for their recovery, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year.

If the injury additionally requires surgical intervention, the penalty shall be imprisonment of six months to two years.

Art. 152 Serious injuries

If the injury produces a persistent impairment of health or physical or mental integrity, of a sense, organ, limb or function, has endangered life or leaves a visible and permanent scar on the face, it shall be punished with imprisonment of two to five years.

If the injury leaves a visible and permanent scar on any other part of the body, on a person who by their profession, sex, occupation or custom usually leaves it uncovered, it shall be punished with a penalty of one to three years of imprisonment.

When the serious injury is produced using weapons, instruments, objects, means, methods or forms specifically dangerous to the life, physical or mental health of the injured person, imprisonment of three to six years shall be imposed.

Art. 153 Very serious injuries

Whoever causes another, by any means or procedure, the loss or disability of a principal organ or limb or of a sense, impotence, sterility, a serious deformity or a serious somatic or mental illness, a penalty of imprisonment of three to ten years shall be imposed.

Art. 154 Negligent injuries

Whoever by reckless negligence causes any of the injuries provided for in the preceding articles, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to one year, if they are minor injuries; nine months to two years, for serious injuries, and one to three years, for very serious injuries.

When the acts referred to in this article have been committed using a motor vehicle or a firearm, the penalty of deprivation of the right to drive motor vehicles or of the right to possession and carrying of weapons for a period of one to three years shall also be imposed.

When the injuries are committed by professional negligence, the penalty of special disqualification for the exercise of the profession, occupation or position for a period of one to three years shall also be imposed.

Art. 155 Domestic or intrafamily violence

Whoever exercises any type of force, violence or physical or mental intimidation against whoever is or has been their spouse or cohabitant in a stable de facto union or against the person to whom they are or have been linked in a stable manner by an affective relationship, or against their own children, those of the spouse or of the cohabitant outside the cases of the right of disciplinary correction, or against ascendants or disabled persons who live with him or her, or who are subject to the parental authority, guardianship or custody of one or the other

and as a consequence of the performance of the acts previously indicated, the following are caused:

a)	minor injuries, the penalty shall be one to two years of imprisonment;
b)	serious injuries, the penalty shall be three to seven years of imprisonment and,
c)	very serious injuries, the penalty shall be five to twelve years of imprisonment.

In addition to the penalties of imprisonment previously indicated, those responsible for intrafamily violence shall be imposed special disqualification for the same period of the rights derived from the relationship, mother, father and children, guardianship or custody.

Art. 156 Provoked contagion

Whoever knowing that they suffer from a sexually transmitted disease or any other serious infectious disease, executes acts on another person that involve danger of transmission or contagion of such disease, thereby endangering their health, physical integrity or life, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to three years. If contagion occurs, the penalty shall be one to four years of imprisonment.

If the contagion produces death, the corresponding criminal provision shall apply.

Art. 157 Exemptions by consent

Injuries performed on the body of another with their valid, free, conscious, spontaneous and expressly given consent shall not be punishable, when these take place for the purpose of benefiting their health or that of a third party or improving their physical appearance, unless the consent has been obtained through fraud or the grantor is a minor or incapable person, or the injuries were caused by professional negligence.

Art. 158 Tumultuous brawl

Those who fight among themselves attacking each other tumultuously and using means or instruments that endanger the life or integrity of persons, shall be punished for their participation in the brawl with the penalty of imprisonment of six months to one year. It shall be considered a tumultuous brawl when more than three persons confront each other.

CHAPTER IV

EXPOSURE OF PERSONS TO DANGER

Art. 159 Exposure and abandonment of persons

Whoever exposes to danger the life or integrity of any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years.

Whoever exposes to danger the life or integrity of a child or person incapable of fending for themselves, abandons them or places them in a situation of helplessness, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

If the perpetrator were the legal person responsible for the care of the child or person incapable of fending for themselves, the penalty shall be two to four years of imprisonment and special disqualification of two to six years from the rights derived from the relationship mother, father and children, guardianship or custody.

Art. 160 Failure to render assistance

Whoever fails to provide necessary assistance to a helpless person in manifest and serious danger, when they had the possibility of doing so without personal risk or risk to third parties, shall be punished with one hundred to five hundred days fine.

Whoever finds a lost or abandoned child or incapable person whose life is in imminent danger and fails to provide them with necessary assistance having the possibility of doing so without personal risk or risk to third parties, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and one hundred to five hundred days fine.

If the victim, indicated in the preceding paragraphs, were so due to an accident fortuitously caused by the one who failed to render assistance, the penalty shall be imprisonment of three to six months and if the accident were due to negligence, that of imprisonment of six months to one year.

If the perpetrator of the crimes indicated in the preceding paragraphs were the legal person responsible for the care of the victim, the penalty of special disqualification of six months to three years from the rights derived from the relationship mother, father and children, guardianship or custody shall also be imposed.

Whoever denies health care or abandons health services, when serious risk to the health of persons derives from the denial or abandonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification of three to five years.

Art. 161

Use of children, adolescents, disabled persons or elderly persons for begging
Whoever uses persons with disability problems, children, adolescents or elderly persons to practice begging, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

If the perpetrator of this crime were the legal person responsible, special disqualification of one to four years to exercise the rights derived from the relationship mother, father and children, guardianship or custody shall also be imposed.

Art. 162 Provocation, conspiracy and proposal

Provocation, conspiracy and proposal to commit the crimes of homicide, parricide, murder, genetic manipulation and cloning of cells, genetic manipulation for production of biological weapons, minor injuries, serious injuries and very serious injuries, provided for in the preceding chapters, shall be punished with a penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the

penalty provided in the law, for the crime in question and whose minimum limit shall be half of that.

TITLE II

CRIMES AGAINST LIBERTY

CHAPTER I

KIDNAPPING AND ILLEGAL DETENTIONS

Art. 163 Simple kidnapping

Whoever abducts, retains or conceals a person against their will, shall incur imprisonment of three to six years and one hundred to three hundred days fine.

If the perpetrator of this crime releases the kidnapped person within the first forty-eight hours of their deprivation of liberty, a penalty of imprisonment of one to three years shall be imposed.

Art. 164 Kidnapping for extortion

Whoever kidnaps a person with the purpose of demanding for their freedom a benefit, ransom or any utility, or to have something done or omitted, or for publicity or political purposes, shall be punished with a penalty of five to ten years of imprisonment.

Art. 165 Aggravating circumstances

The penalties established for kidnapping for extortion shall be ten to twelve years of imprisonment, if any of the following circumstances concur:
a)	That the victim be a person with a disability or be seriously ill in such a way that places them in a notorious state of defenselessness, a minor under thirteen years of age, a pregnant woman or a person over sixty-five years of age.
b)	That the deprivation of liberty be prolonged for more than ten days;
c)	That the crime be committed by an authority, official or public employee taking advantage of the exercise of their position;
d)	If the crime be committed taking advantage of the trust placed by the victim in the author or in any of the co-participants;
e)	That the act be committed simulating being an official or public employee;
f)	That the victim be an authority, official or public employee or that the act be perpetrated with the purpose of obtaining from them some benefit or advantage on the occasion of the performance of their position; or
g)	When the kidnapper does not give account of the kidnapped person. In this case the penalty shall be twelve years of imprisonment.

Art. 166 Illegal detention and concealment of detainee

Whoever orders or executes the detention of someone without judicial order or order from competent authority, except in the case of flagrant crime, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of one to two years and special disqualification of two to four years to exercise position or public function. The person in charge of a detention center who admits the illegally detained person shall incur the same penalty.

The same sanction shall correspond to the authority, official or public employee who does not obey the order of release issued by a competent Judge and to the private individual, official or public employee who does not place a detainee at the disposal of the competent authority within the time periods established by law.

The authorities who order and those who execute the concealment of a detainee shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and with special disqualification to exercise the position or public employment of four to six years, as applicable.

CHAPTER II

CRIMES AGAINST SEXUAL FREEDOM AND INTEGRITY

Art. 167 Rape

Whoever has carnal access or has themselves accessed or introduces to the victim or forces them to introduce a finger, object or instrument with sexual purposes, by vaginal, anal or oral route, using force, violence, intimidation or any other means that deprives the victim of will, reason or sense, shall be punished with a penalty of eight to twelve years of imprisonment.

Persons of either sex may be authors or victims of this crime.

Art. 168 Rape of minors under fourteen years of age

Whoever has carnal access or has themselves accessed with or by a person under fourteen years of age or whoever with sexual purposes introduces to them or forces them to introduce a finger, object or instrument by vaginal, anal or oral route, with or without their consent, shall be punished with a penalty of twelve to fifteen years of imprisonment.

Art. 169 Aggravated rape

The penalty of twelve to fifteen years of imprisonment shall be imposed when:

a)	The author commits the crime taking advantage of a relationship of superiority, authority, kinship, dependence or trust with the victim, or of permanently sharing the family home with them;
b)	The rape be committed with the participation of two or more persons;
c)	When the victim be especially vulnerable by reason of illness or physical or mental disability to resist, or it be a pregnant person or person over sixty-five years of age; or
d)	Serious harm to the health of the victim results.

If two or more of the circumstances provided in this article concur, the maximum penalty shall be imposed.

Art. 170 Statutory rape

Whoever being married or in a stable de facto union or being of legal age, without violence or intimidation, carnally accesses or has themselves accessed by a person over fourteen and under sixteen years of age, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment.

Art. 171 Aggravated statutory rape

When statutory rape be committed by whoever is in charge of the education or spiritual guidance, guardianship or custody of the victim or by a person who maintains with them a relationship of authority, dependence or familiarity or permanently shares the family home with them, the penalty of imprisonment of five to ten years shall be imposed.

Art. 172 Sexual abuse

Whoever performs lascivious acts or lewd touching on another person, without their consent, or forces them to perform it, making use of force, intimidation or any other means that deprives them of will, reason or sense, or taking advantage of their state of incapacity to resist, without reaching carnal access or other conduct provided in the crime of rape, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of five to seven years.

When in the commission of the crime any of the circumstances of aggravated rape occurs, the penalty shall be seven to twelve years of imprisonment. If two or more of said circumstances concur or the victim be a girl, boy, or adolescent the maximum penalty shall be imposed.

No value is recognized, in any of the cases, to the consent of the victim when the latter be under fourteen years of age, or a person with disability or mental illness.

Art. 173 Incest

Imprisonment of one to three years shall be imposed on whoever, knowing the consanguineous relationships that bind them and by means of consent, has carnal access with an ascendant, descendant, or collateral within the second degree of consanguinity over eighteen years of age. The foregoing, without prejudice to the penalty that may be imposed for the commission of other crimes.

In this case the pardon of the offended party extinguishes the exercise of criminal action.

Art. 174 Sexual harassment

Whoever in a repeated manner or availing themselves of their position of power, authority or superiority demands, requests for themselves or for a third party, any sexual act in exchange for promises, explicit or implicit, of preferential treatment, or for

threats relating to the current or future situation of the victim, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

When the victim be a person under eighteen years of age, the penalty shall be three to five years of imprisonment.

Art. 175

Sexual exploitation, pornography and sexual act with adolescents by means of payment
Whoever induces, facilitates, promotes or uses for sexual or erotic purposes persons under sixteen years of age or disabled persons, causing them to witness or participate in public or private behavior or spectacle, even if the victim consents to witness that behavior or participate in it, shall be punished with five to seven years of imprisonment and four to six years of imprisonment shall be imposed when the victim is over sixteen and under eighteen years of age.

Whoever promotes, finances, manufactures, reproduces, publishes, commercializes, imports, exports, disseminates, distributes material for purposes of sexual exploitation, by any means whether direct, mechanical, digital, audio visual, or with computer, electronic or other type of support, the image, or the voice of a person under eighteen years of age in sexual or erotic activity, real or simulated, explicit or implicit, or the representation of their genitals for sexual purposes, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and one hundred fifty to five hundred days fine.

Whoever for purposes of sexual exploitation possesses pornographic or erotic material in the terms expressed in the preceding paragraph, shall be punished with the penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

Whoever executes sexual or erotic act with a person over fourteen years and under eighteen years of age of any sex, paying or promising to pay or give in exchange economic advantage or of any nature, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment.

Art. 176

Specific aggravating circumstances in case of sexual exploitation, pornography and sexual act with adolescents by means of payment

The penalty shall be six to eight years of imprisonment when:

a)	The act is executed for profit purposes;

b)	The author or authors are part of an organized group to commit crimes of a sexual nature, unless the crime of organized crime concurs;

c)	There is deception, violence, abuse of authority or any means of intimidation or coercion; or

d)	The author commits the crime taking advantage of a relationship of superiority, authority, kinship, dependence or trust with the victim, or of permanently sharing the family home with her.

If two or more of the provided circumstances concur, the penalty to be imposed shall be seven to nine years of imprisonment. The maximum penalty shall be imposed when the person has a disability or is under fourteen years of age.

Art. 177 Promotion of Tourism for purposes of sexual exploitation

Those who within or outside the national territory, individually or through tour operators, advertising campaigns, reproduction of texts and images, promote the country as an attractive or sexual tourist destination, using persons under eighteen years of age, shall be punished with the penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and one hundred fifty to five hundred days fine.

Art. 178 Procuring

Whoever induces, promotes, facilitates or favors the sexual exploitation, pornography and remunerated sexual act of a person of any sex, maintains them in it or recruits them for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to six years and one hundred to three hundred days fine.

Art. 179 Aggravated procuring

The penalty shall be six to eight years of imprisonment and three hundred to six hundred days fine when:
a)	The victim is under eighteen years of age or with disability;
b)	There is intent for profit;
c)	There is deception, violence, abuse of authority or any means of intimidation or coercion;
d)	The author commits the crime taking advantage of a relationship of superiority, authority, kinship, dependence or trust with the victim, or of permanently sharing the family home with her.

Art. 180 Pimping

Whoever by means of threats or coercion, has himself maintained economically, even partially, by a person who performs sexual act by means of payment, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to five years and sixty to two hundred days fine.

If the victim is under eighteen years of age or with disability, the sanction shall be five to seven years of imprisonment and two hundred to four hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall apply when the author is united in marriage or in stable de facto union with the victim.

Art. 181 Restriction of mediation and other benefits

When the sexual crime is committed against children and adolescents, there shall be no place for the mediation procedure, nor any benefit of suspension of penalty.

Art. 182

Trafficking in persons for purposes of slavery, sexual exploitation or adoption
Whoever in exercise of power or availing himself of threats, offers, deceptions, promotes, facilitates, induces or executes the capture, recruitment, contracting, transport, transfer, retention, reception or harboring of persons, for purposes of slavery, sexual exploitation or adoption, so that it may be exercised within or outside the national territory, even with the consent of the victim, shall be punished with a penalty of seven to ten years of imprisonment.

If the victim is a person under eighteen years of age, or person with disability, or the act was committed by a family member, tutor or person in charge of the education, guardianship or custody, spiritual guide or permanently shares the family home of the victim, or there is a relationship of trust, the penalty shall be ten to twelve years of imprisonment.

Whoever sells, offers, delivers, transfers or accepts a girl, boy, or adolescent in which there is or is not, payment or reward for purposes of sexual exploitation, shall be punished with a penalty of eight to twelve years of imprisonment. The same penalty shall apply to whoever offers, possesses, acquires or accepts the sale of a girl, boy or adolescent for purposes of illegal adoption.

Art. 183 Common provisions

When the author of aggravated rape, aggravated statutory rape, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, sexual acts with adolescents by means of payment and pornography, promotion of tourism for purposes of sexual exploitation, aggravated procuring, pimping or trafficking in persons for purposes of slavery or sexual exploitation is the father, mother or legal person responsible for the care of the victim, there shall be imposed in addition the penalty of special disqualification for the period indicated for the prison sentence of the rights derived from the mother, father and children relationship, tutorship or guardianship.

The provocation, conspiracy and proposal to commit the crimes of sexual exploitation, sexual acts with adolescents by means of payment and pornography, promotion of tourism for purposes of sexual exploitation, procuring, pimping or trafficking in persons for purposes of slavery or sexual exploitation, provided in the preceding chapters, shall be punished with an attenuated penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty provided in the law for the crime in question and whose minimum limit shall be half of that.

CAPÍTULO III

CRIMES AGAINST FREEDOM TO ACT

Art. 184 Threats

Whoever threatens another with causing him, his family or other persons with whom he is intimately linked, a harm that constitutes a crime and that by its nature appears credible, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to one year of imprisonment.

If the threat consists of causing a harm that does not constitute a crime, it shall be punished with a penalty of one hundred to two hundred days fine.

Art. 185 Blackmail

Whoever with threats of imputations against honor or prestige, violation or disclosure of secrets, with prejudice in either case for the offended party, his family or the entity he represents or in which he has an interest, compels another to do or not do something, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and one hundred to two hundred days fine.

Art. 186 Threat with weapons

Whoever threatens another person with a bladed or firearm weapon or object capable of causing damage to physical integrity or health, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years imprisonment and one hundred to two hundred days fine.

Art. 187 Coercion and displacement

Whoever by violence or intimidation compels another to do, not to do, or to tolerate something to which he is not obliged, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and one hundred to two hundred days fine.

If the coercion consists of forcing a person to change his domicile or residence or to abandon his dwelling in a permanent or transitory manner, the penalty shall be three to five years of imprisonment and two hundred to five hundred days fine. If the displacement affects a group of more than ten persons, the penalty shall be four to six years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

If the coercion prevents the exercise of an individual right enshrined in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, the sanction shall be two to four years of imprisonment. This provision shall apply only in the absence of any other that punishes that same conduct with a higher penalty.

Art. 188 Insemination without consent

Whoever, without the woman's consent, procures her pregnancy using medical or chemical techniques of artificial insemination, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to five years. If pregnancy results, imprisonment of four to six years shall be applied. In both cases, when health professionals are involved, a penalty of special disqualification of five to ten years shall also be imposed.

Art. 189 Fraudulent insemination

Whoever fraudulently alters the conditions agreed upon to perform an artificial insemination, or obtains consent through deceit or false promises, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification of one to five years to exercise the profession or occupation in the exercise of which he committed the offense.

CAPÍTULO IV

OFFENSES AGAINST RELIGIOUS OR FUNERAL ACTS. VIOLATION OF TOMBS AND DESECRATION OF CORPSES

Art. 190 Disturbance of religious or ceremonial acts

Whoever prevents or disturbs the exercise of religious worship or ceremonies, shall be punished with one hundred to two hundred days fine.

Art. 191 Desecration of corpses

Imprisonment of one to three years shall be imposed on whoever:

a)	Desecrates or vilifies the place where a deceased person or his ashes rest, or destroys or removes objects from the place where the corpse rests;

b)	Outrages a corpse or its ashes;

c)	Removes, manipulates, commercializes or conceals a corpse or its ashes;

d)	Mutilates or destroys a corpse, unless it is a dissection performed for didactic or scientific purposes authorized by the relatives of the deceased or when it is a corpse that is not claimed within a period of thirty days or when it is a medico-legal necropsy.

TÍTULO III

OFFENSES AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE AND THE INVIOLABILITY OF DOMICILE

CAPÍTULO I

OFFENSES AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE

Art. 192 Unlawful opening or interception of communications

Whoever unlawfully opens, intercepts or by any other means learns the content of a letter, a sealed document or a telegraphic, telematic, electronic or other nature dispatch not addressed to him, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years.

If he also disseminates or reveals the content of the communications indicated in the preceding paragraph, imprisonment of one to three years shall be imposed.

Art. 193 Removal, diversion or destruction of communications

Whoever without learning its content, unlawfully seizes, destroys or diverts from its destination a communication not addressed to him, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year.

Whoever knowing or presuming the content of the communication performs the conduct provided in the preceding paragraph, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years.

Art. 194 Unlawful capture of communications of others

Whoever unlawfully records the words or conversations of others, not intended for the public, or whoever by technical procedures listens to private or telephone communications not addressed to him, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years.

Art. 195 Disclosure

Whoever being lawfully in possession of a communication, documents or recordings of a private nature, makes them public without due authorization, even if they were addressed to him, shall be punished with sixty to one hundred eighty days fine.

Art. 196 Violation of professional secrecy

Whoever by reason of his investiture, occupation, position, employment, profession or art, has knowledge of a secret whose disclosure may cause harm, and reveals it without legitimate justification, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification of two to five years to exercise the position, profession or occupation in question.

Art. 197 Prohibited registries

Whoever without authorization of law promotes, facilitates, authorizes, finances, creates or commercializes a database or a computerized registry with data that may affect natural or legal persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and three hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 198 Unauthorized access and use of information

Whoever, without due authorization, uses the computerized records of another, or enters, by any means, his database or electronic files, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years, and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 199 Aggravation by abuse of function or position

The authority, official or public employee who outside the cases authorized by law and taking advantage of his position or function performs any of the conducts established in this chapter, shall be imposed the penalty of three to six years of imprisonment and disqualification to exercise the position or public employment for the same period.

CAPÍTULO II

OFFENSES AGAINST THE INVIOLABILITY OF DOMICILE

Art. 200 Violation of domicile

Whoever enters or remains in another's dwelling, in its dependencies or in a place inhabited by another, whether against the express or presumed will of whoever has the right to exclude him, whether clandestinely or with deceit, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

In the case of the preceding paragraph, the penalty shall be two to four years of imprisonment if the act is committed by two or more persons or with force against things or climbing, and three to five years if committed with violence or intimidation against persons or with display of weapons.

If the unlawful entry or remaining occurs in the domicile of a legal person, public or private, professional office or private office, the penalty shall be six months to one year, and if any of the circumstances of the preceding paragraph occurs, the penalty corresponding to it shall be imposed, reduced by half.

Art. 201 Unlawful search

The authority, official or public employee who searches a domicile without the formalities prescribed by law, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period.

This assumption excludes the search produced in the cases expressly provided in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua and in the law.

TÍTULO IV

OFFENSES AGAINST HONOR

CAPÍTULO I DE LA CALUMNIA

Art. 202 Slander

Whoever falsely imputes to another the commission of or participation in a specific crime, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of one hundred to two hundred days fine.

If the slander is propagated with publicity, he shall be sanctioned with a penalty of one hundred twenty to three hundred days fine.

Art. 203 Insult

CAPÍTULO II DE LA INJURIA

Whoever by expression or action, injures the dignity of another person undermining his fame, image, reputation, honor or attacking his own self-esteem, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of one hundred to two hundred days fine.

If the insults are disseminated with publicity they shall be sanctioned with a penalty of two hundred to three hundred days fine.

Art. 204 Exclusion of crime

The crime of insult does not exist when:

a) The imputation is true and is linked to the defense of a current public interest;

b) The information about newsworthy events has been carried out in accordance with journalistic ethics;

c) It involves unfavorable judgments of political, literary, artistic, historical, scientific or professional criticism, without offensive purpose;

d) The expressions are directed against public officials or employees regarding true facts concerning the exercise of their positions;

e) It involves an unfavorable opinion expressed in fulfillment of a duty or exercising a right, provided that the manner of proceeding or the lack of discretion, when there should have been discretion, do not demonstrate an offensive purpose;

f) The offenses contained in writings submitted or in statements or speeches made by litigants, attorneys or defenders before the Courts, and concerning the subject matter of the trial. These shall be subject only to the corresponding disciplinary sanctions.

Art. 205 Unauthorized dissemination of images of a deceased person

Whoever disseminates, by any means, images of a deceased person without the authorization of their spouse, father, mother, sons and daughters, or brothers and sisters, with morbid interest that increases the pain generated by their death, shall be punished with a fine of one hundred to three hundred day-fines.

CHAPTER III COMMON PROVISIONS

Art. 206 Aggravating circumstance

When defamation or insult is carried out by means of price, reward or remunerative promise, an aggravated penalty shall be imposed that shall have as its lower limit the maximum limit of the penalty for the crime of defamation or insult in question and as its upper limit, the latter increased by half.

Art. 207 Retraction

The retraction made by the accused person in the crimes of defamation and insult extinguishes the criminal action, provided that the offended party accepts it.

The Judge, at the request of the victim and at the expense of the accused, must order the publication of the retraction, of the dismissal judgment or the record of the mediation proceeding in which the retraction is recorded or of a summary thereof in a written communication medium.

If the defamation or insult was disseminated through a communication medium, the Judge, at the request of the victim and at the expense of the accused, must order the publication referred to in the preceding paragraph, in the same medium or one of similar coverage, in the same form, space, place and proportion in which it was published.

Art. 208 Pardon of the offended party

At any time before the final judgment, the accused of defamation or insult shall be exempt from criminal liability by the pardon of the offended person or their legal representative, specially empowered to pardon.

Art. 209 Offense to the memory of a deceased person

Whoever offends the memory of a deceased person with insulting or defamatory expressions shall be punished with a fine of one hundred to two hundred day-fines. The right to file a complaint for this crime includes the spouse, father, mother, sons and daughters, or brothers and sisters.

TITLE V

CRIMES AGAINST THE FAMILY

CHAPTER I

CRIMES AGAINST CIVIL STATUS

Art. 210 Illegal marriage

Whoever contracts a subsequent civil marriage, without the previous one being legally dissolved or annulled, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and a fine of one hundred to two hundred day-fines.

Art. 211 Simulation of marriage

The same penalty of the preceding article shall be suffered by whoever deceives another person, simulating the celebration of a marriage with them.

Art. 212 Illegal celebration of marriage

The judge or notary public who, with knowledge of its illegality, authorizes the marriage in the cases established in the two preceding articles, or intervenes in its simulation, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to five years, and special disqualification from exercising the position, profession or office of judge or notary public for the same period.

Witnesses who knowingly participate in the illegal celebration or in the simulation of marriage shall be imposed a penalty of six months to one year

of imprisonment and a fine of fifty to one hundred day-fines.

Art. 213 Supposition, suppression and alteration of civil status

Whoever orders the registration in the corresponding registry of the birth or death of a non-existent person; alters the registry data of a person or conceals their existence, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years.

If this crime is committed by the public official responsible for the registration, the penalty shall be three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period.

CHAPTER II

ON THE ALTERATION OF MATERNITY AND PATERNITY

Art. 214 Simulation of childbirth and alteration of filiation

Whoever with intent to modify or alter filiation shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years:
a) Simulates a childbirth;
b) Conceals a son or daughter or other descendant or any boy or girl, even if not linked to them by a relationship of filiation or kinship, or,
c) Delivers a boy or girl to another person evading the legal procedures of guardianship or adoption, provided that it does not constitute the crime of trafficking in persons.

Art. 215 Substitution of girl or boy

Whoever substitutes one girl or boy for another, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to five years.

The substitution of girl or boy occurring in hospitals, health centers, public or private medical clinics, due to lack of due care by those responsible for their identification and custody, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years.

Art. 216 Aggravating circumstances

Whoever by means of price, reward or promise of some benefit, commits any of the acts established in this chapter, shall be punished with an aggravated penalty that shall have as its lower limit the maximum limit of the penalty for the crime in question and as its upper limit, the latter, increased by half.

If the conducts described in this chapter were carried out by an ascendant, tutor or guardian of a boy or girl, there shall be imposed in addition, as the case may be, the penalty of special disqualification from exercising the rights derived from the mother, father and children relationship, tutorship or guardianship that they had over the simulated, concealed, delivered or substituted child or descendant, for a period of three to six years.

When the referred conducts are carried out by an educator, medical or health professional, public official or employee in the exercise of their position, or notary public in the exercise of their profession, there shall be imposed, in addition to the indicated penalty, that of special disqualification from public employment or position, profession or office for the same period as the principal penalty imposed.

CHAPTER III BREACH OF FAMILY DUTIES

Art. 217 Breach of maintenance duties

A penalty of imprisonment from six months to two years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise the rights derived from the father, mother and children relationship, guardianship or custody shall be imposed on:

a) Whoever, being obliged to provide maintenance in accordance with the law on the matter, with a provisional or final resolution or contractual obligation, or through an agreement before any organism or institution, deliberately fails to provide it;

b) Whoever, being obliged to the care or education of another person, breaches or neglects such duties, in such a way that the latter is in a situation of material or moral abandonment.

The penalty shall be two to three years of imprisonment, when the perpetrator knowingly of his maintenance obligation places himself in a state in which it is impossible for him to fulfill his maintenance duty or for having employed any fraudulent means to conceal his assets, or for having resigned or abandoned his work in order to evade his responsibility.

Whoever fails to fulfill the maintenance duty for having transferred his assets to third parties within the period of twelve months prior to the filing of the judicial proceeding for the collection of the maintenance duty, during the judicial proceeding for maintenance collection and up to six months after the issuance of the final favorable resolution of the existence of the maintenance credit or the duty to satisfy it, shall also incur in this crime.

The person who pays the maintenance owed, reasonably guarantees the subsequent fulfillment of his obligations or adequately guarantees the care and education of the person in his charge shall be exempt from the imposed penalty.

The employer who does not carry out the withholding of the amounts from the salary of the maintenance debtor ordered by the Judge or conceals information in relation to the salaries or other aspects of interest for the establishment of the amount that must be paid to fulfill the maintenance duty, that has been requested by the jurisdictional authority, shall be liable for disobedience to authority.

For the purposes of this article, maintenance debtors shall also be understood as

children in relation to their parents, when they are obliged to provide maintenance, as well as siblings with respect to their incapacitated sibling.

CHAPTER IV

CRIMES AGAINST MOTHER, FATHER AND CHILDREN RELATIONS, GUARDIANSHIP AND CUSTODY

Art. 218 Abduction of minor or incapacitated person

When a family member, without the circumstances of kidnapping being present, abducts a minor or an incapacitated person from the power of his parents, guardian, custodian or person legally in charge of his custody, and whoever retains him against their will, shall be punished with imprisonment from one to four years.

TITLE VI

CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY AND THE SOCIOECONOMIC ORDER

Art. 219 Simple theft

CHAPTER I OF THEFT

Whoever unlawfully takes possession of a movable thing totally or partially belonging to another shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years and ninety to one hundred twenty days fine, provided that the value of the stolen thing is greater than the sum resulting from two monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector.

Art. 220 Aggravated theft

Theft shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment from two to five years and one hundred twenty to three hundred days fine in the following cases, when:

a) It is committed with abuse of trust or with the assistance of a domestic servant or dependent of the offended party or making use of a false name, or simulating authority, order thereof or representation that one does not have;

b) It involves luggage or valuables of a traveler, in any type of vehicle or in the parking lots or terminals of transport companies, air or land customs. The same shall apply if the theft occurs in correspondence or goods sent by mail, customs facilities and the like;

c) It involves supplies, machines or work instruments;

d) It is committed taking advantage of the facilities arising from a disaster, a public commotion or a particular misfortune of the victim;

e) It falls on objects of scientific, security or religious value, when by the place where they are located they are intended for the service, utility or reverence of an indeterminate number of persons, or entrusted to public confidence;

f) It involves cultural property, defined as such by law;

g) It is of things that form part of the installation of a public service and are entrusted to public confidence;

h) It has been carried out by abusing the personal circumstances of the victim;

i) The amount of what was stolen exceeds ten minimum wages taking as a parameter the industrial sector; or

j) The perpetrator is a repeat offender of theft, simple or aggravated.

When two or more of the circumstances described in the preceding paragraph concur, the penalty of imprisonment shall be four to six years and two hundred to three hundred days fine.

Art. 221 Theft for use

Whoever, without any right, takes without violence a movable thing totally or partially belonging to another with the sole purpose of making use of it and returns it within the following forty-eight hours, shall be punished with ninety to three hundred days fine, provided that the value of the stolen thing is greater than the sum resulting from two monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector. If restitution is not made within the indicated period, the act shall be punished as theft, simple or aggravated.

Art. 222 Cattle Rustling and Related Conduct

The following shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment from three to seven years and from one hundred to five hundred days fine:

a) Whoever unlawfully takes possession of one or more head of major or minor livestock wholly or partially belonging to another;

b) Whoever sells or purchases one or more head of major or minor livestock wholly or partially belonging to another, without the legitimate owner having granted a bill of sale for the livestock sold, authenticated by the corresponding authority;

c) Whoever transports or causes to be transported one or more head of major or minor livestock wholly or partially belonging to another, without being duly authorized to do so;

d) Whoever slaughters one or more head of major or minor livestock, knowing or having reason to know of its origin from theft or robbery;

e) Whoever acquires or sells meat, hide or other things from one or more head of major or minor livestock originating from the crime, knowing or having reason to know of its origin from theft or robbery;

f) Whoever inserts, alters, removes or falsifies brands, marks, signs or other instruments or devices used for the identification of one or more head of major or minor livestock wholly or partially belonging to another;

g) Whoever falsifies or uses certificates of acquisition, transit guides, brand or mark tickets or equivalent false documentation or devices for one or more head of major or minor livestock;

h) Whoever sells hides from one or more head of major or minor livestock, without being an authorized public slaughterer, owner of recognized livestock, owner of livestock tannery or accredited merchant;

i) Whoever issues falsified bills of sale or acquisition documents;

j) Being an authorized public slaughterer, sells hides from one or more head of major or minor livestock, without presenting proof of their origin;

k) Whoever purchases hides from one or more head of major or minor livestock from a person who is not an authorized public slaughterer, owner of recognized livestock, owner of livestock or accredited merchant;

l) Being a vendor of fiscal or municipal tickets, required for the slaughter of livestock, issues them without the slaughterer showing the legally issued bill of sale and fails to record on the ticket the sex, color and brand, mark, instrument or identification device of the head or heads of major or minor livestock to be slaughtered. When it is the owner of the head or heads of major or minor livestock who is going to slaughter it, it shall suffice that he present the registration of his brand, if the head of livestock is native;

m) Being Director or person responsible for a slaughterhouse, dispenses with the presentation of the bill of sale and authorizes the sacrifice of the head or heads of major or minor livestock in the Institution under his charge.

If the taking of possession is committed by means of force upon things, the penalty shall be from three to eight years of imprisonment. If it is executed with violence or intimidation upon persons, the penalty shall be from four to ten years of imprisonment. In both cases a fine of two hundred to six hundred days shall also be imposed.

The penalty shall be from four to eighteen years of imprisonment and from two hundred to six hundred days fine and special disqualification for the same period as the penalty imposed if the act is committed by an authority, public official or public employee.

CHAPTER II ROBBERY

Art. 223 Robbery with Force upon Things

Whoever unlawfully takes possession of a movable thing wholly or partially belonging to another with use of force upon things shall be punished with imprisonment from two to five years and from one hundred twenty to three hundred days fine.

It shall be understood that there is force upon things when the act is executed under any of the following circumstances:

a) Breaking, fracture, boring or perforation of wall, fence, door, window, roof or floor;

b) Fracture of cabinets, chests, trunks, filing cabinets or other kind of closed or sealed furniture or objects, or forcing of their locks or hinges;

c) Disabling of specific alarm or guard systems; or

d) Use of skeleton key, false key or other similar instrument or the true key obtained unlawfully. Keys also include magnetic or perforated cards, and any other electronic control or opening instrument.

Art. 224 Robbery with Violence or Intimidation upon Persons

Whoever unlawfully takes possession of a movable thing wholly or partially belonging to another making use of violence or intimidation upon persons, shall be punished with imprisonment from three to six years.

These penalties shall apply when the violence or intimidation takes place before the act to facilitate it, in the act of committing it or immediately thereafter, without prejudice to those that may correspond to the acts of violence practiced by reason or occasion of the robbery.

Outside the cases of violence that may occur, it shall be deemed to exist when the act is executed by snatching by surprise a thing that the victim was carrying or using hypnotic or narcotic means.

Art. 225 Aggravated Robbery

The penalty of imprisonment from three to six years shall be imposed when robbery with force upon things is committed:

a) By two or more persons;

b) Under any of the circumstances established in subsections b), d), e) or i) for the crime of aggravated theft; or,

c) In an inhabited place or its dependencies with the presence of persons.

The penalty of imprisonment shall be from four to seven years when robbery with violence or intimidation upon persons is committed:

a) By two or more persons;

b) At night, in an unpopulated place, solitary or in a dwelling house;

c) With weapons or other equally dangerous means to commit the crime; or

d) Under any of the circumstances established in subsections b), d), e), f), g) or i) of the article on aggravated theft.

The penalty of imprisonment in its upper half shall be applied when two or more of the circumstances described in the preceding paragraphs concur.

Art. 226 Receiving Stolen Goods

Whoever purchases, receives or conceals goods or valuables originating from a crime, knowing their illicit origin, shall be punished with the penalty of imprisonment from one to three years or from fifty to three hundred days fine or work for the benefit of the community from ninety to three hundred days of two hours daily.

If the crime is committed by a merchant or intermediary in the financial sector, authority, public official or public employee in the exercise of their functions in a commercial establishment, or to traffic with the proceeds of the crime, the penalty shall be imprisonment from two to five years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise public employment or office, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalties established in the preceding paragraphs shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits when goods or valuables are received whose absence has caused interruption in basic services, affects the economy or national security.

CHAPTER III

ILLICIT TRAFFICKING IN VEHICLES

Art. 227 Illicit Trafficking in Vehicles

Whoever traffics, imports, exports, transports, stores or commercializes stolen or robbed vehicles or that have been the object of unlawful appropriation or retention, nationally or internationally, or parts thereof, shall be punished with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment.

The penalty shall be from four to seven years of imprisonment if the act is committed by a member of an organized criminal group or national or international gang.

The penalty shall be from four to eight years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period if the act is committed by an authority, public official or

public employee.

CHAPTER IV EXTORTION

Art. 228 Extortion

Whoever with the purpose of obtaining an illicit benefit, compels another with violence or intimidation to perform or omit an act or legal transaction, to the detriment of his patrimony or that of a third party, shall be punished with imprisonment from two to five years.

CHAPTER V

FRAUD

Art. 229 Fraud

Whoever, with the purpose of obtaining an illicit benefit for themselves or for a third party, by means of artifice or deceit, induces or maintains another person in error so that they make a total or partial disposition of their own or another's patrimony, provided that the value of the patrimonial damage exceeds the sum equivalent to two monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years and ninety to three hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever, with the purpose of obtaining an illicit benefit, achieves the non-consensual transfer of any patrimonial asset to the detriment of a third party, by means of manipulation of computer records or computer programs or the use of another similar artifice.

Art. 230 Aggravated fraud

Fraud shall be punished with imprisonment of three to six years and three hundred to five hundred days fine, in the following cases:

a) When its object consists of housing or land destined for the construction of such housing or other goods of recognized social utility;

b) When it is committed with abuse of the personal relations existing between the victim and the fraudster, or the latter takes advantage of their business or professional credibility;

c) When it affects goods that form part of the historical, cultural or scientific patrimony of the nation;

d) When it is carried out by an attorney-in-fact or administrator of a company that obtains, totally or partially, its resources from public savings, or by whoever, personally or through a registered or unregistered entity, of any nature, has obtained their resources totally or partially from public savings;

e) When the value of what was defrauded and the extent of the damage places the victim or their family in a serious deterioration of their standard of living;

f) When it is committed by using their own or another's credit or debit card, or with abuse of a signature in blank; or,

g) When it is carried out by means of a check, promissory note, bill of exchange in blank or fictitious exchange transaction.

Art. 231 Insurance fraud

Whoever, with the purpose of achieving for themselves or for another the improper collection of insurance or other illegal benefit, destroys, damages, simulates the disappearance or causes the disappearance of an insured thing, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and ninety to one hundred fifty days fine. If they achieve their purpose, the penalty shall be three to five years and one hundred fifty to three hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall apply to the insured person who with the same purpose inflicts or simulates an injury or aggravates the consequences of injuries suffered in a misfortune or to whoever simulates the disappearance of a person.

Art. 232 Issuance of check without funds

Whoever issues a check in any of the following circumstances shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year or thirty to three hundred days fine, if the act does not constitute the crime of aggravated fraud:

a) Without having provision of funds, except when there is express authorization from the bank to pay the overdraft;

b) If they give a stop-payment order, outside the cases in which the law authorizes;

c) Knowing that at the time of its presentation it cannot be legally paid.

For criminal action to be brought it shall be necessary that the check be rejected by the bank or corresponding credit institution, that the drawer has been personally informed of the non-payment, by means of notarial act, and that they do not pay the amount of the check plus the corresponding legal surcharges, within five calendar days following the notarial notification.

Payment of the check plus the corresponding legal surcharges, before the first instance judgment, shall extinguish the criminal action.

The issuance or transfer of a postdated check or delivered as guarantee shall not give rise to criminal action.

In no case shall the amount of the days fine penalty be less than the amount of the check plus the corresponding legal surcharges.

Art. 233 Stellionate

Imprisonment of one to four years and ninety to three hundred days fine shall be imposed on whoever:

a) Sells or encumbers as free goods that are litigious, seized or encumbered;

b) Sells, encumbers or leases as their own another's goods;

c) Sells, encumbers or leases illegitimately to different persons the same good;

d) By means of any legal act that is not alienation, whether by concealing, damaging or removing a good, makes impossible, uncertain or litigious the right or the fulfillment of an obligation agreed with another, for a price or as guarantee; and,

e) Damages or renders useless to the detriment of a third party, a movable good of their property or removes it from whoever legally has it in their possession.

Art. 234 Fraud in the delivery of things

Whoever deceives in the substance, quality or quantity of the things they must make or deliver, or of the materials they must use to carry out a work that has been entrusted to them, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and ninety to one hundred fifty days fine, when what was defrauded is greater than two minimum wages of the industrial sector.

The imprisonment penalty shall be three to five years and one hundred fifty to three hundred days fine when it involves products for mass consumption or distribution, basic or essential goods, objects of artistic value or others subject to official control.

If the value of the things to be made or delivered, or the materials to be used is greater than twenty minimum wages of the industrial sector, the penalty shall be three to seven years of imprisonment. The same penalty shall apply when it involves housing or public works.

Art. 235 Fraud by simulation

The same penalty as for the crime of fraud shall be imposed on whoever:

a) With simulation contracts, prepares writings or performs acts to the detriment of another and to obtain any undue benefit;

b) Constitutes themselves as debtor or guarantor and performs acts with the purpose of evading payment of the guarantee or the debt;

c) To the detriment of another's patrimony, carries out a simulation of litigation, proceeding or use of other procedural fraud.

Art. 236 Improper use of electric power, water and Telecommunications

Whoever by means of an illegal connection or having altered the control and measurement systems, obtains or uses for themselves or for a third party, the services of water, electricity, telecommunications or other public services, with damage to the supplying company or other users, for a monthly amount equal to or greater than three monthly wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and one hundred to three hundred days fine.

CHAPTER VI

FRAUDULENT ADMINISTRATION AND MISAPPROPRIATION

Art. 237 Fraudulent administration

The administrator in fact or in law of another's goods who harms their owner by altering in their accounts the prices or conditions of contracts, inventing operations or expenses or exaggerating those they had made, concealing or retaining assets or using them abusively or improperly, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years.

Art. 238 Misappropriation and improper retention

The penalties provided for the crime of fraud shall apply to whoever, having under their power or custody a movable good, patrimonial asset or value belonging to another, which exceeds the sum equivalent to two minimum wages of the industrial sector by a title that produces an obligation to deliver or return, appropriates it or does not deliver or return it in due time, under the pre-established conditions, to the detriment of another.

If there has been no appropriation, but rather improper use of the thing to the detriment of a third party, the penalty shall be six months to one year of imprisonment.

Art. 239 Irregular appropriation

Whoever shall be punished with thirty to one hundred eighty days fine or community service of thirty to one hundred fifty days of two hours daily:

a) Whoever appropriates a lost thing belonging to another without complying with the requirements prescribed by Law;

b) Whoever appropriates a thing belonging to another into whose possession he has come as a consequence of an error or a fortuitous event; and,

c) Whoever appropriates in whole or in part a discovered treasure, without delivering the portion that corresponds to the owner of the immovable property, in accordance with the Law.

CHAPTER VII USURPATION

Art. 240 Usurpation of private domain

A penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment shall be imposed on whoever:

a) By violence, intimidation, deceit or abuse of confidence dispossesses another, totally or partially, of the possession or holding of an immovable property or of the exercise of a real right constituted over it, whether the dispossession occurs by invading the immovable property, remaining in it or expelling the occupants;

b) To take possession of all or part of an immovable property, alters its terms or limits; or

c) By violence or intimidation, disturbs the possession or holding of an immovable property.

Art. 241 Usurpation of public or communal domain

Whoever shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years:

a) Without authorization, permanently occupies land or space corresponding to streets, roads, gardens, parks, promenades or other places of public domain, or vacant lands or any other real property of the State, of the Autonomous Regions of the Atlantic Coast or of the Municipalities;

b) Without being legally authorized, exploits veins, deposits, mantles and other mineral deposits;

c) Making use of concessions granted by law for a determined purpose, has entered into possession of land and uses it for a purpose different from that authorized, or, after exploiting the respective forest, abandons said land, without fulfilling the commitments acquired in relation to said exploitation;

d) Occupies communal lands or lands belonging to indigenous communities;

e) Whoever by acts of force restricts, limits or makes impossible passage through public roads that constitute access to a property, hamlet, community, town, lake, sea or river shores. Without prejudice to what may proceed, the Judge shall order immediate opening.

Art. 242 Usurpation of waters

A penalty of imprisonment of six months to two years or community service of forty-five to two hundred days of two hours daily shall be imposed on whoever:

a) Diverts in his favor waters that do not correspond to him, or takes them in greater quantity than that to which he had a right; and

b) Obstructs or prevents the exercise of the rights that a third party had over said waters, in accordance with the law of the matter.

CHAPTER VIII DAMAGES

Art. 243 Damage

Whoever destroys, renders useless, causes to disappear or in any way damages movable or immovable property, totally or partially belonging to another, provided that the act does not constitute another more severely punished crime, shall be sanctioned with imprisonment of six months to two years or ninety to three hundred days fine or community service of forty-five to two hundred days of two hours daily, considering the economic condition of the victim and the amount of the damage, if this exceeds two minimum monthly salaries of the industrial sector.

Art. 244 Aggravated damage

Imprisonment of two to three years shall be imposed when the damage:

a) Is executed to prevent the free exercise of authority or in revenge for its determinations;

b) Is caused to archives, registries, libraries, museums or other things of scientific, artistic, cultural, historical or religious value; to property for public use, commemorative signs or monuments, tombs and other constructions of cemeteries;

c) Falls upon means or routes of communication or transit, upon bridges or canals, upon production plants or conduits of water, electricity or energy substances;

d) Is executed with violence against persons or with intimidation;

e) Leaves the victim in serious economic situation;

f) Falls upon works, establishments or military or police installations, means of military transport or transmission, war material, supplies or other means or resources assigned to the service of the Army of Nicaragua or the National Police;

g) Produces infection or contagion in plants or animals;

h) Is perpetrated by three or more persons; or,

i) Is executed employing means, procedures or substances harmful to

health or the environment.
If the damage occurs to dwelling or house of habitation, the penalty shall be three to five years of imprisonment.

Art. 245 Destruction of computer records

Whoever destroys, erases or in any way renders useless computer records, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years or ninety to three hundred days fine.

The penalty shall be increased from three to five years, when it concerns information necessary for the provision of a public service or it concerns an official record.

Art. 246 Use of destructive programs

Whoever, with the intention of producing damage, acquires, distributes or puts into circulation destructive computer programs or instructions, that may cause harm to records, programs or computer equipment, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and three hundred to five hundred days fine.

CHAPTER IX

CRIMES AGAINST COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Art. 247 Unauthorized exercise of copyright and related rights

Whoever shall be sanctioned with ninety to one hundred fifty days fine or imprisonment of six months to two years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct, who contravening the law of the matter, and with the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit for himself or for a third party, performs any of the following acts without written authorization of the right holder:

a) The translation, arrangement, or other transformation of the work;

b) The public communication of a work or phonogram by any form, means or procedure, in whole or in part;

c) The retransmission, by any wired or wireless means of a broadcasting emission;

d) The reproduction of a greater number of copies than that established in the contract;

e) Distributing or communicating the work after the contract has ended;

f) The false attribution of authorship of a work;

g) The performance of any act that evades or attempts to evade a technological

measure implemented by the right holder to prevent unauthorized use of a work or phonogram;

h) The manufacture, importation, distribution and commercialization, or whoever provides mechanisms, devices, products or components, or offers installation services to evade technological measures set forth in the preceding literal;

i) The alteration, suppression of information on rights management; and

j) The importation, distribution, commercialization, rental or any other modality of distribution of works or phonograms whose information on rights management has been suppressed or altered.

Art. 248 Unlawful Reproduction

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable Law and with the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit for themselves or for a third party, performs any of the following acts without written authorization from the right holder, shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct:

a) The reproduction, total or partial, of a work or phonogram by any means, form or procedure;

b) The distribution of copies of a work or phonogram by means of sale, rental, public lending, importation, exportation or any other form of distribution;

c) The fixation of the performance of a performing artist; and

d) The fixation of a protected broadcast for its subsequent reproduction or distribution.

Art. 249 Offenses against Protected Satellite Signals

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law and with the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit for themselves or for a third party, performs any of the following acts without written authorization from the right holder:

a) The retransmission or distribution to the public of a program-carrying signal, whether by wired or wireless means or other similar means or procedure;

b) The decoding of an encoded program-carrying signal;

c) The fixation or reproduction of broadcasts;

d) The manufacture, assembly, modification, importation, exportation, sale, installation, maintenance, rental or any other form of distribution or commercialization of devices or systems that serve to decode an encoded program-carrying signal.

Anyone who engages in any of the aforementioned conducts shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years or a fine of three hundred to five hundred days and special disqualification for the same period to exercise the position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct.

Art. 250 Protection of Computer Programs

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law, manufactures, distributes or sells mechanisms or systems that permit or facilitate the unauthorized removal of technical devices that have been used to prevent the reproduction of computer programs, shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct.

Art. 251 Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

The penalties provided in the preceding articles shall be increased by one-third in their minimum and maximum limits when they apply to a work not intended for disclosure or when deformation, mutilation or other modification is carried out that affects or endangers the decorum or reputation of persons.

The penalties provided in the preceding articles shall be reduced by one-third if they are carried out without the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit for oneself or for a third party.

CHAPTER X

OFFENSES AGAINST INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY

Art. 252 Fraud Concerning Patent, Utility Model or Industrial Design

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law and without written authorization from the right holder, performs any of the following acts, shall be punished with a fine of ninety to three hundred days or imprisonment of one to two years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct:

a) Makes products appear as patented, protected by utility model or industrial design, when they are not;

b) Without being the holder of a patent, utility model or industrial design or without enjoying these privileges any longer, invokes it before a third party as if enjoying them.

Art. 253

Violation of Patent, Utility Model or Industrial Design Rights.
Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law and without written authorization from the right holder, performs any of the following acts, shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct:

a) The manufacture of a product protected by a patent or utility model, or a protected industrial design;

b) The use of a patented process for the manufacture of products obtained directly from the patented process;

c) The sale, distribution, importation, exportation or storage of a product protected by a patent or obtained by a patented process, knowing that they were manufactured or produced; and,

d) The sale, distribution, importation, exportation or storage of a product protected by a utility model, or that incorporates a protected industrial design, knowing that they were manufactured or produced.

Art. 254 Offenses against the Breeder's Right

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law and without written authorization from the right holder, produces, reproduces, prepares for the purposes of reproduction or multiplication, commercializes, exports, imports or donates reproductive or multiplication material of the protected plant variety, shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct.

Art. 255 Unlawful Commercial Use of Trademarks and Other Distinctive Signs

Anyone who, in violation of the applicable law and without written authorization from the right holder, performs any of the following acts, shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct:

a) The manufacture, sale, storage, distribution, importation, exportation of products or services that bear a registered trademark or distinctive sign or a servile copy or imitation thereof, as well as the modification thereof, if the trademark or distinctive sign is used in relation to the products or services distinguished by the protected sign;

b) The manufacture, reproduction, sale, storage or distribution of

labels, containers, wrappers, packaging or other similar materials that reproduce or contain a registered trademark or distinctive sign;

c) The use for commercial purposes of containers, wrappers or packaging that bear a registered trademark or distinctive sign with the purpose of giving the appearance that they contain the original product; and

d) The manufacture, sale, storage or distribution of the product that bears a false geographical indication or appellation of origin even when the true origin of the product is indicated or it is used accompanied by expressions such as "type," "kind," "manner," "imitation" or other similar expressions.

Art. 256

Violation of rights derived from ownership of layout-designs or topographies of integrated circuits
Whoever, in contravention of the law on the matter and without written authorization from the right holder, performs any of the following acts shall be punished with a fine of three hundred to five hundred days or imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct:

a) Reproduces by incorporation into an integrated circuit, or in any other manner, a protected layout-design, in its entirety or in any of its parts considered original.

b) Imports, exports, sells, distributes, stores a protected layout-design, an integrated circuit incorporating that layout-design, or an article containing an integrated circuit that in turn incorporates the protected layout-design.

Art. 257 Publication of judgments

Without prejudice to the criminal sanction imposed in this and the previous chapter, the Judge shall order, at the request of a party and at the expense of the infringer, the publication of the operative part of the judgment in one or more widely circulated newspapers, or failing that, by any other form or modality.

CAPÍTULO XI

PUNISHABLE BANKRUPTCIES AND INSOLVENCIES

Art. 258 Fraudulent bankruptcy

The person declared in fraudulent bankruptcy who, to the detriment of their creditors, performs any of the following acts shall be punished with imprisonment of two to six years and special disqualification to exercise the position, profession or trade for the same period:

a) Simulate or assume debts, disposals, expenses or losses;

b) Remove or conceal assets corresponding to the estate or fail to justify their departure or cancellation;

c) Grant undue advantages to any creditor with the purpose of feigning obligations;

d) Maliciously transfer or dispose of assets under any title before being declared in a state of bankruptcy;

e) Falsify balance sheets and financial statements;

f) Carry out negotiations with monetary instruments or assets with the intention of reducing or simulating a decrease in the estate;

g) Keep duplicate accounting books or keep them falsely;

h) Pay dividends from profits that manifestly did not exist, with the intent to diminish the company's equity;

i) Distribute fictitious dividends or profits that have not been received, or those whose distribution has been prohibited by competent authority.

This crime is also committed by the partner, director or officer who by reason of their vote or position or in any other manner, has procured advantages over the assets of the entity declared bankrupt or who as a consequence of their fraudulent action or operations, led to the bankruptcy of the company.

Art. 259 Negligent bankruptcy

Whoever has been declared bankrupt or caused the same through their own insolvency to the detriment of their creditors, as a consequence of their excessive expenses in relation to their own or third parties' assets, ruinous speculations, gambling, abandonment of their business or any other act of negligence or imprudence, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years and special disqualification for the same period, to exercise the position, profession, art or trade.

Art. 260 Fraudulent insolvency

The non-merchant debtor in civil insolvency proceedings who fraudulently conceals, alters, falsifies or deteriorates accounting information or equity situation in order to defraud their creditors, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to eighteen months.

Art. 261 Connivance

Whoever in their own name, by delegation or in representation of another natural or legal person, arranges with the debtor or with a third party illegal advantages for the assumption of acceptance of an arrangement, agreement or transaction,

shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years or a fine of ninety to one hundred fifty days.

The debtor or whoever acting in representation of a legal person, declared bankrupt or in civil insolvency proceedings, without judicial authorization or authorization from the insolvency bodies, performs any act of patrimonial disposition intended to pay one or several creditors with postponement of the rest, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years.

Art. 262 Evasion of civil liability derived from crime

The person responsible for any criminal act who, subsequent to its commission and with the purpose of evading compliance with civil liabilities arising from the criminal offense, performs acts of patrimonial disposition or contracts obligations that diminish their assets to the degree of becoming insolvent, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to five years.

CAPÍTULO XII USURY

Art. 263 Usury

Whoever in exchange for a loan or other legal obligation, in any form, for themselves or for others, charges interest or other pecuniary advantages or causes to be granted receipts or guarantees exceeding the interest rates established in the Law regulating loans between individuals, in the Law for the promotion and regulation of the use of credit cards and other laws on the matter, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years and a fine of one hundred to one thousand days.

The same penalty shall be applied to whoever acquires, transfers or enforces a usurious credit and to whoever demands from their debtors, in any form, an interest rate higher than that indicated in the preceding paragraph, even when the interest is concealed or disguised under other denominations, and to whoever capitalizes interest for the purpose of charging interest on interest.

The penalty shall be a fine of five hundred to one thousand days and imprisonment of two to five years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, commerce or trade, if the perpetrator is a habitual lender.

CAPÍTULO XIII

CRIMES AGAINST FREE COMPETITION AND CONSUMERS

Art. 264 Fraudulent offering of credit instruments

Whoever offers to the public bonds, shares or other types of obligations of commercial companies, concealing or hiding true facts or circumstances, or affirming false facts or circumstances, that may cause harm to a third party, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years and special disqualification for the same period of the sentence to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalty may be increased up to double in its minimum and maximum limits, when the crime is executed through an entity that makes public offerings of securities.

Art. 265 Publication and authorization of false balance sheets

The partner, director, manager, supervisor, auditor, accountant, or representative in fact or in law, of a company incorporated or in formation or of an individual merchant, who knowingly and to the detriment of another, authorizes or publishes a balance sheet, an income statement, reports or any other false or incomplete document relating to the equity situation of the company or the individual merchant, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a position, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalty may be increased up to double in its minimum and maximum limits, when the crime is executed through an entity that makes public offerings of securities.

Art. 266 Stock market price manipulation

Whoever, with the intent to obtain a benefit for himself or for a third party or to harm another, causes the price of securities tradable on the stock exchange to rise, fall or remain stable, by means of the assertion or simulation of false facts or circumstances or the distortion or concealment of true facts or circumstances, in such a way as to mislead about the essential characteristics or promising prospects of the investment or the issues, shall be punished with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment, and special disqualification for the same period to exercise office, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

Art. 267 Insider trading

Whoever, knowing by reason of his professional activity privileged information relating to securities tradable on the stock exchange, or their issuers or relating to securities markets, provides such information to another, acquires or disposes of, by himself or through a third party, securities of such issuers, with the purpose of obtaining an undue benefit for himself or for others, shall be punished with a penalty of one to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise the profession, trade, industry or commerce.

For the purposes of this article, privileged information is considered to be that which by its nature may influence the prices of the securities issued and which has not yet been made public knowledge.

Art. 268 Profiteering

Whoever to the detriment of another, raises or lowers the price of merchandise, securities or tariffs in the market, by means of fictitious transactions, false news, hoarding, destruction of products, raw materials, machinery or by means of agreements or arrangements with other producers, holders or

businessmen, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise office, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalty of imprisonment shall be three to eight years if it involves public services, basic necessities or medicines.

Art. 269 Shortage

Whoever with the purpose of obtaining an economic benefit, causes total or partial shortage or a situation of scarcity in the market, by means of hoarding or concealment, destruction of merchandise or unjustified interruption of services, shall be punished with three hundred to six hundred days fine and imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalty of six hundred to one thousand days fine and three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce shall be imposed, when it involves public services, food products, medicines or any other article of basic consumption or of first necessity.

Art. 270 Illegal sale of merchandise

Whoever, having under his custody, administration or distribution, goods destined for free distribution, illegitimately, sells or disposes of them, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years and three hundred to five hundred days fine. If the crime is committed in a time of public commotion or calamity, or is carried out by an authority, public official or employee, the penalty shall be three to eight years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise office, profession or trade.

Art. 271 Fraud in invoicing

Whoever, to the detriment of the consumer and by any means, alters invoices through the establishment of higher amounts for products or services, includes in it concepts of undue charges or alters the legally or contractually established values, or the instruments for measuring weights or measures to increase information with the same object or effect; shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years and three hundred to five hundred days fine.

The penalty shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits when the conduct involves articles of first necessity or public services.

Art. 272 Misleading advertising

Whoever by any advertising medium makes misleading statements about the nature, composition, origin, virtues or substantial qualities, discounts, conditions of the offer, prizes or recognitions received of the products or services advertised, capable in itself of misleading

the consumer or harming a competitor, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce, or, three hundred to five hundred days fine.

The fine shall be increased to double in its minimum and maximum limits, when it involves advertising related to food products, medicines or those destined for consumption or use by children.

Art. 273 Anticompetitive practices

Whoever, contravening the law of the matter, by means of agreements prevents, hinders or restricts free competition, endangering the economic stability of the country, or when the anticompetitive practice involves goods, products or services of first necessity through any of the following practices, shall be punished with six hundred to one thousand days fine and imprisonment of two to six years and special disqualification for the same period, to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce:

a)	The direct or indirect imposition of prices or other conditions of purchase or sale of goods or services, exchanging information with the same object or effect;

b)	The imposition of limitations or restrictions on the production, processing, distribution and marketing of goods or services;

c)	The division of markets, areas of supply, sources of procurement or of customers;

d)	Preventing, hindering or obstructing other economic agents from entering or remaining in a market or excluding them from it.

Art. 274 Unfair competition

Whoever by means of acts of denigration, fraudulent inducement or comparison, attempts to divert, for his own benefit or that of a third party, the clientele of an industrial or commercial establishment, to the detriment of a competitor or consumer, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years or three hundred to six hundred days fine.

Art. 275 Misappropriation of trade secrets

Whoever, for his own benefit or that of a third party, misappropriates by any means, information, data, written or electronic documents, computer records or other means or objects containing a trade secret, without authorization from its legitimate possessor or authorized user, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of two to four years or three hundred to six hundred days fine.

The provisions of this article shall be understood without prejudice to the penalties that may correspond for the acts of misappropriation or the damages

caused.

Art. 276 Disclosure of trade secret

Whoever having, legally or contractually, the obligation to maintain confidentiality, illegitimately disseminates, communicates, divulges, reveals or exploits a trade secret, shall be punished with a penalty of two to five years of imprisonment or five hundred to seven hundred days fine.

Art. 277 Improper use of trade secret

Whoever, with knowledge of its illicit origin, and without having participated in the misappropriation of the trade secret, carries out any of the conducts described in the two preceding articles, shall be punished with the penalties of imprisonment of six months to two years and three hundred to six hundred days fine.

CAPÍTULO XIV

CRIMES RELATING TO COMPANIES

Art. 278 Abusive Management

The director, manager, supervisor, auditor, legal representative, de facto or de jure administrator, or partner of a commercial or civil entity, with or without profit motive, who adopts or contributes to making any abusive decision or agreement for their own benefit or that of third parties, to the serious detriment of the company or entity, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period from exercising a profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The same penalty shall be imposed when the persons mentioned in the preceding paragraph alter accounts or financial information with the purpose of presenting a distorted situation in a manner capable of causing economic harm to the entity, to any of the partners or third parties.

Art. 279 Authorization of Improper Acts

The director, manager, supervisor, auditor or legal representative de jure or de facto, of a company constituted or in formation who, knowingly, lends their assistance or consent to the performance of acts contrary to the law or the bylaws, from which some harm may derive to their represented entity or the public, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and special disqualification for the same period from exercising office, profession, trade, industry or commerce.

The penalty may be increased up to double in its minimum and maximum limits, when the crime is executed through an entity that makes a public offering of securities.

Capítulo XV

Crimes against the banking and financial system

Art. 280 Crimes against the banking and financial system

The partner, director, manager, administrator, supervisor, external or internal auditor, legal representative, officer or employee of banks, non-bank financial institutions and financial groups, supervised by the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions, who knowingly or having a duty to know, directly or indirectly performs acts or operations, which, with abuse of their own functions, cause serious patrimonial harm to depositors, their clients, creditors, partners of their respective entity, to the stability of the Banking and Financial System or to the State, shall be punished with a penalty of six to eight years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising the profession, trade, industry or commerce for the same period and three hundred to one thousand days fine.

Those who knowingly or having a duty to know, conceal, alter, disfigure, distort or destroy information, data or records of financial balance sheets, minute books, accounting books, accounts, correspondence or other documents belonging to the institution, with the purpose of causing harm to it, or with the intention of avoiding or hindering the supervisory work of the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions or trying to prevent the patrimonial reality of the institution from being known or the origin of the invested capital from being truthfully identified, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising positions in the Financial System and three hundred to one thousand days fine.

A penalty of three hundred to five hundred days fine shall be imposed on whoever prevents or denies one or more partners from obtaining truthful information about the real patrimonial state of the business and the financial balance sheets.

A penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising positions in the Financial System and four hundred to one thousand days fine shall be imposed on the partner, director and any officer of the entities supervised by the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions who by their functions or position, authorizes and approves distribution of profits that are fictitious or that are not authorized or have been reasonably objected to by the Superintendent in accordance with the Law on the matter or that have not been effectively received, unless it is a distribution of accounting profits intended to be capitalized, subject to non-objection by the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions.

A penalty of four to six years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising positions in the Financial System and three hundred to six hundred days fine shall be imposed on the person who, with or without the participation of partners, directors and any officer of the entities supervised by

the Superintendency of Banks and Other Financial Institutions, performs fraudulent acts that seriously endanger the solvency, liquidity and stability of banking and non-bank financial entities, disseminates by any mass social media, unfounded rumors or unauthorized information, about the solvency, liquidity, and risks inherent to the Financial System, that threaten the stability and operation of any of the banking and non-bank financial entities.

If the acts indicated in the preceding paragraphs lead to the forced liquidation of one or more supervised entities, or seriously damage the National Financial System or the economy of the Nation, the penalty shall be ten to fifteen years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising positions in the Financial System and eight hundred to one thousand days fine.

CAPÍTULO XVI

CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC TRUST

Art. 281 Fraud in contests and other public acts

Whoever conspires with another to alter the price or other conditions in an auction, price contest, auction or public bidding or solicits or receives payment, pays or makes a promise of payment to participate or not participate in an auction, price contest, auction or public bidding shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising the activity related to the criminal activity for the same period.

A penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising the activity related to the criminal activity shall be imposed on whoever prevents or attempts to prevent the participation of another bidder or participant or tenderer by means of violence, intimidation or deceit, or, disseminates false or distorted news in any of the acts indicated in the preceding paragraph to obtain benefit for themselves or third parties.

CAPÍTULO XVII

MONEY LAUNDERING, GOODS OR ASSETS

Art. 282 Money laundering, goods or assets

Whoever knowingly or should know, by himself or through an intermediary, carries out any of the following activities:

a) Acquires, uses, converts, conceals, transfers, secures, holds in custody, administers, collects, safeguards, intermediates, sells, encumbers, donates, simulates or extinguishes obligations, invests, deposits or transfers money, goods or assets originating or substituting from illicit activities or any other act with the purpose of concealing or covering up their illicit origin, whether in a single act or by the repetition of related facts, regardless of whether any of these occurred within or outside the country;

b) Prevents in any way the actual determination of the nature, origin, provenance or connection of money, goods, assets, securities or interests generated from illicit activities; or advises, manages, finances, organizes fictitious companies and enterprises or performs acts with the purpose of concealing or covering up their illicit origin, whether in a single act or by the repetition of related facts, regardless of whether they occurred within or outside the country;

c) Provides false or incomplete information to, or from banking or non-banking financial entities, insurance, stock market, exchange, remittance, commercial or any other nature with the purpose of contracting services, opening accounts, making deposits, obtaining credits, conducting transactions or business of goods, assets or other resources, when these come from or have been obtained from any illicit activity in order to conceal or cover up their illicit origin;

d) Facilitates or lends his identification data or the name or business name of the company, enterprise or any other legal entity of which he is a partner or shareholder or with which he has any connection, whether or not legally constituted, regardless of its line of business, for the commission of the crime of money laundering, goods or assets or carries out any other front man activity;

e) Brings into or removes from the national territory goods or assets from illicit activities using customs or immigration posts: land, sea or air or any other point in the country;

f) Seriously breaches the duties of his position to facilitate the conduct described in the preceding paragraphs.

The foregoing conduct constitutes this crime when the preceding illicit activity is one that is punished at its upper maximum limit with a penalty of five or more years of imprisonment.

The crime of money laundering, goods or assets is autonomous with respect to its predicate crime and shall be prevented, investigated, prosecuted, adjudicated or sentenced by the competent authorities as such, in relation to the illicit activities from which it could originate, for which it will not be required that a prior criminal proceeding be substantiated in relation to the preceding illicit activity. For its prosecution it will be sufficient to demonstrate its connection with that from which it originates.

These conducts shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period for the exercise of the profession, trade or position, and a fine of one to three times the value of the money, goods or assets in question.

Art. 283 Aggravating circumstances

When the illicit activities that precede the crimes established in this Chapter are linked to or derived from crimes related to narcotics, psychotropic substances and other controlled substances or other crimes that have been committed by a member of an organized criminal group or national or international gang, unless the crime of organized crime concurs, a fine of three to six times the value of the money, goods or assets in question and imprisonment of seven to fifteen years and disqualification for the same period to exercise the profession, position or trade shall be imposed.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever knowingly or should know, receives or uses money, goods or assets or any financial resource from any illicit act provided for in the preceding article for the financing of political activities.

The prison sentences provided for in this Chapter shall be increased by up to one third when the foregoing crimes are committed by a director, partner, representative or employee of a legal entity or public official, authority or public employee.

TITLE VII CRIMES OF FALSITY

CHAPTER I FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS

Art. 284 Material falsification

Whoever makes in whole or in part a false document or alters a true one, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years, if it is a public document or instrument, and with imprisonment of six months to two years if it is a private document.

Art. 285 Ideological falsity

The penalties provided for material falsification of a public or private instrument or document are applicable to whoever inserts or causes to be inserted in a public document or instrument false declarations, concerning a fact that the document must prove.

Art. 286 Suppression, concealment and destruction of documents

Whoever suppresses, conceals or destroys, in whole or in part, a public or private document shall be punished with the penalties provided for the crime of material falsification, in the respective cases.

Art. 287 Equivalent documents

Whoever falsifies in whole or in part, suppresses, conceals or destroys a sealed will, a check, a bill of

exchange, shares or other documents or credit instruments transferable by endorsement or to the bearer shall be punished with the penalties provided for the falsification or alteration of public documents or instruments.

Art. 288 Falsity in medical certificates

A physician who issues a materially or ideologically false certificate, concerning the existence or non-existence, present or past, of any disease or injury shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification for the same period.

The penalty shall be two to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for an equal period to exercise the profession, if the false certificate has any of the following purposes:

a) That a healthy person be confined in a psychiatric hospital or other health establishment;

b) That an accused person evades a precautionary measure in a criminal case; or,

c) That a convicted person evades the imposed sanctions.

Art. 289 Use of false document

A penalty of imprisonment of six months to three years and fifty to two hundred days fine shall be imposed on whoever makes use of a false or altered document.

Art. 290 Aggravating circumstance

The penalties provided for in this Chapter shall be increased by up to one third when the foregoing crimes are committed by a public authority, official or employee in the exercise of their functions or on the occasion of their position.

CHAPTER II

FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY, SECURITIES AND STAMPED EFFECTS

Art. 291 Falsification of currency

Whoever manufactures, brings in, possesses, sells or distributes false national or foreign currency shall be punished with imprisonment of three to six years and six hundred to one thousand days fine.

The same penalty shall apply to those who falsify or alter negotiable securities or instruments issued by the State and to the good faith acquirer of these securities who, after their acquisition, becomes aware of their falsity and puts them into circulation, transferring them under any title.

For the purposes of this article, currency is understood to mean metallic currency and paper money in legal tender, national or foreign; credit cards, debit cards, traveler's checks, electronic account entries, national or municipal debt securities, national treasury bonds or bills and treasury bonds bills issued by a foreign government and any

other form of currency established in our legislation.

Art. 292 Forgery of postage stamps or fiscal stamps

Whoever forges postage stamps or fiscal stamps, or stamped paper, stamps of the national postal service, or any class of stamped effects whose issuance is reserved by law, or with knowledge of their falsity exports them, introduces them into the national territory, distributes or uses them, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years. The same penalty shall apply when the action concerns tickets of authorized lottery.

For the purposes of this article and the following ones, fraudulent printing of the genuine stamp shall be considered forgery.

Art. 293 Forgery of signs and marks

Whoever shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years:

a) Forges marks, seals or signatures officially used to verify weights or measures, identify any object or animal or certify its quality, quantity or content, date, expiration, sanitary registration and whoever applies them to objects other than those to which they should be applied;

b) Forges bonds, tickets, bills, vouchers, receipts, coupons of public or private service entities; or,

c) Forges, alters or suppresses the individualizing numbering of an object, registered in accordance with the law for security or fiscal reasons.

Art. 294 Fraudulent restoration of stamps

Whoever causes to disappear, in any of the stamps, fiscal stamps, marks or seals referred to in the preceding articles, the sign indicating that it has served or has been used for the purpose of its issuance, with the purpose of reusing it or selling it, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years or ninety to one hundred fifty days fine.

If the fraudulent restoration of stamps occurs in food or medicinal products, the penalty shall be two to four years of imprisonment.

The same penalty shall be incurred by whoever, knowingly, uses, causes to be used or offers for sale the voided effects referred to in the preceding paragraph.

Art. 295 Possession of instruments of forgery

Whoever manufactures, introduces into the country or keeps in his possession material or instruments intended to commit any of the forgeries provided for in this Title, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year or ninety to three hundred days fine.

CAPÍTULO III

USURPATION OF PUBLIC FUNCTIONS, PROFESSIONAL TITLES AND IMPROPER USE OF UNIFORMS AND INSIGNIA

Art. 296 Usurpation of public functions

Whoever shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification for the same period for the exercise of public office:

a) Assumes or exercises public functions, without appointment issued by competent authority, or without having been invested with the office;

b) After having ceased by operation of law in the performance of a public office or after having received from the competent authority official communication of the resolution that ordered the cessation or suspension of his functions and the official handover having been effected or refusing the same, continues exercising them;

c) Usurps functions corresponding to another office or organ.

Art. 297

Improper use of emblems, uniforms or equipment of the Army of Nicaragua and the National Police
Whoever improperly and publicly uses uniforms, insignia, official emblems or other equipment that simulate the belonging of its bearer to the Army of Nicaragua or the National Police, with the purpose of usurping the authority of these institutions, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to three years or fifty to two hundred days fine.

Art. 298 Illegal exercise of profession and usurpation of title

Whoever exercises acts proper to a profession whose exercise obligatorily requires possession of the academic title issued or recognized in Nicaragua and authorization in accordance with current legislation, shall incur the penalty of one hundred fifty to three hundred days fine.

Whoever having a professional title and being suspended in the exercise of his profession, exercises it, shall be imposed the penalty of ninety to one hundred fifty days fine and special disqualification to exercise the profession from one to three years.

TÍTULO VIII

CRIMES AGAINST THE CULTURAL HERITAGE OF THE NATION CAPÍTULO ÚNICO

Art. 299 Illegal trafficking of cultural heritage

Whoever traffics, transports, stores, commercializes or extracts from the country cultural goods, or in any way transfers goods described in the Law for the Protection of the Cultural Heritage of the Nation without authorization from the competent

organ, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to five years and five hundred to eight hundred days fine.

If the cultural, artistic or scientific work by its nature, quality and importance is considered irreplaceable or forms part of the cultural heritage of other States or forms part of the cultural heritage of humanity, the penalty of four to six years of imprisonment and six hundred to one thousand days fine shall be imposed.

For the purposes of this article, whoever acquires stolen or robbed cultural goods is considered author of the crimes indicated in the preceding paragraphs.

Art. 300 Exemption from penalty

If before the beginning of the oral and public trial hearing the stolen cultural, scientific or artistic goods are delivered to the Nicaraguan Institute of Culture, official museum, municipal mayor's office or university, exemption from penalty shall be granted.

Art. 301

Demolition or serious alteration of buildings of historical, artistic, cultural or monumental interest
Whoever in contravention of laws, regulations or urban planning regulations, demolishes or seriously alters a building or an urban or rural complex protected for its historical, artistic, cultural or monumental interest, shall be punished with the penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment.

Whoever being obligated to the conservation of a building or urban or rural complex indicated in the preceding paragraph, unjustifiably fails to maintain it or does not permit its maintenance, shall be imposed a penalty between fifty and two hundred days fine.

Art. 302 Crimes against cultural heritage committed by officials

When the acts described in the preceding articles are committed by an authority, official or public employee, in addition to the penalty applicable for each of the crimes, absolute disqualification to exercise public office for a period of six to twelve years shall be imposed on the author.

TÍTULO IX

CRIMES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TREASURY AND SOCIAL SECURITY

CAPÍTULO I TRIBUTARY CRIMES

Art. 303 Tax fraud

Whoever totally or partially evades payment of a fiscal obligation shall be punished with the penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment and a fine equivalent to double the value defrauded or attempted to defraud provided that the amount is greater than the sum of ten minimum wages of the industrial sector and not greater than twenty-five, when:

a) Illegally benefits from a fiscal incentive or tax refund;

b) Omits the duty to file a tax return or provides false information;

c) Conceals totally or partially the reality of his business as to production of goods and services or amounts of sales;

d) Fails to comply with the duty to issue invoices for sales made or receipts for professional services rendered; and

e) Omits payment of taxes by means of stamp or fiscal seals on documents determined by law.

When the amount defrauded or attempted to defraud exceeds the equivalent of twenty-five minimum wages of the industrial sector, the crime of tax fraud shall be punished with imprisonment of three to five years and a fine equivalent to double the value defrauded or attempted to defraud.

Art. 304 Determination for tax fraud

For the determination of the penalties referred to in the preceding article, only the amount defrauded or attempted to be defrauded within the same fiscal period shall be taken into account, even when it involves different tax obligations and various actions or omissions of those provided for in said article.

Art. 305 Misappropriation of tax withholding

The tax withholding agent authorized by the corresponding law who, through fraudulent alteration or concealment, does not remit the withheld tax, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of one to three times the value of the amount not remitted.

Art. 306 Fraud against regional and municipal treasuries

The provisions of the two preceding articles shall be applicable, as pertinent, in the case of tax obligations established by law in favor of the Autonomous Regions of the Atlantic Coast and the Municipalities of the country.

Art. 307 Customs fraud

Whoever, with the purpose of evading totally or partially the payment of import or export duties and taxes on goods and merchandise whose value in córdobas exceeds an amount equivalent to one hundred thousand Central American pesos, performs any act tending to defraud the application of the established tax charges, shall be punished with a penalty of three to six years of imprisonment and a fine equivalent to double the value of the goods or merchandise involved.

Art. 308 Smuggling

Whoever, with the purpose of evading totally or partially the payment of import or export duties and taxes on goods and merchandise whose value in córdobas exceeds an amount equivalent to one hundred thousand Central American pesos, introduces, disposes of, maintains or extracts them illegally from the national territory, shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment and a fine equivalent to double the value of the goods or merchandise involved.

Art. 309 Common provisions

The fines established in the preceding articles shall be paid without prejudice to the payment of the respective taxes.

When these crimes are committed by authorities, public officials or employees, the penalty of absolute disqualification for a period of six to ten years shall also be imposed, and if they are committed by other offenders, special disqualification of six months to three years shall be imposed to exercise a profession, trade, industry, commerce or right related to the criminal activity.

When the act is committed by a director, partner, participant or employee of a legal person for its benefit, in addition to the criminal liabilities incurred by the perpetrators and other participants, the legal person shall be subject to the fines and administrative and civil liabilities that they have incurred. In case of recidivism, the judicial authority may order the dissolution and liquidation of the legal personality.

Whoever, before the final judgment, fully settles the tax obligations shall be exempt from the corresponding penalty for the preceding crimes, without prejudice to the corresponding administrative sanctions. Authorities, public officials or employees or recidivists for this crime are excepted from this provision.

Art. 310 Accounting infractions

Whoever, being required by law to keep commercial accounting, books or tax records to satisfy obligations with the Treasury, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of ninety to one hundred twenty days:

a)	Keeps two or more similar books with different entries or data, even when they are auxiliary or unauthorized books, to record accounting, tax or corporate operations;

b)	Conceals, destroys, orders or permits the destruction, totally or partially, of the accounting books required by commercial laws or tax provisions, rendering them illegible; or,

c)	Substitutes or alters the numbered pages in the books referred to in

paragraph b).

In the event that the beneficiary of the accounting infraction is a legal person, the natural persons involved shall be liable for it.

In case of recidivism for this crime, the penalty shall be applied at its maximum upper limit and a penalty of community service work of thirty to one hundred days, for a period of not less than two hours per day.

CAPÍTULO II

CRIMES RELATED TO PUBLIC EXPENDITURE

Art. 311 Fraud in state subsidies, concessions or benefits

Whoever, through fraudulent alterations in accounting statements, concealment of the company's financial situation or false declarations under promise of law, obtains a subsidy, concession or state benefit exceeding the sum equivalent to twenty monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of three hundred to six hundred days.

Art. 312 Misuse of state subsidies, concessions or benefits

The same penalty of the preceding article shall be imposed on the holder of a subsidy, concession or state benefit exceeding the sum equivalent to twenty monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector who uses or applies the benefit, concession or subsidy distorting its purpose or destines it to activities or purposes different from those provided for in the motivation of the granting act.

CAPÍTULO III

CRIMES AGAINST SOCIAL SECURITY

Art. 313 Social security fraud

The employer who:

a)	Having deducted and withheld from his workers the labor quota for social security, does not remit it to the corresponding institution, shall be imposed a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment; or,

b)	Through fraudulent maneuver does not remit the due employer contribution to social security, shall be imposed a penalty of one to four years of imprisonment.

When the activities described above are carried out in the sphere of national, regional or municipal public administration, in addition to the penalties indicated, absolute disqualification of the responsible official for six to ten years shall be imposed.

Art. 314 Common Provisions

Whoever, before final judgment, settles the corresponding obligations with social security shall be exempt from penalty, when the contributions due do not exceed three continuous months, without prejudice to the corresponding administrative, civil and labor liabilities.

The penalty shall be reduced by one third when the perpetrator of the crime, before final judgment, fully settles the obligations with social security, without prejudice to the corresponding administrative, civil and labor sanctions.

Authorities, public officials or employees or recidivists for this crime are excepted from these provisions.

TÍTULO X

CRIMES AGAINST LABOR RIGHTS CAPÍTULO ÚNICO

Art. 315 Discrimination, servitude, exploitation

Whoever discriminates in employment on grounds of birth, nationality, political affiliation, race, ethnic origin, sexual orientation, gender, religion, opinion, economic position, disability, physical condition, or any other social condition, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year and ninety to one hundred fifty days fine.

Whoever subjects, reduces or maintains another person in slavery or conditions similar to slavery, forced or compulsory labor, servitude regime or any other situation contrary to human dignity, in labor activity, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years.

A penalty of imprisonment of five to eight years and one hundred fifty to three hundred days fine shall be imposed on those who traffic persons, with the purpose of subjecting them to labor exploitation activities, as well as forced recruitment to participate in armed conflicts.

The penalty for the offenses indicated in the preceding paragraphs shall be aggravated up to half of the maximum limit of the offense in question, when they are committed:

a)	To the detriment of boys or girls; or

b)	By means of violence or intimidation.

If both circumstances concur, the penalty shall be aggravated up to three quarters of the maximum limit of the respective offense.

Whoever hires for employment a person under eighteen years of age outside the cases authorized by law for purposes of labor exploitation, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment.

Art. 316 Reprisal

Whoever, in reprisal for the exercise of a labor right recognized in the Constitution, international instruments, laws, regulations or collective agreements, terminates the labor relationship or modifies it to the detriment of the worker, shall be punished with ninety to three hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall apply to the employer, manager or administrator who finances or promotes organizations intended to restrict or prevent the full freedom and autonomy of trade unions contemplated in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, international instruments, laws, regulations or collective agreements.

Art. 317 Safety at work

The employer, manager or administrator who, disregarding the firm indications or recommendations issued by competent authority relating to safety and hygiene at work, does not adopt the necessary measures to avoid danger to the life and health of workers or third parties, shall be punished with two to four years of imprisonment or three hundred to six hundred days fine.

Whoever employs or permits persons under eighteen years of age to perform work in unhealthy places and at risk to their life, health, physical, mental or moral integrity, such as work in mines, underground, garbage dumps, nighttime entertainment centers, those involving manipulation of machinery, equipment and dangerous tools, manual transport of heavy loads, toxic objects and substances, psychotropic substances and night shifts in general or in any other task contemplated as hazardous child labor, according to the corresponding regulations, shall be punished with a penalty of three to six years of imprisonment and four hundred to seven hundred days fine.

TÍTULO XI ILLEGAL MIGRATIONS

CAPÍTULO ÚNICO

Art. 318 Trafficking of illegal migrants

Whoever with the purpose of trafficking persons, enters, facilitates the exit or stay, transports, contracts or shelters illegal migrants knowing their condition, shall be punished with five to eight years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

If the offense is committed through negligence, the penalty to be imposed shall be three to five years of imprisonment.

If the perpetrator is an authority, public official or employee, the minimum and maximum limits of the previously provided penalties shall be increased by one third, in addition to special disqualification for the same period to exercise public office or employment.

TÍTULO XII

OFFENSES AGAINST COMMON SAFETY

Art. 319 Arson

CAPÍTULO I ARSON AND OTHER RAVAGES

Whoever sets fire to movable property with danger to the safety of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years.

If the fire is produced on immovable property, the penalty shall be two to five years of imprisonment.

If the immovable property referred to in the preceding paragraph is a dwelling house, educational center, public building, or places intended for religious worship or spectacle, at times when they are crowded, the penalty shall be four to eight years of imprisonment, without prejudice to the liability generated by other offenses produced on the occasion of the fire.

Art. 320 Ravages

Whoever causes damage of large proportions that entails a danger to the life or physical integrity of persons or public or private patrimonial property by means of explosion, flood, landslide, collapse of a building or by any other powerful means of destruction, shall be punished with the penalty of imprisonment of five to eight years.

Art. 321 Disabling of civil defense works

Whoever damages or disables dikes or other works intended for civil defense, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years.

The same penalty shall apply to whoever, in order to prevent or hinder civil defense tasks against a disaster, removes, conceals or disables materials, instruments or other means intended for civil defense.

The penalty shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits when the offense is committed by an authority, public official or employee.

Art. 322 Failure to observe safety rules

Whoever in the manufacture, handling, transport, possession or commercialization of explosives, flammable or corrosive substances, toxic, asphyxiating, nuclear materials, radioactive elements or organisms, or any

other matter, apparatus or devices that may cause ravages, contravenes the established safety standards, placing in concrete danger the life, physical integrity or health of persons, or the environment, shall be punished with the penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment and special disqualification of one to three years to exercise profession, industry, commerce or right related to the criminal activity.

Art. 323 Negligent disaster

Whoever through negligence causes any of the conducts provided for in the preceding articles, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to one year or ninety to one hundred fifty days fine.

Capítulo II

OFFENSES AGAINST TRANSPORT, POWER GENERATING PLANTS AND CONDUCTING MEANS

Art. 324 Danger to means of transport

Whoever executes any act that endangers the safety of a vessel, floating construction, air or land motor transport, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years.

If the act executed causes shipwreck, stranding or air or land disaster, the penalty shall be four to six years of imprisonment.

The preceding provisions shall apply even if the action falls upon one's own property, if from the act danger to the life, physical integrity or health of persons is derived and without prejudice to the penalties that may correspond for other results.

Art. 325 Attacks against energy plants or conductors

Whoever endangers life, physical integrity or health, in any of the following forms, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years:

a) Attacking works or installations intended for the production or transmission of electrical energy or energy substances;

b) Attacking the safety of energy conducting means;

c) Avoiding or preventing the repair of damage to works or installations referred to in paragraph a), or the restoration of interrupted energy conductors.

If a havoc or disaster results from those acts, the penalty shall be four to six years of imprisonment.

The acts provided for in this article shall also be punishable with imprisonment of four to six years, when they are executed with the purpose of preventing or

hindering defense or rescue tasks against a disaster occurred against works or installations of electrical energy or energy substances.

CHAPTER III

CRIMES AGAINST CIRCULATION, TRAFFIC SAFETY AND CONDUCTING MEANS

Art. 326

Driving or operation while intoxicated or under the effects of pharmaceuticals, drugs and other controlled psychotropic substances or alcoholic beverages
Whoever drives or operates any type of aerial, land or water vehicle, dedicated to collective transport or public service or heavy construction, agricultural or industrial vehicle, under the influence of pharmaceuticals, toxic drugs, narcotics, psychotropic substances or alcoholic beverages in such a way as to diminish their faculties, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and deprivation of the right to drive or operate vehicles for the same period.

In case of recidivism, in addition to the corresponding prison sentence, deprivation of the right to drive or operate vehicles shall be imposed for a period of up to ten years.

Art. 327 Obstruction of public services

Whoever creates a dangerous situation, preventing or seriously obstructing the normal functioning of transport by land, water and air, or that of public services for the provision of drinking water, electricity or other energy substances, or telecommunications, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years.

CHAPTER IV PIRACY

Art. 328 Piracy

Whoever shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years:

a) Practices at sea, in the air, in lakes or in navigable rivers, any act of depredation or violence against a vessel of any draft or aircraft, or against the persons or things found therein;

b) Being inside seizes any vessel, aircraft or what belongs to its cargo, luggage or equipment, by means of deceit or violence committed against its commander or person in charge thereof or its crew;

c) In connivance with pirates, delivers or facilitates the seizure of a vessel or aircraft, its cargo, goods or persons found therein;

d) With threats or violence, opposes or prevents the commander or crew from defending the vessel or aircraft attacked by pirates;

e) Knowingly and on their own or another's account, equips a vessel or aircraft intended for piracy;

f) Traffics with pirates or provides them with assistance from the territory of the Republic; or

g) Through violence, intimidation, prevents a vessel or aircraft from continuing its course or journey, diverting it from its route or unduly retaining it.

CHAPTER V COMMON PROVISIONS

Art. 329

Illicit manufacture or possession of explosive or radioactive instruments or materials
Whoever unlawfully, with the purpose of committing crimes against common safety, manufactures, supplies, acquires, removes or possesses bombs, booby traps, explosive or toxic materials, flammable or asphyxiating, radioactive elements, or generators of ionizing radiation or other substances or materials intended for their preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years.

TITLE XIII

CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 330

Manufacture and commercialization of harmful substances or substances of restricted use Whoever, without being authorized by the competent body, manufactures, dispenses, supplies or commercializes substances harmful to health or of restricted use, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise, as the case may be, profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the criminal conduct.

Art. 331 Non-compliance with prescribed formalities

Whoever being authorized for the traffic of the substances or products referred to in the preceding article, supplies or dispenses them without complying with the formalities provided for in the respective laws and regulations, endangering the life, physical integrity and health of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years and special disqualification, as the case may be, to exercise profession, trade, industry, commerce or right related to the criminal conduct for the same period.

Art. 332 Commercialization of adulterated, expired or deteriorated pharmaceuticals

Whoever knowingly supplies, imports, distributes or commercializes adulterated, expired or deteriorated medicines, or fails to comply with technical requirements relating to their storage, composition, stability and efficacy or substitutes one for another, endangering the life, physical integrity or health of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years and special disqualification of one to three years for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry, commerce or right related to the conduct.

Art. 333 Manufacture and commercialization of unauthorized pharmaceuticals

Whoever introduces, sells, manufactures, stores, supplies, commercializes or prescribes pharmaceuticals without the proper sanitary registration of Nicaragua, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years, and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be.

Art. 334 Adulteration of medicines

Whoever alters the quantity, dose or original composition of a medicine with respect to what is authorized and declared on its label, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be.

Art. 335 Simulation of pharmaceuticals

Whoever with the purpose of commercializing or using in any manner, imitates or simulates medicines giving them the appearance of genuine ones, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever, knowing of the alteration of the substance and with the purpose of selling them or destining them for use by other persons, keeps in storage, announces, advertises, offers, exhibits, sells, facilitates or uses in any form the adulterated or simulated medicines or substances, endangering the life or health of persons.

When the crimes indicated in this article are committed by pharmacists or technical directors of legally authorized laboratories in whose name or representation they act, the penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct shall be imposed.

Art. 336 Adulteration of food

Whoever uses in foods, substances or beverages intended for human consumption additives or other unauthorized agents capable of causing harm to the health of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and disqualification for the same period from exercising profession, trade,

industry, commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be.

Art. 337

Marketing of expired, spoiled food or food without sanitary authorization
Whoever introduces, exports, distributes or markets packaged foods without sanitary registration, expired or spoiled, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment.

Art. 338 Contamination and sale of meat unfit for consumption

The penalty of one to three years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period from exercising profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be, shall be imposed on whoever:

a)	Administers to animals whose meats or products are intended for human consumption, additives or unauthorized substances, prohibited or in doses higher than permitted, that create risk to the life or health of persons;

b)	Slaughters animals and destines their products for human consumption knowing that the substances mentioned in the preceding paragraph have been administered to them, or that they are carriers of diseases capable of producing alterations in the health of persons; or

c)	Sells animals or products derived from animals, for human consumption, with knowledge that they are carriers of transmissible diseases capable of altering health.

The public official or employee who authorizes the slaughter, sale or marketing of animals or products derived from animals, under the conditions described above, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification for the same period from exercising position, profession or trade.

Art. 339 Slaughter of animals without sanitary control

Whoever slaughters animals for marketing without proper authorization and sanitary supervision, causing risk to the life or health of persons, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years and special disqualification for the same period from exercising profession, trade, industry or commerce related to the conduct, as the case may be.

Art. 340 Poisoning of water and food

Whoever poisons or contaminates water or food, intended for human consumption, with serious risk to health, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years.

Art. 341 Irrigation with contaminated or residual water

Whoever knowingly irrigates with contaminated or untreated residual water any type of crop intended for human or animal consumption, shall be punished with the penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment or fifty to two hundred days fine.

Art. 342 Contamination by blood transfusion

Whoever knowingly and on the occasion of a blood transfusion or one of its derivatives or in the preparatory process to carry out this activity, contaminates the recipient person with some disease or condition transmissible by this route, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to five years and disqualification for the same period from exercising profession or trade related to the conduct.

When the foregoing conducts produce an incurable disease the penalties shall be increased by one third, in their minimum and maximum limits.

Whoever, knowingly, applies to a recipient person a type of blood that is not compatible with their blood type, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to five years and disqualification for the same period from exercising profession or trade related to the conduct.

Art. 343 Liability for recklessness

When any of the acts provided for in the preceding articles of this Chapter is committed by reckless imprudence, a mitigated penalty shall be imposed, whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the penalty that the crime in question deserves and its minimum limit one third thereof.

Art. 344 Illegal practice of medicine or related professions

Whoever shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years and ninety to three hundred days fine:

a)	Without title or authorization for the practice of the medical profession or related professions, announces, prescribes, administers or habitually applies any real or supposed means intended for the diagnosis, prognosis, treatment, therapy or prevention of diseases of persons, even if done free of charge; or

b)	Having title or authorization for the practice of medicine or related professions, lends their name to another who lacks those so that they may exercise the acts referred to in the preceding paragraph. In addition, special disqualification of one to four years shall be imposed from exercising profession or trade related to the conduct.

Traditional healing uses and customs, alternative therapies whose efficacy is proven, and those attributable to acts of faith that do not threaten the life or integrity of persons are not punishable.

Art. 345 Experiments on human beings

Whoever conducts medical, chemical, biochemical, physiological or psychological experiments on a person, without the consent of that person, and without authorization from the competent body, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification of six to eight years from exercising profession or trade related to the conduct.

If the experiments had been conducted on a group of more than ten persons, imprisonment of four to six years shall be imposed and the special disqualification penalty indicated shall have a duration of eight to ten years.

If the experiment had consisted of the free distribution or public sale of drugs or medicinal substances, not scientifically proven, or whose main or secondary effects are unknown, imprisonment of six to ten years and special disqualification of ten to fifteen years from exercising profession or trade related to the conduct shall be imposed. The same penalties shall apply to the public official who authorizes the distribution to the public of drugs or medicinal substances under those circumstances.

If the experiment is suitable to put at risk the health of persons, the penalties provided in the preceding paragraphs shall be increased by one third.

Art. 346 Trafficking and extraction of human organs and tissues

Whoever without the corresponding authorization imports, exports, traffics or extracts human organs or tissues, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and special disqualification for the same period from the exercise of the profession, trade or activity, related to the conduct. If the human organs or tissues came from a minor under eighteen years of age, the penalty shall be six to twelve years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period.

The same penalty shall be incurred by whoever traffics with gametes, zygotes or human embryos, obtained in any manner or under any title.

The foregoing penalties shall be imposed without prejudice to those that correspond in case of crimes against life or physical integrity.

Art. 347 Aggravating circumstances

When the conducts indicated in this Chapter are carried out by authority, public official or employee in the exercise of their position, the indicated penalties shall be increased by one third.

TITLE XIV

CRIMES RELATED TO NARCOTICS, PSYCHOTROPICS AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES

SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 348

Illicit financing of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and controlled substances
Whoever illicitly finances the planting, cultivation, harvesting, storage, trafficking, elaboration, manufacture, transportation or commercialization of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and controlled substances or the seeds or plants from which they are extracted, or the illicit use of precursors, chemicals, solvents or other agents necessary for their obtaining, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to twenty-five years and a proportional fine of five to ten times the value of what was financed.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever finances the leasing, construction or purchase of movable and immovable property, and infrastructure in general, for the same purpose.

Art. 349

Production of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances
Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation or commerce, illicitly plants, cultivates or harvests plants or seeds from which the controlled substances described in the preceding article can be obtained, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and one hundred to one thousand days fine.

Art. 350 Production, possession or illicit trafficking of precursors

Whoever illicitly introduces into the country or extracts from it, re-exports, transports, diverts, manufactures, stores, commercializes or has in his possession precursors, chemicals, solvents or other necessary agents with the purpose of using them for the processing of narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of one to ten times the market value of the precursors.

Art. 351

Industrialization or illegal processing of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances
Whoever illicitly, through any procedure, whether industrial or artisanal, extracts, elaborates, transforms or modifies raw material to obtain narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances shall be punished with imprisonment of five to twenty years and one hundred to one thousand days fine.

Art. 352

Illegal transport of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances
Whoever, by himself or through an intermediary, transports narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to fifteen years and three hundred to one thousand days fine.

A penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment shall be imposed on whoever, for the same purpose, prepares, conceals, guides, guards, or conditions the necessary means to carry out the conducts established in the preceding paragraph.

When the transport is international, the penalty to be imposed shall be ten to twenty years of imprisonment, and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

For the purposes of this article, any means shall be understood as a means for transport, whether terrestrial, aerial, maritime, fluvial, or any other object that can be used for the intended purpose.

Art. 353

Transfer of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances
Whoever carries on his body, attached to it or hidden in his clothing, narcotics, psychotropic drugs or other controlled substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to eight years.

Art. 354 Construction or facilitation of runways or landing sites

Whoever knowingly constructs, has constructed or permits to be constructed or facilitates the construction or use of runways or landing sites, to be used in the trafficking, transport or transfer of narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to twenty years of imprisonment and three hundred to eight hundred days fine.

Art. 355

Storage of narcotics, psychotropic drugs or other controlled substances
Whoever knowingly or should know, without being legally authorized, by himself or through an intermediary, keeps, guards, conceals or stores narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to fifteen years and one hundred to one thousand days fine.

Art. 356

Promotion or encouragement for the consumption of psychotropic narcotics or other controlled substances
Whoever by any means propagandizes, incites or induces others to consume narcotics, psychotropic drugs or other controlled substances or offers or gives them away, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and one hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 357

Supply of products containing aromatic hydrocarbons or similar substances
Whoever knowingly or should know, supplies to any person products containing aromatic hydrocarbons or similar substances that produce toxic effects, for the purpose of inhalation, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and one hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 358

Possession or holding of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances
Whoever is found in possession of or is proven to hold narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances, in quantities exceeding five grams and less than twenty grams in the case of marijuana, and exceeding one gram and less than five grams in the case of

cocaine or any other controlled substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to three years and fifty to one hundred days fine.

If the seized substances exceed the limits of twenty grams in the case of marijuana and five grams in the case of cocaine or any other controlled substance, the penalty to be imposed shall be three to eight years of imprisonment and one hundred to three hundred days fine.

Art. 359 Trafficking of narcotics, psychotropic drugs and controlled substances

Whoever illicitly distributes, sells, exchanges, dispenses, offers for sale or in any other way commercializes narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to fifteen years and three hundred to eight hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall be imposed on owners, administrators or any employee or whoever provides services to the establishment, who knowing or should know and directly or indirectly, permits or facilitates the foregoing conduct in their respective premises.

When the trafficking of these substances is carried out at the international level, introducing them, extracting them or in transit through the national territory, a penalty of ten to twenty years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine shall be imposed.

Art. 360 Provocation, proposition and conspiracy

The proposition, provocation or conspiracy expressed by any means, to commit any of the illicit acts established in this chapter, shall be punished with a penalty equivalent to one-third of the penalty established for the crime that is proposed, provoked or conspired.

Art. 361 Common provisions

Whoever with knowledge of the cause facilitates properties of any type to store, elaborate, manufacture, cultivate or transform narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances or facilitates means for their transport, shall be considered a co-author of the foregoing crimes, and shall be punished with the corresponding penalty for the crime in question.

For purposes of this chapter, the narcotics, psychotropic drugs, controlled substances and precursors referred to in the preceding articles are those contained in the Law on the matter and those defined by the Ministry of Health.

Art. 362 Aggravating circumstances

The minimum and maximum limits of the penalties established in this Chapter shall be increased by one third when:

a) The offense is committed to the detriment of persons under eighteen years of age or incapacitated persons;

b) A minor or incapacitated person is used to commit an offense;

c) The criminal act is committed in educational, welfare, cultural, sports or recreational centers, as well as military or police units, prison establishments, religious centers or in places located less than one hundred meters from the aforementioned places;

d) The perpetrators belong to an organized criminal group or national or international gang dedicated to committing the offenses referred to in this Chapter, unless the offense of organized crime is present; or

e) It is committed by an authority, public official or public employee.

TITLE XV

PROHIBITED CONSTRUCTIONS AND OFFENSES AGAINST NATURE AND THE ENVIRONMENT

CHAPTER I PROHIBITED CONSTRUCTIONS

Art. 363 Construction in prohibited places

Whoever subdivides, constructs or has constructed a building on land designated for green areas, property in the public domain or places that have legally or administratively recognized landscape, ecological, artistic, historical or cultural value, or that for the same reasons have been considered specially protected, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years or from three hundred to six hundred days fine and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a profession, trade, industry, commerce or right related to the criminal conduct.

Whoever subdivides, urbanizes or constructs on unauthorized or hazardous land, failing to comply with existing regulations and seriously endangering the environment or the property and life of the population, shall be punished with imprisonment from three to six years and from six hundred to nine hundred days fine and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a profession, trade, industry, commerce or right related to the criminal conduct.

In both cases, the Judge shall order the demolition of the work at the expense of the convicted person.

The same penalties shall be imposed on the authority, official or public employee who, knowing of its illegality, has approved, by himself or as a member of a collegiate body, an authorization, license or concession that has permitted the commission of the described conducts or who, in the course of his inspections, has remained silent about the violation of the laws, regulations and other general normative provisions that regulate it.

Art. 364 Alteration of the natural environment or landscape

Whoever significantly alters or disturbs the urban or rural natural environment and landscape, its perspective, beauty and panoramic visibility, through modifications to the land, signs or advertisements of any kind, installation of antennas, poles and transmission towers for electrical energy or communications, without having the Environmental Impact Study or the corresponding authorizations, or outside the cases provided for in the study or authorization, shall be punished with one hundred to three hundred days fine. In this case, the judicial authority shall order the removal of the objects at the expense of the convicted person.

CHAPTER II

OFFENSES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES

Art. 365 Contamination of soil and subsoil

Whoever, directly or indirectly, without due authorization from the competent authority, and in contravention of the respective technical standards, discharges, deposits or infiltrates or permits the discharge, deposit or infiltration of wastewater, liquids or chemical or biochemical materials, waste or toxic contaminants into the soil or subsoil, with danger or damage to health, natural resources, biodiversity, water quality or ecosystems in general, shall be punished with imprisonment from two to five years and from one hundred to one thousand days fine.

The penalties established in this article shall be reduced by one third at their minimum and maximum limits, when the offense is committed through reckless imprudence.

Art. 366 Contamination of waters

Whoever, directly or indirectly, without due authorization from the competent authority and in contravention of the respective technical standards, discharges, deposits or infiltrates or permits the discharge, deposit or infiltration of wastewater, liquids or chemical or biochemical materials, waste or toxic contaminants into marine waters, rivers, basins and other water deposits or currents with danger or damage to health, natural resources, biodiversity, water quality or ecosystems in general, shall be punished with imprisonment from two to five years and from one hundred to one thousand days fine.

The penalty of four to seven years of imprisonment shall be imposed when, for the purpose of concealing water contamination, volumes of water greater than those generated by wastewater discharges are used, thus contravening the technical standards that establish the particular conditions of discharges in environmental matters.

The penalties established in this article shall be reduced by one third at their minimum and maximum limits, when the offense is committed through reckless imprudence.

Art. 367 Atmospheric contamination

Whoever without due authorization from the competent authority and in contravention of the respective technical standards, through the use or burning of solid and liquid, chemical or biochemical or toxic materials, generates or discharges point or continuous emissions that contaminate the atmosphere and air with gases, smoke, dust or contaminants with serious damage to the health of persons, to natural resources, to biodiversity or to ecosystems shall be punished with imprisonment from three to five years and from one hundred to one thousand days fine.

The penalties established in this article shall be reduced by one third at their minimum and maximum limits, when the offense is committed through reckless imprudence.

Art. 368

Transport of toxic, hazardous or contaminating materials and waste
Whoever transports in any form toxic, hazardous and contaminating materials and waste or authorizes or orders the transport of these materials or substances in contravention of the legal provisions in force regarding environmental protection in such a way as to endanger or damage the health of persons or the environment, shall be imposed a penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment and from one hundred to five hundred days fine.

The penalties established in this article shall be reduced by one third at their minimum and maximum limits, when the offense is committed through reckless imprudence.

Art. 369

Storage or handling of toxic, hazardous, explosive, radioactive or contaminating substances
Whoever without complying with the measures and precautions established in current legislation in such a way as to endanger or damage the life or health of the population or the environment or natural resources; stores, distributes, markets, handles or uses gasoline, diesel, kerosene or other petroleum derivatives, butane gas, insecticides, fertilizers, pesticides or any other agrochemical, toxic, hazardous, explosive, radioactive or contaminating substances, shall be punished with one hundred to one thousand days fine and imprisonment from three to five years and special disqualification for the same period to exercise a trade, art, profession or commercial or industrial activity.

The penalties established in this article shall be reduced by one third at their minimum and maximum limits, when the offense is committed through reckless imprudence.

Art. 370 Special aggravating circumstances

The minimum and maximum limits of the penalties established in the preceding articles shall be increased by one third, when the offense:

a)	Affects water reservoirs intended for human consumption;

b)	Produces the destruction of mangroves or the filling of natural or artificial lagoons or estuaries or any type of wetlands;

c)	Affects the soils and subsoils of population settlements and the health of persons;

d)	Is carried out within protected areas and buffer zones;

e)	Destroys totally or partially coastal maritime, lacustrine or fluvial ecosystems;

f)	Is carried out in areas declared by the competent authority as having special biological, ecological, educational, scientific, historical, cultural, recreational, archaeological, aesthetic or economic development value;

g)	Causes direct or indirect damage to a hydrographic basin;

h)	Affects hydrobiological resources;

i)	Involves the burning of solid, liquid, chemical and biological materials in streets or avenues of cities, population centers or urban properties;

j)	Causes contagious diseases that constitute a danger to persons and wildlife species;

k)	Is carried out with substances, products, elements or materials that are carcinogenic or alter the genetics of persons;

l)	Is carried out with substances, products, elements or materials that cause risks of explosion, or are flammable or substantially radioactive.

Art. 371 Violation of the provisions of environmental impact studies

Whoever alters, damages or degrades the environment by failure to comply with the limits and provisions of an environmental impact study approved by the competent authority, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and special disqualification for the same period for the exercise of the activity, trade, profession or art, employment or position.

Art. 372 Incorporation or supply of false information

Whoever, being authorized to prepare or conduct environmental impact studies, incorporates or supplies false information in documents, reports, studies, declarations, audits, programs or reports that are communicated to the competent authorities and on that occasion an authorization is produced for a project or work to be carried out or developed that generates damage to the environment or its components, to the health of persons or to the integrity of ecological processes, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment.

The authority, official or public employee in charge of the approval, review, oversight or monitoring of environmental impact studies who, knowingly, incorporates or permits the incorporation or supply of false information referred to in the preceding paragraph, shall be punished with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period for the exercise of public office.

CAPÍTULO III

OFFENSES AGAINST NATURAL RESOURCES

Art. 373 Illegal exploitation of natural resources

Whoever, without authorization from the competent authority or exceeding what is authorized, exploits, conceals, trades, exploits, transports, traffics or benefits from the specimens, products or parts of fauna resources, forest resources, floristic, hydrobiological, genetic and mineral substances, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years of imprisonment and one hundred to three hundred days fine.

Art. 374 Diversion and illicit exploitation of waters

Whoever, without authorization from the competent authority or exceeding what is authorized, constructs dikes, retaining walls, drills, obstructs, retains, exploits, diverts or causes to diminish the free flow of waters of rivers, streams or other natural drainage channels or of the subsoil, or in management zones, closed seasons or natural reserves in a permanent manner, directly affecting ecosystems, the health of the population or economic activities, shall be punished with a penalty of one to three years of imprisonment and one hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 375 Fishing during closed season

Whoever fishes or carries out activities of extraction, collection, capture, trade or transport of hydrobiological resources, in prohibited areas or during closed season, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to two years.

The minimum and maximum limits of the penalty of the preceding paragraph shall be increased by double, if in carrying out the act unauthorized or prohibited gear is used by the competent authority, or specimens declared threatened or in danger of extinction are captured or extracted in accordance with

national legislation and international instruments to which Nicaragua is a party, or that do not comply with the minimum catch sizes and weights established by the competent authority.

Whoever captures or extracts specimens of hydrobiological resources that do not comply with the minimum sizes and weights established in the corresponding laws, even if not during closed season, shall be punished with a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

Art. 376 Transshipment of fish or discard at high seas

Whoever transships fishing products at high seas or does not land them in Nicaraguan ports, shall be punished with three to five years of imprisonment.

With the same penalty shall be punished whoever carries out massive discards of fishing products to the sea or captures sharks in continental, maritime, lacustrine waters or any other body of water, solely to cut off their fins or tail.

In the cases of the preceding paragraphs, in the conviction sentence, the Judge shall order the definitive cancellation of the license granted for the fishing activities on the occasion of which the offense was committed.

Art. 377 Fishing without conservation devices

Whoever, authorized for fishing, carries out fishing activities without having installed in their vessels the conservation and protection devices for species established by national legislation and international instruments to which the State is a party, shall be punished with two to four years of imprisonment.

Art. 378 Fishing with explosives or other destructive form of fishing

Whoever fishes with explosive elements, poisons or carries out fishing activities with methods that permit the indiscriminate destruction of species, as well as the use of gillnets in inlets or natural reefs shall be punished with two to four years of imprisonment.

Art. 379 Fishing with unauthorized foreign flag

Whoever carries out fishing activities with industrial or artisanal vessels of foreign flag without due authorization, shall be punished with three to five years of imprisonment.

Art. 380 Hunting of animals in danger of extinction

Whoever hunts animals that have been declared in danger of extinction by international instruments ratified by the State, or defined as such by law or by administrative provision, shall be punished with a penalty of one to four years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

The minimum and maximum limits of the penalty provided in the preceding paragraph shall be

increased by double, if the activity is carried out in protected areas.

If the hunting is carried out on species of animals that are not in danger of extinction, but without the permission of the competent authority or in protected areas, one hundred to four hundred days fine shall be imposed.

Art. 381 Commercialization of fauna and flora

Whoever, without authorization from the competent authority, commercializes or sells species of wild fauna or flora that are not catalogued by law or administrative provision as endangered species or restricted for commercialization, shall be punished with fifty to one hundred days fine.

The preceding paragraph does not apply to fishing or hunting for rational self-consumption, when it does not involve species or subspecies in danger of extinction or is not carried out in national, ecological or municipal parks and wildlife refuges.

Art. 382 Aggravating circumstance

The penalties indicated in the two preceding articles shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits when the hunting or commercialization of species is destined for international traffic or trade.

Art. 383 Forest fires

Whoever provokes a forest fire or incites others to carry out a forest fire, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

Whoever, being authorized by competent authority and due to imprudence, carries out agricultural burns that cause damage outside the areas designated to carry out such burning, shall be punished with fifty to two hundred days fine.

Whoever, without authorization from competent authority, carries out agricultural burns and causes damage in forest areas shall be punished with the penalties provided in the first paragraph, whose greater and lesser extremes shall be increased to double.

Controlled burns authorized by the competent authority, nor damage produced as a consequence of a fortuitous or unexpected situation, shall not constitute a crime.

Art. 384 Cutting, exploitation and forest ban

Whoever, without the corresponding authorization, destroys, removes totally or partially, trees or plants on state lands, vacant lands, communal lands, private property and public roads, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

Whoever, without the corresponding authorization, clear-cuts trees on

lands defined as forest, or of forest vocation, shall be punished with a penalty of two to five years of imprisonment and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

Whoever authorizes clear-cutting in areas defined as forest or of forest vocation to change the vocation of land use, shall be punished with a penalty of three to seven years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise employment or public office.

If the activities described in the preceding paragraphs are carried out in protected areas, the penalty shall be four to ten years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

Exploitation carried out for domestic use or consumption purposes, in accordance with the legislation on the matter, shall not constitute a crime.

Whoever cuts species under ban, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to seven years.

Art. 385 Cutting on watersheds and slopes

Whoever, even if the owner, deforests, cuts or destroys trees or shrubs, in areas designated for the protection of watersheds or natural springs or slopes determined by the law on the matter, shall be punished with a penalty of two to five years of imprisonment and five hundred to one thousand days fine.

Art. 386 Illegal cutting, transport and commercialization of timber

Whoever cuts, transports or commercializes forest resources without the respective permit from the competent authority, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and five hundred to eight hundred days fine.

Art. 387 Cutting or pruning of trees in urban areas

Whoever cuts or destructively prunes one or more trees on the edges of highways, avenues, streets or boulevards, electrical or telecommunications line easements, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to four years of imprisonment.

Art. 388 Non-compliance with Environmental Impact Study

Whoever deforests, cuts or destroys, removes totally or partially herbaceous vegetation, or trees, without complying, when applicable, with the Environmental Impact Studies (EIA) and the technical and environmental regulations established by the competent authority, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to four years and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 389 Restitution, reparation and compensation for environmental damage

In the case of crimes contemplated in this Title, the Judge must order at the expense of the author or authors of the act and according to the principle of proportionality one of the following measures in order of priority:

a)	Restitution to the state prior to the production of the punishable act:
b)	Reparation of the environmental damage caused; and
c)	Total compensation for the environmental damage produced.

If the crimes were committed through a legal person, the accessory consequences that fall upon the legal person provided in this Code shall also be applied.

Art. 390

Introduction of invasive species, biological or biochemical agents Whoever, without authorization, introduces, uses or propagates in the country invasive species of flora and fauna, biological or biochemical agents capable of significantly altering animal or plant populations or endangering their existence, in addition to causing damage to the ecosystem and biodiversity, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years of imprisonment and a fine of five hundred to one thousand days.

CHAPTER IV ANIMAL CRUELTY

Art. 391 Physical harm or cruelty to animals

Whoever mistreats, subjects to cruel treatment or is cruel to an animal of any species, whether domestic or not, and regardless of their use or purpose, even if their property, causing physical harm by blows, punishments or manifestly excessive work that leads it to suffer impediments or causes damage to its health, stress or death, shall be punished with fifty to two hundred days fine or community service work of ten to twenty days for a period of not less than two hours daily.

Whoever carries out violent spectacles between animals, whether in public or private places shall be punished with imprisonment of three to six months. If the spectacle is carried out for profit, a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment shall be imposed.

Traditional popular spectacles or games, such as cockfights and bullfights, are excepted from the preceding provisions.

TITLE XVI

CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

CHAPTER I

CRIMINAL ASSOCIATION AND ORGANIZED CRIME

Art. 392 Criminal association

Whoever forms part of an association of two or more persons, organized with the permanent purpose of committing or favoring less serious crimes, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to one year.

The leaders and promoters of an illicit association, shall be punished with a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

Art. 393 Organized Crime

Whoever forms part of an organized criminal group or national or international gang structured, of two or more persons, that exists for a certain time and that acts in concert with the purpose of obtaining directly or indirectly, an economic benefit or of any kind, with the purpose of committing one or more serious crimes, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment.

The penalty shall be increased in its minimum and maximum extremes:

a)	By one third, if the author holds a position of superiority in relation to the rest of the persons involved in the criminal organization, or if the crime is carried out totally or partially at the international level.

b)	To double if the crime committed is punished with a penalty equal to or greater than fifteen years of imprisonment.

Provocation, conspiracy and proposal to commit the crime, shall be punished with a penalty of one to five years of imprisonment.

CHAPTER II TERRORISM

Art. 394 Terrorism

Whoever, acting in the service of or in collaboration with gangs, organizations or armed groups, using explosives, toxic substances, weapons, fires, flooding, or any other act of mass destruction, carries out acts against persons, property, public services and means of transport, as a means to produce alarm, fear or terror in the population, in a group or sector thereof, alter the constitutional order, seriously alter public order or cause panic in the country, shall be punished with a penalty of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment.

Art. 395 Financing of Terrorism

Whoever generates, collects, obtains, channels, deposits, transfers, moves, insures, administers, safeguards, intermediates, lends, provides, delivers funds or assets from lawful or unlawful sources to be used in the commission of any terrorist act or deed described in the preceding article, or in any other way finances them or finances a terrorist organization without participating in its execution or if it is not consummated, shall be punished with a penalty of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment.

The penalty shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits, when the crime is committed through the financial system or by a partner, director, manager, administrator, supervisor, external or internal auditor, representative or employee of a public entity or by an authority, public official or public employee.

Art. 396 Hostage taking

Whoever deprives one or more persons of their liberty and holds them against their will for terrorist purposes, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to fifteen years of imprisonment.

If as a consequence of the acts described above, the death or injuries of one or more persons occur, they shall be punished in addition to the penalty previously described, with the penalty of the corresponding crime.

Art. 397 Specific aggravating circumstance

The minimum and maximum limits of the penalties established in the preceding chapters shall be increased by one third, when the following circumstances concur:

a)	That the crime is committed in an educational institution, health center, or in their vicinity or in other places, to which schoolchildren, students and citizens go to carry out educational, sports, social activities or on property that is part of the archaeological, historical and artistic heritage of the country;

b)	That girls, boys and adolescents are used or victimized, for the commission of these crimes.

Art. 398

Incitement, proposal and conspiracy to commit terrorist acts Incitement, proposal and conspiracy to commit terrorist acts shall be punished with a penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the respective penalty of the crime in question and whose minimum limit shall be half of it.

CHAPTER III

CRIMES AGAINST THE SECURITY OF VESSELS AND PORT FACILITIES

Art. 399 Crimes Against the Security of Civil Aviation

Whoever on board an aircraft in flight, by means of violence, threat of violence or any other form of intimidation seizes an aircraft, exercises control over it or executes any act that endangers the security of the aircraft or of the persons or property transported therein, shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever:

a)	Destroys an aircraft on the ground that is in service or causes damage that incapacitates it for flight or that by its nature constitutes a danger to the security of the aircraft in flight;

b)	Places or causes to be placed on an aircraft in service, by any means, a device or substance capable of destroying it or of causing damage that incapacitates it for flight or that by its nature constitutes a danger to the security of the aircraft in flight;

c)	Destroys or damages airport facilities or air navigation services or disrupts their operation, if such acts by their nature constitute a danger to the security of the aircraft in flight;

d)	Knowingly communicates false information, thereby endangering the security of an aircraft in flight.

Art. 400 Crimes against navigation and port security

Whoever affects navigation or port security, by carrying out any of the following acts, shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment:

a)	Destroys a vessel in port that is in service or causes damage that incapacitates it for navigation or that by its nature constitutes a danger to the security of the vessel.

b)	Places or causes to be placed on a vessel in service by any means, a device or substance capable of destroying it or of causing damage, that incapacitates it for navigation or that by its nature constitutes a danger to the security of the vessel.

c)	Destroys or damages port facilities or water navigation services or disrupts the operation of the port, if such acts by their nature constitute a danger to the security of the vessel or port services.

d)	Knowingly communicates false information thereby endangering the security of a vessel.

CHAPTER IV

CRIMES AGAINST THE CONTROL AND REGULATION OF WEAPONS, AMMUNITION, EXPLOSIVES AND OTHER DANGEROUS MATERIALS

Art. 401 Illegal carrying or possession of firearms or ammunition

Whoever sells, carries, possesses or facilitates the carrying or use of a firearm or ammunition, without having the respective license or authorization, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to one year of imprisonment and fifty to one hundred days fine.

Art. 402 Illicit trafficking in weapons

Whoever brings in, removes, transports, delivers or transfers firearms, ammunition and their accessories, from outside or through the national territory, in contravention of the provisions of the respective legislation, shall be punished with a penalty of two to six years of imprisonment and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

A penalty of six months to two years shall be imposed on whoever, for the same purpose, prepares, conceals or conditions the necessary means to carry out the conducts established in the preceding paragraph.

Art. 403 Alteration of the technical characteristics of firearms

Whoever alters, eliminates or modifies the system or technical mechanisms, manufacturing mark, serial number, model, type, barrel change or caliber of a firearm, without the due and prior authorization of the competent authority, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and one hundred to two hundred days fine.

Art. 404

Manufacture, trafficking, possession and use of restricted weapons, substances or explosive devices
Whoever without authorization or license, transports, manufactures, commercializes, brings into, or removes from the national territory, possesses or stores restricted weapons, according to national legislation; automatic or semi-automatic weapons for military use or substances or explosive devices, shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever for criminal purposes manufactures firearms by hand that simulate or reach the capacity of authorized weapons.

Art. 405 Trafficking, stockpiling or storage of prohibited weapons

Whoever brings in, removes, transports, possesses, delivers, intermediates, stockpiles, stores, distributes, transfers, from outside or through the national territory, prohibited weapons, according to national legislation shall be punished with imprisonment of eight to twelve years and two hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 406 Construction or facilitation of landing strips

Whoever constructs, or facilitates the use of landing strips or docking sites, to be used in the transport of explosive, bacteriological, chemical substances, weapons of mass destruction, goods or money originating from illicit trafficking of weapons, ammunition, explosives, other related materials and connected activities, shall be punished with imprisonment of eight to twelve years and three hundred to seven hundred days fine

Art. 407

Delivery of weapons or dangerous substances to persons unable to handle them
Whoever sells or entrusts weapons, explosive materials or poisonous or

corrosive substances to a minor under sixteen years of age or to any person who does not have the physical, mental, civil or legal capacity in such a way that it represents a serious danger to him or a third party, shall be punished with a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

Art. 408 Common provision

In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the penalty of special disqualification from six months to three years, to engage in commerce, profession or industry and the deprivation of the right to possession and carrying of weapons shall be imposed.

The penalties shall be increased by one third, when the offenses of this Chapter are committed by an authority, official or public employee, related to any of the activities provided, in addition to absolute disqualification for the same period.

TÍTULO XVII

OFFENSES AGAINST THE SECURITY OF THE STATE

CAPÍTULO I ACTS OF TREASON

Art. 409 Treason

The Nicaraguan who in an international armed conflict takes up arms against Nicaragua or joins its enemies providing them aid, collaboration or facilitates the advance or progress of enemy forces or hinders the defense of the State, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years and absolute disqualification, for the performance of function, employment or public office for the same period.

The same penalties shall be imposed on whoever induces a foreign State to declare war on Nicaragua or conspires with it for the same purpose.

If the perpetrator is an authority, official or public employee, the previous penalties shall be increased by one third.

Art. 410 Impairment of national integrity

Whoever performs acts that tend to impair or fragment the territorial integrity of Nicaragua, to subject it in whole or in part to foreign domination, to affect its nature as a sovereign and independent State, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to fifteen years of imprisonment and absolute disqualification, for the same period for the performance of function, employment or public office, except as provided in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua.

Art. 411 Treason committed by foreigners

The preceding provisions are applicable to foreigners residing in Nicaraguan territory, except as established by treaties ratified by

Nicaragua or by international law concerning diplomatic officials and nationals of countries in conflict.

Art. 412 Provocation, proposal and conspiracy

Provocation, proposal and conspiracy to commit any of the acts provided in this Chapter, shall be punished with a penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower extreme of the respective penalty and whose minimum limit shall be half of it.

CAPÍTULO II

OFFENSES THAT COMPROMISE PEACE

Art. 413 Hostile acts

Whoever with illegal acts or acts that are not duly authorized by the national government, in accordance with national legislation, provokes or places in imminent danger a declaration of war against Nicaragua, or exposes its inhabitants to experience vexations or reprisals in their persons or their property, or endangers the peaceful relations of the Nicaraguan government with a foreign government, shall be punished with a penalty of two to six years of imprisonment.

Art. 414 Violation of immunity

Whoever violates the immunity of a head of state, head of government, or any person protected by immunity in accordance with international treaties ratified by Nicaragua, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to three years of imprisonment.

Art. 415 Violation of state secrets

Whoever improperly obtains, uses or reveals state secrets relating to national security, national defense, foreign relations of the State, determined as reserved information in accordance with the law on the matter, and that endangers national security or peaceful relations with other countries, shall be punished with a penalty of three to eight years of imprisonment.

Art. 416 Reckless disclosure of state secrets

Whoever through reckless imprudence permits the secrets mentioned in the preceding article to become known, of which he is in possession by virtue of his employment, occupation or an official contract, shall be punished with imprisonment of six months to two years.

Art. 417 Intrusion

Whoever improperly with espionage purposes commits any of the following acts shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment:

a)	Draws up or reproduces plans or documentation referring to zones, installations or military materials that are of restricted access and

whose knowledge is protected and reserved by information legally classified as reserved;

b)	With purposes contrary to the security of the State, takes, draws or reproduces images of fortifications, vessels, establishments, roads or military works;

c)	Enters into computer programs relating to national security or national defense; or

d)	Has in his possession objects or information legally classified as reserved, relating to security, national defense or foreign relations of the State.

Art. 418 Diplomatic infidelity

Whoever, officially designated by the Nicaraguan government to direct a negotiation with a person or with a group of persons from another country, with a foreign state or an international organization, acts outside the instructions received to the detriment of the interests of Nicaragua, shall be punished with a penalty of five to eight years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise function, employment, profession, occupation or public office.

Art. 419 Violation of contracts of military interest

Whoever, when the State is at war, does not duly fulfill contractual obligations relating to needs of the armed forces, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years. If the breach was imprudent, the penalty shall be imprisonment of two to four years.

TÍTULO XVIII

OFFENSES AGAINST THE POLITICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA

CAPÍTULO I

OFFENSES AGAINST THE CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER

Art. 420 Rebellion

Whoever rises up in arms to achieve any of the following purposes shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment:

a)	Modify, suspend or repeal the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua totally or partially.

b)	Replace any Branch of the State or prevent the free exercise of its functions.

c)	Replace the President of the Republic or the government cabinet or prevent the free exercise of their functions.

d)	Remove the nation in whole or in part from the obedience of the constituted government.

The inducers, promoters, leaders of the rebellion, shall be punished with a penalty of eight to ten years of imprisonment.

Subordinates with command, shall be punished with a penalty of six to eight years of imprisonment

Art. 421 Riot

Those who, without being included in the crime of rebellion, rise up publicly with violence to prevent compliance with laws or resolutions of authorities, public officials or employees; compel them to take a measure or grant some concession, or prevent the exercise of public functions, provoking serious disturbance to public order, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising employment or public office for the same period.

The inciters, promoters and leaders of the riot shall be punished with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising employment or public office for the same period.

Subordinates with command shall be punished with a penalty of one to three years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising employment or public office for the same period.

Art. 422 Special aggravation

If the conducts provided for in the crimes of rebellion or riot had been carried out by an authority, public official or employee, the penalties shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits and absolute disqualification shall be imposed for the same period. In the case of rebellion, in addition the impediments indicated for that purpose by the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua shall be applied.

Art. 423 Desistance

There shall be no crime when the rebels or rioters submit to the legitimate authority or dissolve, before it makes demands upon them or as a consequence thereof, without having caused any harm other than the momentary disturbance of order. In this case only the inciters, promoters and leaders of the crime of rebellion shall be punishable, who shall be punished with one third of the penalty established for the crime.

Art. 424 Provocation, Proposal and Conspiracy

Provocation, proposal and conspiracy to commit the crimes of rebellion or riot shall be punished with a penalty whose maximum limit shall be the lower limit of the respective penalty for the crime in question, and whose minimum limit shall be half of this.

Art. 425 Seduction, usurpation and illegal retention of command

Whoever personally seduces members of the armed or police forces to remove them from their military or police command, usurps or illegally retains military or police command, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising employment, office, profession or trade for the same period.

Art. 426 Breach of duty of resistance

Authorities, public officials or employees who, being charged with preserving public order, do not confront rebellion or riot with the means at their disposal and with due timeliness, shall be considered accomplices to the crime in question.

CAPÍTULO II

DE LOS DELITOS CONTRA LOS DERECHOS Y GARANTÍAS CONSTITUCIONALES

Art. 427 Discrimination

Whoever prevents or hinders another from exercising a right or power provided for in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, laws, regulations and other provisions, for any economic, social, religious, political, personal motive or condition or other conditions, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to one year or three hundred to six hundred days fine.

Art. 428 Promotion of discrimination

Whoever publicly promotes the commission of acts of discrimination referred to in the preceding article shall be punished with one hundred to five hundred days fine.

Art. 429 Crimes against freedom of expression and information

Whoever prevents by means of violence or intimidation the exercise of freedom of expression, the right to inform and be informed, the free circulation of a book, magazine, newspaper, voice or image recording tapes, or any other means of emission and dissemination of thought, shall be punished with three to five years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising the profession or trade related to the criminal activity for the same period.

If the conduct described above were carried out by means of bribery or deceit, a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment and special disqualification from exercising the profession or trade related to the criminal activity for the same period shall be imposed.

Art. 430

Obstruction of legal assistance or the rights of the accused, charged or sentenced person
The authority, public official or employee who prevents or obstructs the right to legal assistance of the accused, charged or sentenced person, procures or favors their waiver of such assistance or does not inform them immediately or comprehensibly of their rights and the reasons for their

detention, shall be punished with a penalty of one hundred to three hundred days fine and special disqualification for one to three years from exercising a profession, employment or public office.

Art. 431 Suspension of constitutional guarantees

The authority, public official or employee who, outside the cases provided for in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, suspends totally or partially, in part or throughout the national territory, rights, freedoms or guarantees established therein, shall be punished with a penalty of five to ten years of imprisonment.

If the suspension affects rights, freedoms or guarantees that cannot be suspended according to the constitutional provision, the penalty shall be seven to fifteen years of imprisonment.

In both cases, absolute disqualification from exercising office or public employment for the same period as the imprisonment penalty imposed shall be imposed.

TÍTULO XIX

DELITOS CONTRA LA ADMINISTRACIÓN PÚBLICA

CAPÍTULO I

DE LOS ABUSOS DE AUTORIDAD

Art. 432 Abuse of authority or functions

The authority, public official or employee who, with abuse of their office or function, orders or commits any act contrary to the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, laws or regulations to the detriment of the rights of any person, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment and disqualification from exercising office or public employment for six months to four years.

Art. 433 Breach of duties

The authority, public official or employee who without justified cause omits, refuses or delays any act due and proper to their function, to the detriment of any person, shall be punished with a penalty of six months to one year of imprisonment and disqualification from exercising office or public employment for the same period.

Art. 434 Request for force against legitimate acts

The authority, public official or employee who, abusing their office, requests the assistance of the National Police or the Army of Nicaragua to prevent the execution of legal provisions or orders of the authority or of judicial sentences or resolutions, shall be punished with special disqualification for three to six years from exercising office or public function.

Art. 435 Abandonment of public functions

The authority, public official or employee who unjustifiably abandons their functions, causing damage to the public service, shall receive one hundred to five hundred days fine or ten days of work in favor of the community of two hours daily. The exercise of the right to strike in accordance with the law is excepted from this provision.

Art. 436 Illegal appointment

The authority, public official or employee who, in the exercise of their competence and knowing of its illegality, appoints or gives possession for the exercise of a certain public office to any person without the legally established requirements being met, shall be punished with one hundred to three hundred days fine and special disqualification for one to four years from exercising employment or public office.

The same penalties shall be imposed on whoever, knowing of its illegality, accepts the appointment or taking of possession.

CAPÍTULO II

DE LA DESOBEDIENCIA Y DENEGACIÓN DE AUXILIO

Art. 437 Denial of assistance

The authority, official or public employee who, when required in the exercise of their competence, does not provide the assistance legally required by competent authority, shall be punished with a penalty of special disqualification from one to four years for public employment or office.

The authority, official or public employee who, when required by a private individual to provide the assistance to which they are obligated by reason of their office to prevent a crime, shall be punished according to the seriousness thereof with the penalty of special disqualification for the exercise of public office or employment from six months to two years.

Art. 438 Disobedience of authority, official or public employee

Authorities, officials or public employees who openly refuse to give due compliance to judicial resolutions, decisions or orders of competent authority, issued within the scope of their respective competence and vested with legal formalities, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of ninety to one hundred fifty days fine and special disqualification to exercise public employment or office for a period of six months to two years.

Authorities, officials or public employees shall not incur criminal liability for failing to comply with a mandate that constitutes a clear and manifest infringement of a constitutional or legal provision.

Art. 439 Non-appearance before National Assembly

The official, authority or public employee who, having been duly summoned by the National Assembly to appear in matters within its competence, and without just cause, refuses to appear or omits, conceals or alters required information, shall be sanctioned from six months to one year of imprisonment and disqualification to exercise public office or employment for the same period.

The same conduct shall be incurred by one who, having a legal or contractual relationship with state institutions or who has in their possession documents or information on the matter being investigated or of public interest, shall be sanctioned with fifty to one hundred fifty days fine.

CAPÍTULO III

INFIDELITY IN THE CUSTODY OF DOCUMENTS AND VIOLATION OF SECRETS

Art. 440 Improper access to documents or reserved public information

The authority, official or public employee who accesses or permits access to documents or public information whose access is reserved in accordance with the law on the matter, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of one to three years of imprisonment and disqualification from two to four years to exercise public employment or office.

Art. 441 Revelation, disclosure and exploitation of information

The authority, official or public employee who reveals or discloses information or documents declared as reserved public information or private information in accordance with the law on the matter, shall be punished with three to five years of imprisonment and disqualification to exercise public employment or office for the same period.

If the perpetrator has custody of the information or document, the penalty to be imposed shall be four to eight years of imprisonment and disqualification to exercise public employment or office for the same period.

The private individual who, taking advantage of reserved public information or private information revealed by the authority, official or public employee under the conditions indicated in the preceding paragraphs and obtains profit or benefit for themselves or for a third party, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of three to five years of imprisonment.

Art. 442 Reckless facilitation

The authority, official or public employee who through reckless imprudence gives rise to the conduct described in this Chapter, shall be sanctioned with the penalty of disqualification to exercise public employment or office from six months to two years.

CAPÍTULO IV

CRIMES AGAINST ACCESS TO PUBLIC INFORMATION

Art. 443 Denial of Access to Public Information

The authority, official or public employee who, outside the cases established by law, denies or impedes access to public information requested, shall be sanctioned with a penalty of six months to two years of imprisonment, and disqualification from one to two years for the exercise of public employment or office.

Art. 444 Violation of informational self-determination

The authority, official or public employee who discloses private information or refuses to rectify, update, delete false information about a person contained in archives, files, databases, or public records, shall be sanctioned with imprisonment from six months to two years, and disqualification from one to two years to exercise public employment or office

CAPÍTULO V BRIBERY

Art. 445 Bribery committed by authority, official or public employee

The authority, official or public employee who requires or accepts for themselves or through third parties a gift, money, favors, promises or advantages, or any object of pecuniary value for themselves or for another person or entity, in exchange for the performance, delay, expediting or omission of any act in the exercise of their public functions, shall be sanctioned with the penalty of four to six years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period, to exercise public employment or office.

Art. 446 Bribery committed by private individual

Whoever by themselves or through third parties offers or grants to an authority, official or public employee, a gift, money, favors, promises, advantages or any object of pecuniary value, for that authority, official or public employee or for another person or entity, in exchange for the performance, delay, expediting or omission of any act in the exercise of their functions, shall be sanctioned with the penalty of three to six years of imprisonment and three hundred to five hundred days fine

Art. 447

Requirement or acceptance of undue advantages for an act performed or omitted
The authority, official or public employee who requires or accepts for themselves or for a third party a gift, money or any other undue advantage, for themselves or for another person or entity, for an act performed or omitted, in their capacity as authority, official or public employee, shall be punished with four to six years of imprisonment.

The same penalty shall apply to whoever by themselves or through third parties offers or grants to an authority or official or public employee, a gift, money, favors,

promises, advantages or any object of pecuniary value, for that authority, official or public employee or for another person or entity, in exchange for an act performed or omitted in the exercise of their functions.

If the gift or advantage is required or accepted under the sole circumstance of the condition of their function, the penalty to be imposed shall be two to five years of imprisonment.

Art. 448 Illicit enrichment

The authority, official or public employee, who without incurring a more severely punished crime, obtains an increase in their patrimony with significant excess, with respect to their legitimate income, during the exercise of their functions and who cannot reasonably justify its origin, when required by the competent body indicated in the law, shall be sanctioned from three to six years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to exercise public office or employment.

Art. 449 International bribery

A non-resident foreigner who offers, promises, grants or confers to a national authority, public official or public employee, or a national or resident foreigner, who engages in the same conduct, with respect to officials of another state or of an international organization or entity, directly or through an intermediary person or entity, any object of pecuniary value or other benefits, such as gifts, money, favors, promises or advantages, in exchange for the authority, public official or public employee, having performed or omitted, or to perform or omit any act in the exercise of their functions, related to an economic or commercial activity of an international nature, shall be punished with four to eight years of imprisonment and a fine of five hundred to one thousand days.

The authority, public official or public employee who requires or accepts from a non-resident foreigner, directly or indirectly, a gift, money, favors, promises or advantages or any object of pecuniary value, for himself or for another person or entity, in exchange for performing or omitting or for having performed or omitted any act, in the exercise of their functions, related to an economic or commercial activity of an international nature, shall be punished with four to eight years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to hold public office or employment.

CAPÍTULO VI

TRAFFICKING IN INFLUENCE

Art. 450 Trafficking in influence

The authority, public official or public employee, who by himself or through another person or acting as an intermediary, influences another authority, public official or public employee, of equal, lower or higher hierarchy, taking advantage of the exercise of the powers of his office or of any other situation derived from his personal or hierarchical relationship with the latter or with another authority, public official or

public employee or abusing his real or supposed influence to obtain an undue advantage or benefit, which may generate directly or indirectly a profit, economic or of any other nature, for himself or for third parties, shall be punished with a penalty of four to six years of imprisonment and absolute disqualification for the same period.

The private individual who influences an authority, public official or public employee and takes advantage of any situation derived from his personal relationship with the latter or with another authority, public official or public employee to obtain an undue advantage or benefit that may generate directly or indirectly an economic profit of any other nature for himself or for a third party, shall be punished with a penalty of three to six years of imprisonment.

Art. 451 Embezzlement

CAPÍTULO VII DEL PECULADO

The authority, public official or public employee who subtracts, appropriates, misapplies or consents, that another subtracts, appropriates or misapplies goods, funds, securities or public effects, whose administration, possession or custody have been entrusted to him by reason of his office in functions in the public administration, organs, dependencies, deconcentrated, decentralized, autonomous entities or State, Municipal and Autonomous Regions enterprises, to obtain for himself or for a third party a benefit, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to ten years, and absolute disqualification for the same period.

If the goods, funds, securities or effects subtracted, appropriated or misapplied had been declared of cultural, paleontological, historical, artistic, archaeological value, or if they are effects intended to alleviate some public calamity, a penalty of six to twelve years of imprisonment and absolute disqualification for the same period shall be imposed.

These provisions shall also be applicable to administrators and depositaries of goods, funds, securities or effects that have been delivered by competent authority, even if they belong to private individuals.

For the purposes of this Chapter and the next, public goods, funds or effects shall be understood as all goods, movable and immovable, tangible or intangible, corporeal and incorporeal, funds, securities, assets and other rights that belong to the State or its institutions, whatever the source from which they come and the documents or legal instruments that accredit, attempt to steal or refer to the ownership or other rights over said assets.

DE LA MALVERSACIÓN DE CAUDALES PÚBLICOS

Art. 452 Misappropriation of public funds

The authority, public official or public employee who gives a different destination than that indicated by law, for public funds, movable or immovable property, money or securities belonging to any public administration, organs, dependencies, deconcentrated, decentralized, autonomous entities or State, Municipal and Autonomous Regions enterprises or organisms dependent on some of them, whose administration, possession or custody have been entrusted to him by reason of his office or functions in the public administration, shall be punished with a penalty of two to five years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period, to hold employment or public office.

Art. 453 Use of human resources of the Public Administration

The authority, public official or public employee who takes advantage or allows another to take advantage or who gives for private use, for his own benefit or that of a third party, human resources in the service or person under custody of the administration or state, regional or municipal entity or of decentralized, deconcentrated or autonomous entities, to which he has had access by reason of or on the occasion of the function performed, shall incur a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to hold office or public employment.

CAPÍTULO IX

FRAUD AND EXTORTION

Art. 454 Fraud

The authority, public official or public employee who in contracts, supplies, tenders, price competitions, auctions, or any other operation in which he intervenes by reason of his office or special commission, defrauds or consents to defraud the public administration, organs, dependencies, deconcentrated, decentralized, autonomous entities or State, municipal and Autonomous Regions enterprises, shall be punished with a penalty of five to ten years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to hold office or public employment.

Art. 455 Extortion

The authority, public official or public employee who, abusing his office, demands or causes to be paid fees, tariffs, duties, taxes, contributions, rates or levies that are non-existent or in a greater amount than that indicated by law, shall be punished, without prejudice to the reimbursements to which he is obliged, with two to six years of imprisonment, and disqualification for the same period to hold office or public employment.

CAPÍTULO X

PROHIBITED NEGOTIATIONS FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS OR EMPLOYEES AND ABUSES IN THE EXERCISE OF THEIR FUNCTION

Art. 456 Incompatible professional activity

The authority, public official or public employee who, outside the cases admitted in laws or regulations, performs by himself or through an intermediary person, a professional or advisory activity, permanent or occasional, under the dependence or in the service of private entities or individuals, in matters in which he must intervene or has intervened by reason of his office and functions, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to hold office or public employment.

Art. 457 Transactions incompatible with duty

The authority, official or public employee who, openly or covertly or in any other manner, takes for himself in whole or in part, property or asset in whose auction, lease, adjudication, seizure, sequestration, judicial participation, deposit or administration, he intervenes by reason of his position or office or enters in part in any negotiation or speculation for profit or personal interest over the same properties or assets, or over anything in which he has official intervention, shall be punished with a penalty of four to six years of imprisonment and one hundred to three hundred days of fine.

Art. 458 Use of confidential information

The authority, official or public employee who makes use of any type of confidential information of which he has had knowledge by reason of or on the occasion of the function performed with the intent to obtain an economic benefit for himself or for a third party, shall incur the penalty of two to six years of imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to exercise employment or public office. If the economic benefit sought is effectively obtained, the penalty shall be imposed in its upper half.

If serious harm results to the public cause or to a third party, the penalty shall be imprisonment of three to seven years, imprisonment and disqualification for the same period to exercise employment or public office.

Art. 459 Benefited third party

Whoever obtains a benefit derived from the commission of the criminal conduct established in this Title, shall be punished with the same penalty of the crime committed by the authority, official or public employee.

TÍTULO XX

CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 460 Obstruction of functions

Whoever employs intimidation or violence to prevent or obstruct an authority, official or public employee from the performance of an act proper to his functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to four years.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever intimidates or exercises violence against the person who provides assistance to the authority, official or public employee in the exercise of a lawful act of his functions, at the request of the latter or by virtue of a legal duty or in apprehension of a person in flagrante delicto.

Art. 461 Aggravating circumstances

In the case of the preceding article the penalty shall be aggravated by one third in its minimum and maximum extremes.

a)	If the act was committed with a firearm;
b)	If the act was committed with the participation of two or more persons;
c)	If the perpetrator took advantage of his condition as authority, official, or public employee.

Art. 462 Disobedience or contempt of authority

Whoever disobeys a judicial resolution or one issued by the Public Prosecutor's Office, except when it concerns his own detention, shall be punished with six months to one year of imprisonment or fifty to one hundred fifty days fine.

There shall be no crime when voluntarily or by requirement of authority the disobeyed resolution is subsequently complied with.

TÍTULO XXI

CRIMES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

CAPÍTULO I

MALFEASANCE AND PROFESSIONAL DISLOYALTY

Art. 463 Malfeasance

Imprisonment of five to seven years and absolute disqualification for the same period shall be imposed on the Judge or Magistrate who incurs in any of the following conduct:

a)	Issues a resolution against the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua or express law;
b)	Bases the resolution on a false fact;
c)	Hears a case that he represented as a lawyer;
d)	Advises or counsels the parties or their lawyers who litigate in cases

pending in his court;
e)	During the processing of the case becomes involved in business or sentimentally with any of the parties or their relatives within the second degree of consanguinity.

Art. 464 Denial of justice

The judge or magistrate, who refuses to resolve, without having legal cause, or under the pretext of obscurity, insufficiency or silence of the law, shall be punished with three hundred to six hundred days fine and special disqualification to exercise employment or public office of two to six years.

Art. 465 Malicious delay

The judge or magistrate who maliciously delays the administration of justice, shall be punished with three hundred to six hundred days fine and special disqualification of two to six years. The delay shall be understood as malicious when it is provoked to affect the interests of any of the parties.

If the same conduct described in the preceding paragraph is carried out by the prosecutor, procurator, secretary or judicial employee, the preceding penalties shall be reduced by half.

Art. 466 Unfaithful representation

The lawyer who deliberately harms the interests that have been entrusted to him, shall be punished with three hundred to six hundred days fine and special disqualification of two to six years.

If the preceding conduct is carried out by reckless imprudence, it shall be punished with special disqualification for the practice of law of six months to two years.

The following shall be punished with the same penalties indicated in the preceding paragraph:
a)	the lawyer who having advised, defended or represented a person, advises, defends or represents in the same matter someone who has contradictory interests; or
b)	the lawyer who destroys, renders useless or conceals documents or information to which he has had access by reason of his profession, with prejudice to the interests of the party he represents, assists or advises.

Art. 467 Equivalent subjects

The provisions of the preceding article shall be applicable to prosecutors, procurators, public defenders, assistants, secretaries, technical consultant or expert witness, arbitrators or mediators.

CAPÍTULO II

OMISSION OF THE DUTY TO PROSECUTE CRIMES AND TO PROMOTE THEIR PROSECUTION

Art. 468 Omission of the duty to prosecute crimes

The authority, official or public employee who, failing in the obligation of his office, illegally ceases to promote or continue the prosecution of crimes of which he has notice, shall be punished with two hundred to five hundred days fine and special disqualification to exercise employment or public office of one to three years.

Art. 469 Omission of the duty to prevent crimes

Whoever with his immediate intervention, without risk to himself or others, and with capacity to do so does not prevent the commission of a crime that affects persons in their life, integrity, health, liberty or sexual liberty, shall be punished with two hundred to five hundred days fine if the crime is against life, and one hundred to five hundred days fine in other cases.

The same penalties shall be incurred by whoever, being able to do so does not go to the authority or its agents so that they prevent a crime of those provided in the preceding paragraph and of whose imminent or current commission he has notice.

CHAPTER III ON CONCEALMENT

Art. 470 Concealment

Whoever, with knowledge of the commission of a crime and without having intervened in it as author or participant, intervenes after its execution in any of the following ways, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years:

a) Assists the authors or participants so that they may benefit from the profit, product or price of the crime;

b) Conceals, alters or renders useless the effects or instruments of a crime to prevent its discovery;

c) Helps the alleged perpetrators of a crime to evade investigation by the authority or its agents, or to escape their search or capture. In this case, the spouse or partner in a stable de facto union, ascendants, descendants, brothers or sisters shall be exempt from criminal liability.

In no case may a prison sentence exceeding that established for the concealed crime be imposed. If the latter were punished with a penalty of another nature, the prison sentence shall be replaced by a fine of ninety to three hundred days, unless the concealed crime has an equal or lesser penalty assigned to

it, in which case half of the minimum limit of the penalty applicable to the principal crime shall be imposed on the guilty party.

Art. 471 Specific aggravating circumstances

The penalties established in the preceding article shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits when:

a) The concealed crime is a serious crime;
b) The author is an authority, public official or public employee with abuse of their public functions. In this case, in addition to the penalties imposed, disqualification from holding public office for three to five years shall be imposed.

The provisions of this Chapter shall apply even when the author of the concealed act is exempt from criminal liability.

CHAPTER IV

ON FALSE ACCUSATION AND REPORT

Art. 472 False accusation and report

Whoever, with knowledge of its falsity, reports to a competent authority or accuses any person of acts that if true would constitute a crime, shall be punished with a penalty of:

a) Imprisonment from six months to two years and from three hundred to six hundred days fine, if a serious crime is imputed; or

b) Imprisonment from six months to one year and from ninety to three hundred days fine if a less serious crime is imputed.

The penalty shall be three to eight years of imprisonment if the conviction of the innocent person results.

Proceedings may not be brought against the reporter or private accuser except after a judgment of not guilty or final dismissal or order, also final, rejecting the accusation for lack of merit issued by a competent judge.

Without prejudice to the corresponding liabilities, members of the Public Prosecutor's Office in the exercise of public criminal action shall not incur this crime.

Art. 473 Simulation of crimes

Whoever before a competent authority simulates being responsible for or victim of a crime or misdemeanor or reports a nonexistent one and provokes investigative or procedural actions shall be imposed a fine of one hundred to two hundred days.

Chapter V

On perjury and false testimony

Art. 474 Perjury

Whoever fails to tell the truth regarding their own acts when the obligation to tell it is imposed under promise of law in judicial proceedings shall be punished with imprisonment from one to three years or from three hundred to six hundred days fine.

Art. 475 False testimony

Whoever, when rendering testimony or statement in judicial or administrative proceedings, conceals or distorts true facts or simulates or affirms false facts, totally or partially, shall be punished with imprisonment from three to five years.

If the false testimony is given against the accused or defendant in criminal proceedings, the prison sentence shall be five to seven years. If as a consequence of the false testimony a conviction has been handed down, a penalty of six to eight years of imprisonment shall be imposed.

The preceding penalties shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits when the falsity is committed through bribery.

In no case may a prison sentence exceeding that established for the accused crime be imposed. If the latter were punished with a penalty of another nature, the prison sentence shall be replaced by a fine of ninety to three hundred days, unless the accused crime has an equal or lesser penalty assigned to it, in which case half of the minimum limit of the penalty applicable to the principal crime shall be imposed on the guilty party.

Art. 476 Falsity in expert opinion, interpretation or translation

The penalties of the preceding article shall also be imposed on experts, interpreters or translators who conceal or distort true facts or simulate or affirm false facts, totally or partially. In addition, they shall be imposed the penalty of special disqualification for four to six years to exercise the profession, trade, employment or public office in question.

The preceding penalty shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits when the falsity is committed through bribery.

Art. 477

Offering and exchange of witness, experts, interpreters or translator Whoever knowingly has offered or exchanged a witness, expert, interpreter or translator who has incurred falsity in their statement, report or translation in judicial or administrative proceedings shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and special disqualification for the same period to exercise employment, trade or public office in question.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever consciously presents false documents or evidence in court.

Art. 478 Bribery of witnesses, experts, interpreters or translators

Whoever offers or promises a gift or any other advantage to one of the persons referred to in the preceding article, so that they commit false testimony, if the offer or promise is not accepted or, if accepted, the falsity is not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment from one to three years.

If the falsity is committed, the penalties corresponding to whoever provided or concealed false information shall be applied to the briber.

Art. 479 Retraction

The penalties shall be reduced by two thirds in cases of the crime of false testimony when the witness, expert, interpreter or translator, having given false testimony, report or translation, retracts before the Judge and states the truth, for it to take effect before a judgment is issued in the proceeding where they rendered the statement, report or translation.

If the retraction takes place after the judgment is issued, the penalty shall be reduced by half.

CHAPTER VI

ON OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE

Art. 480 Obstruction of justice

Whoever, legally summoned to appear before a Judge or Court in a criminal case, fails to appear or absents themselves without just cause, and causes the suspension of the procedural act, shall be punished with a fine of ninety to three hundred days.

Whoever, personally or through an intermediary, has prevented or obstructed the appearance or facilitated the absence of the summoned person, shall be punished with a fine of one hundred to three hundred days. The fine penalty shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits when the perpetrator is a lawyer, representative, advisor or assistant of one of the parties in an investigation or trial proceeding.

A penalty of two to seven years of imprisonment shall be imposed if violence or intimidation is used to prevent or obstruct the appearance or facilitate the absence, without prejudice to the penalties corresponding to the acts of violence or intimidation exercised.

If the failure to appear or the absence causes the interruption or consequent annulment of the trial hearing in a criminal case, the penalty shall be a fine of two hundred to five hundred days.

If the suspension of the procedural act is caused by the absence without just cause of the prosecutor, defense attorney or legal representative, in addition to the fine penalty indicated in the preceding paragraph, special disqualification from holding employment, public office or professional practice shall be imposed for a period of three months to one year.

If the person responsible for the suspension of the procedural act due to their failure to appear without just cause is the magistrate, judge or court clerk, in addition to the fine penalty indicated in the first paragraph, special disqualification from holding employment, public office or professional practice shall be imposed for a period of six months to two years.

Art. 481 Undue influence in proceedings

Whoever, with violence or intimidation, attempts to influence or influences directly or indirectly anyone who is a complainant, party or accused, lawyer, prosecutor, legal representative, expert, interpreter, translator or witness, in a proceeding, to alter their statement, testimony, opinion, interpretation, translation, defense or action, in a Judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever commits any act against the life, integrity, liberty, sexual freedom or property, as retaliation against the persons mentioned in the preceding paragraph, for their actions in the judicial proceeding.

The penalties indicated in the preceding paragraphs shall be imposed without prejudice to those corresponding to the acts of violence or intimidation exercised.

CHAPTER VII

FACILITATION OF EVASION AND BREACH OF SENTENCE

Art. 482 Facilitation of evasion

The authority, official or public employee who procures, permits or facilitates the evasion of a legally detained person or a convicted person, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years and special disqualification from holding employment or public office for two to six years.

A private individual who provides the means for the evasion of a legally detained person or the breach of sentence by a convicted person shall be imposed a penalty of one to two years of imprisonment.

If violence or intimidation against persons, force against property or bribery is used to facilitate the evasion, the penalty shall be five to seven years of imprisonment.

Art. 483 Breach of sentence

Whoever breaches their sentence, security measure, imprisonment, precautionary measure or custody, shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment of six months to two years if they were deprived of liberty and a fine of ninety to three hundred days in other cases.

TITLE XXII

CRIMES AGAINST THE INTERNATIONAL ORDER

CHAPTER I GENOCIDE

Art. 484 Genocide

A penalty of twenty to twenty-five years of imprisonment shall be imposed on whoever, with the purpose of destroying totally or partially a specific group of persons, by reason of their nationality, ethnic group or race, religious belief or political ideology, commits any of the following acts:

a)	Causing the death of one or more members of the group;
b)	Seriously injuring the physical or mental integrity, or attacking the liberty, or sexual integrity of one or more members of the group;
c)	Subjecting one or more members of the group to conditions of existence that bring about their physical destruction, total or partial;
d)	Carrying out forced displacements of the group or its members or imposing measures intended to prevent their reproduction, hinder births within the group or forcibly transfer children or adolescents from the group to another group.

Art. 485 Incitement, proposal and conspiracy

Incitement, proposal and conspiracy to commit genocide shall be punished with a penalty of ten to fifteen years of imprisonment.

CHAPTER II CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

Art. 486 Torture

Whoever subjects another person to any type of physical or psychological torture for purposes of criminal investigation, as a means of intimidation, personal punishment, preventive measure, penalty or any other purpose, shall be punished with a penalty of seven to ten years of imprisonment.

The authority, official or public employee who commits any of the conducts described in the preceding paragraph shall be imposed, in addition to the imprisonment penalty, absolute disqualification for eight to twelve years.

The authority, official or public employee who does not prevent the commission of any of the acts defined in the preceding paragraphs, when they have knowledge and competence to do so, shall be punished with a penalty of five to seven years of imprisonment and special disqualification from holding employment or public office for five to nine years. The same penalty shall be imposed on the authority, official or public employee who, having knowledge of the commission of any of the acts indicated in the preceding paragraphs and lacking competence, fails to report the act to the competent authority within forty-eight hours from the moment they learned of it.

For the purposes of this Code, torture shall be understood as intentionally causing severe pain or suffering, whether physical or psychological, to a person whom the accused has under their custody or control, however pain or suffering arising solely from lawful sanctions or that is a normal or incidental consequence thereof shall not be understood as torture.

Art. 487 Apartheid

Whoever commits an inhumane act against a person with the intention of maintaining an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination of one racial group over one or more racial groups, shall be punished with ten to twenty years of imprisonment.

Art. 488 Forced disappearance of persons

The authority, official, public employee or agent of authority who detains a person legally or illegally and does not give reasons about their whereabouts, shall be punished with a penalty of four to eight years of imprisonment and absolute disqualification from office or public employment for six to ten years.

CHAPTER III

CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY PROTECTED IN ARMED CONFLICT

Art. 489 Attack on protected persons

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, attacks protected persons endangering their lives, or causing them serious suffering, shall be punished with a penalty of five to ten years of imprisonment.

For the purposes of this Code, protected persons shall be understood as the wounded, sick or shipwrecked, medical or religious personnel, combatants who have laid down their arms, prisoners of war and persons detained during the armed conflict, civilian persons and civilian population, according to the international instruments on the matter that Nicaragua has ratified.

Art. 490 Attacks against personal dignity

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, commits attacks against the personal dignity of a protected person, especially through humiliating or degrading treatment, shall be punished with a sentence of six to eight years of imprisonment.

Art. 491

Apartheid and other inhuman and degrading practices based on racial discrimination
Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, commits against a protected person an inhuman act with the intention of maintaining an institutionalized regime of oppression and systematic domination of one racial group over one or more racial groups, shall be punished with a sentence of ten to twenty years of imprisonment.

Art. 492 Intentional homicide

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, intentionally kills a protected person shall be punished with a sentence of fifteen to twenty-five years of imprisonment.

Art. 493 Causing starvation with risk to life

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, intentionally causes the civilian population to suffer starvation with risk to life as a method of warfare, depriving them of objects indispensable for their survival, shall be punished with ten to fifteen years of imprisonment.

Art. 494 Sexual crimes

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, commits acts of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, sexual exploitation, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization or any other form of sexual violence against a protected person, shall be punished with a sentence of fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment.

Art. 495 Biological experiments

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, carries out biological experiments that violate the physical or mental integrity of protected persons, shall be punished with a sentence of ten to twenty years of imprisonment.

Art. 496 Harmful medical acts

Whoever, on the occasion of an armed conflict, internal or international, intentionally carries out actions or omissions of a medical nature that are not justified by the state of health of the protected persons or that are not in conformity with the rules generally accepted in medicine and that cause harm to the health and physical or mental integrity, including physical mutilations, medical or scientific experiments, extractions of tissues or organs for transplants, shall be punished with a sentence of five to ten years of imprisonment.

If the offense is committed by medical health personnel, the sentence of the preceding paragraph shall be increased by one third and special disqualification shall also be imposed for the same period to exercise the trade or profession in question.

Art. 497 Indiscriminate attack on civilian population

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, carries out an indiscriminate attack affecting the civilian population, knowing that such attack will cause deaths or injuries among said population or civilian damage excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated, shall be punished with a sentence of fifteen to twenty-five years of imprisonment.

For the purposes of this Code, indiscriminate attack shall be understood as any

attack that is not directed against a specific military objective, as well as where methods or means of combat have been employed that cannot be directed against a specific military objective and whose effects cannot be limited in accordance with the provisions of International Humanitarian Law.

Art. 498 Attacks against unequivocal acts of surrender

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, knowing that there have been unequivocal acts of surrender by the adversary, continues attacking persons out of combat with the purpose of leaving no survivors, of finishing off the wounded and sick or of abandoning them or other types of acts of barbarism, shall be punished with a sentence of fifteen to twenty-five years of imprisonment.

Art. 499 Violation of truce

Whoever violates a truce or armistice agreed between Nicaragua and an adversary State, or between national or foreign belligerent forces, shall be punished with a sentence of five to ten years of imprisonment.

Art. 500 Improper use of emblems and insignia

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, with the purpose of harming or attacking the adversary, simulates the status of a protected person or uses signs of protection such as the Red Cross or the Red Crescent, the flag of the United Nations or of international organizations, of truce or of surrender; flags, uniforms or insignia of the enemy or of neutral countries or of military or police detachments of the United Nations, or other signs of protection contemplated in international treaties ratified by Nicaragua, shall be punished with a sentence of six months to three years of imprisonment.

Art. 501 Taking of hostages

Whoever, serving exclusively the purposes of the armed conflict itself whether of an international or internal nature, deprives protected persons of liberty, with the object of requesting any conduct whatsoever from the other party that benefits them as a condition for respecting their security and integrity, or releasing those detained, shall be punished with a sentence of imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Art. 502 Unjustified delay of repatriation

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, unjustifiably delays the repatriation of protected persons, shall be punished with a sentence of three to seven years of imprisonment.

Art. 503 Illegal deportation or transfer

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, illegally deports or transfers a protected person, in particular when transferring to occupied territory the population of the occupying power, or deports or transfers

within or outside the occupied territory all or part of the population of that territory, or orders the displacement of the civilian population unless required by the security of the civilians concerned or for imperative military reasons, shall be punished with a sentence of five to twelve years of imprisonment.

Art. 504 Illegal detention of protected persons

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, illegally deprives a protected person of their liberty shall be punished with a sentence of five to eight years of imprisonment.

Art. 505 Failure to comply with due process

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, deprives a protected person of the possibility of being tried in accordance with the guarantees of due process established in the Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua, shall be punished with a sentence of five to eight years of imprisonment.

Art. 506 Omission and obstruction of relief and humanitarian assistance measures

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, omits relief and humanitarian assistance measures in favor of protected persons, being obliged to provide them, shall be punished with three to six years of imprisonment.

Likewise, whoever, in the same circumstances, obstructs or prevents medical, health and relief personnel or the civilian population from carrying out the health and humanitarian tasks that according to the rules of International Humanitarian Law they may or must carry out, shall be punished with a sentence of four to eight years of imprisonment.

Art. 507 Attack on protected property

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, attacks property of a civilian nature, shall be punished with imprisonment of two to five years. If the action falls on property indispensable for the survival of the civilian population, the sentence to be imposed shall be five to twelve years of imprisonment.

Art. 508 Use of human shields

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, uses the presence of a protected person to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from military operations, shall be punished with imprisonment of seven to fifteen years.

Art. 509 Recruitment of children

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, recruits or enlists persons under eighteen years of age into the armed forces, or uses them to participate actively in hostilities, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Art. 510 Pillage and attack on towns, villages or places

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, attacks or pillages a town, village or place, even when it is taken by assault and is not defended, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years.

Art. 511 Attack on installations containing dangerous forces

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, carries out an attack against works or installations containing dangerous forces in the knowledge that such attack will cause deaths or injuries among the civilian population or damage to civilian objects, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

For the purposes of this Code, dangerous forces shall be understood as those which, when released, may cause severe losses among the civilian population, such as waters contained in dams or dikes, nuclear energy generated in power stations, toxic deposits, among others.

Art. 512 Attack on undefended localities

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, carries out an attack on undefended localities, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

An undefended locality shall be understood as any inhabited place, by prior agreement, which is in the proximity of or within a zone where armed forces are in contact and which is open to occupation by an adverse party. Such locality shall not have the presence of combatants, weapons and mobile military equipment, nor shall there be any activity in support of military operations, nor shall the authorities or the population commit acts of hostility, this prohibition including the hostile use of fixed military installations or establishments.

Art. 513 Attack on demilitarized zones

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, carries out an attack on demilitarized zones, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Demilitarized zones shall be understood as those zones to which, by agreement, verbal or written, the status of demilitarized zone has been conferred. Such demilitarized zone shall not have the presence of combatants, weapons and mobile military equipment and all activity related to the military effort shall have ceased, nor shall the authorities or the population commit acts of hostility, this prohibition including the hostile use of fixed military installations or establishments.

Art. 514 Declaration that no survivors be left

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, orders an attack or makes a declaration that no survivors be left, shall be punished with imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Art. 515 Compelling service in enemy forces

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, compels a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the armed forces of the adverse party, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years.

Art. 516 Destruction or appropriation of property

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, destroys or appropriates property, on a large scale and arbitrarily, without justification by military necessity, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years.

Art. 517

Attacks against peacekeeping mission or humanitarian assistance
Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, intentionally directs attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles participating in a peacekeeping mission or humanitarian assistance in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, provided that they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects in accordance with international humanitarian law, shall be punished with imprisonment of seven to ten years.

Art. 518 Destruction of medical property and installations

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, attacks or destroys ambulances and medical transports, field hospitals and hospitals, depots of relief supplies, medical convoys, property intended for assistance and relief for the civilian population and for other protected persons and against personnel using the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions in accordance with international law, shall be punished with five to ten years of imprisonment.

Art. 519 Destruction of cultural property

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, attacks, destroys, removes, pillages, steals, improperly uses, commits acts of vandalism against or renders useless cultural property or places of worship, or those to which protection has been conferred by virtue of special agreements, or cultural property under enhanced protection, or buildings dedicated to education, science or charity, shall be punished with imprisonment of four to eight years.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, uses cultural property under enhanced protection or its immediate surroundings in support of military action.

Cultural property shall be understood as movable and immovable property, such as: monuments of architecture, art or history, religious or secular, archaeological sites, monumental centers comprising a considerable number of cultural properties, works of art, manuscripts, books and other objects of historical or artistic interest, as well as buildings whose main purpose is to preserve or exhibit the cultural property described, such as museums, libraries, archive repositories and shelters intended for the protection of cultural property in case of armed conflict.

Art. 520 Destruction of the environment

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, launches an intentional attack that causes widespread, long-term and severe damage to natural resources and the natural environment, which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years.

Art. 521 Prohibited weapons and methods of combat

Whoever, on the occasion of an international or internal armed conflict, uses prohibited means and methods of warfare intended to cause unnecessary suffering or loss or superfluous injury, shall be punished with a penalty of five to ten years of imprisonment.

For the purposes of this article, the prohibited means of warfare are:

a) Poison or poisoned weapons;

b) Asphyxiating, toxic or similar gases or any analogous liquids, materials or devices;

c) Chemical, biological, reactive or atomic weapons;

d) Bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body, such as hard-jacketed bullets which do not entirely cover the interior part or which have incisions;

e) Weapons the primary effect of which is to injure by fragments which cannot be detected by X-rays in the human body;

f) Mines, booby-traps and other similar devices.

For the purposes of this article, mines, booby-traps and other similar devices are:

Mines, booby-traps and other devices fitted with a mechanism or device specifically designed to detonate the munition by the presence of commonly available mine detectors as a result of their magnetic or other non-contact influence during normal use in detection operations, prohibited by the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices as amended on 3 May 1996.

Self-deactivating mines fitted with an anti-handling device designed so that this device can function after the mine is no longer able to do so, prohibited by the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices as amended on 3 May 1996.

Booby-traps and other devices which are in any way attached to or associated with:

a) Internationally recognized protective emblems, signs or signals;
b) Sick, wounded or dead persons;
c) Burial or cremation sites or graves;
d) Medical facilities, equipment, supplies or transports;
e) Children's toys or other portable objects or products specially designed for the feeding, health, hygiene, clothing or education of children;
f) Food or drink;
g) Kitchen utensils or appliances, except in military establishments, military locations or military supply depots;
h) Objects of a clearly religious character;
i) Historic monuments, works of art or places of worship which constitute the cultural or spiritual heritage of peoples;
j) Live or dead animals; prohibited by the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices as amended on 3 May 1996;

Booby-traps or other devices in the form of apparently harmless portable objects which are specifically designed and constructed to contain explosive material, prohibited by Protocol II on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices as amended on 3 May 1996.

Art. 522 Responsibility of the superior

The superior who exercises authority over his subordinates, in an international or internal armed conflict, shall be punished with the same penalty as that prescribed for the offenses described in this title, when they have been committed by forces under his command and effective control, or his authority and effective control, by reason of not having exercised appropriate control over his subordinates, when:

a) He knew or, owing to the circumstances at the time, should have known that the forces or subordinates were committing those offenses or were about to commit them; and

b) He did not take all necessary and reasonable measures within his power to prevent or repress their commission or to submit the matter to the competent authorities for the purposes of investigation and prosecution.

BOOK THREE ON MISDEMEANORS

TITLE I

MISDEMEANORS AGAINST PERSONS SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 523 Assaults against persons

A penalty of ten to forty-five days' fine, or community service work of fifteen to forty-five days of two hours per day, shall be imposed on whoever:

a) Causes another an injury that does not require medical treatment beyond the first medical assistance;
b) Mistreats or strikes another person, throws stones or similar objects at him, or in any way physically assaults him, not requiring medical treatment, or,
c) Maliciously releases or sets a dog or other animal against a person.

Art. 524 Mob assaults

Whoever incites the physical assault of a person or group of persons against other persons or public or private property, shall be punished with fifteen to sixty days' fine, or community service work of twenty to sixty days of two hours per day.

Art. 525 Discharge of firearms

Whoever, in a populated or frequented place, discharges a firearm and with danger to persons or things, shall be punished with ten to forty-five days' fine or with community service work of fifteen to forty-five days of two hours per day.

Art. 526 Presence of children and adolescents in places intended for adults

A penalty of ten to forty-five days' fine, or community service work of fifteen to forty-five days of two hours per day, shall be imposed on whoever, having the duty to prevent it as owner or operator, administrator, security guard, tolerates the entry or presence of a child or adolescent in a place intended exclusively for the presence of adults.

Art. 527 Neglect in the supervision of the insane

The person in charge of a person declared in a state of interdiction or with evident lack of volitional and cognitive capacity who represents a danger to himself or to others, who neglects his supervision or does not notify the authority when the insane person escapes from his custody, shall be punished with ten to thirty days' fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

TITLE II

MISDEMEANORS AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILITY

CHAPTER I DISOBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY

Art. 528 Disobedience to authority

Whoever disobeys instructions, resolutions or recommendations of an authority, public official or employee, in the exercise of their functions, shall be imposed a penalty of ten to thirty days' fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 529 Disobedience of auxiliaries in the process

Whoever, having been legally summoned and having the obligation to appear as a witness, expert or interpreter, unjustifiably does not comply with the call of the authority, shall be imposed fifteen to sixty days' fine, or community service work of twenty to sixty days of two hours per day.

Art. 530 Destruction of official seals

Whoever violates, tears off, destroys or in any other way renders useless the seals affixed by the authority for police, judicial or fiscal purposes, shall be imposed ten to thirty days' fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 531

Denial of assistance to authority, public official or employee Whoever does not provide the authority, public official or employee with the assistance required or does not provide the information requested or provides false information in case of earthquake, fire, flood, shipwreck or other calamity or misfortune, being able to do so without serious detriment to himself, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to forty-five days' fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 532 Obstruction of authority, public official or public employee

Anyone who, without assaulting an authority, public official or public employee or the person providing assistance to them at their request by virtue of a legal obligation, obstructs them or hinders them in any way in the performance of an act proper to their functions, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 533 Refusal to identify oneself

Anyone who, when required or questioned by the authority in the exercise of its functions and within its scope of competence, refuses to present their identity card, passport or residence permit or refuses to give their name, occupation or profession, marital status, nationality, place of birth, domicile and other identification data, or gives false information, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

CAPÍTULO II DISTURBANCES OF PUBLIC PEACE

Art. 534 Disturbance by noise

Anyone who, using sound, electronic or acoustic means of any nature, such as loudspeakers, radios, sound equipment, alarms, horns, industrial machinery, plants or equipment of any nature and purpose, musical instruments and microphones, among others, whether on public roads, in premises, in populated centers, residential areas or popular housing or of any kind, near hospitals, clinics, schools or colleges, public offices, among others; produces sounds at decibels greater than those established by the competent authority and the standards and recommendations issued by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), and which cause damage to health or disturb the tranquility and daytime and nighttime rest of citizens, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day, and in addition the suspension, cancellation or closure of the activities that generate the noise or discomfort.

Activities such as mass evangelistic campaigns conducted outdoors in plazas, parks and streets shall require the corresponding authorization. Exempt are the activities of religious congregations within their temples, such as worship services, daytime congregational fasts and nighttime vigils. Likewise, exempt are those that have established acoustic protection systems that prevent the emission of sounds, music or noises outside of premises duly adapted for such purposes and that have the corresponding authorization and within the permitted hours.

For purposes of this article the following scales of sound intensity shall be considered.

a)	For bedrooms in dwellings thirty decibels for continuous noise and forty-five for single noise events. During the night outdoor sound levels must not exceed forty-five decibels at one meter from the facades of houses;

b)	In schools, colleges and preschool centers the background sound level must not be greater than thirty-five decibels during classes;

c)	In hospitals during the night it must not exceed forty decibels and during the day the guideline value indoors is thirty decibels; and

d)	In ceremonies, festivals and recreational events the sound must be below one hundred ten decibels.

The decibel is the unit of measurement on a logarithmic scale used to express the intensity of a sound.

Art. 535 False call to police, firefighters or rescue corps

Anyone who by unjustified alarm or call provokes a dispatch of the police, a fire truck or an ambulance, shall be imposed a penalty of ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 536 Unjustified alarm to the community

Anyone who unjustifiably alarms the community with news of a public or private calamity or misfortune, or gives the cry of fire without reason to do so, shall be imposed a penalty of ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

CAPÍTULO III

SCANDALOUS ACTS IN PUBLIC FORM

Art. 537 Public scandal

Anyone who causes scandal or disturbs the tranquility of persons, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 538 Improper sale of alcoholic beverages

The owner, manager or staff serving customers, of any commercial establishment that serves, sells or facilitates the consumption of alcoholic beverages to persons under eighteen years of age, shall be imposed ten to sixty days fine or community service work of ten to sixty days of two hours per day.

The same penalty shall apply to anyone who sells for consumption on the premises, permits the consumption or consumes alcoholic beverages in a place of sale or distribution of hydrocarbons or their derivatives.

Art. 539 Harassment

Anyone who harasses another person, with impertinences in fact, word or writing, shall be imposed ten to fifteen days fine, or community service work of five to twenty days of two hours per day.

Art. 540 Exhibitionism

Anyone who shows themselves naked or exhibits their genital organs in public places, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

Art. 541 Sexual acts in public form

Anyone who performs sexual acts, in public form, shall be imposed ten to twenty days fine, or community service work of ten to twenty days of two hours per day.

TÍTULO III

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OR COMMON SAFETY

CAPÍTULO I TRAFFIC SAFETY

Art. 542 Omission in the placement of warning signs

Anyone who omits to place the signs or notices ordered by law, regulations or the authority to warn persons in a place of public transit, or removes said notices or signs, or extinguishes a light placed as a signal, shall be punished with fifteen to sixty days fine, or community service work of twenty to sixty days of two hours per day.

When the person who engages in this conduct is the authority, public official or public employee responsible for signage, the penalty shall be thirty to one hundred twenty days, without the possibility of substitution by community service work.

Art. 543 Rendering traffic signs unusable

Anyone who alters, renders unusable, removes, destroys, stains or in any way affects a traffic sign or sign intended to guide the circulation of vehicles or pedestrians or to warn of a danger, shall be punished with fifteen to sixty days fine, or community service work of twenty to sixty days of two hours per day, without prejudice to other responsibilities that may correspond to them.

Art. 544 Reckless crossing of public road

Anyone who with risk to themselves or to others, recklessly crosses a street or highway, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours per day.

CAPÍTULO II

SAFETY OF CONSTRUCTIONS AND BUILDINGS

Art. 545 Failure to Place Construction or Building Warning Signs

Whoever fails to place signs or warnings ordered by law, regulations or authority, to indicate the risk of collapse or other threats to the safety of persons in buildings, yards, streets or land of any nature, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

The same penalty shall be imposed on whoever removes, conceals or destroys said warnings or signs.

Art. 546

Negligence in the Repair or Demolition of a Ruinous Construction or Work
Whoever, being obligated, fails to perform or delays the repair or demolition of a ruinous construction or work, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

Art. 547 Failure to Take Safety Measures in Defense of Persons

The person responsible for the construction or demolition of a work who fails to take adequate safety measures in defense of persons or property, shall be punished with a penalty of ten to forty-five days fine, or community service work of fifteen to forty-five days of two hours daily.

TÍTULO IV

OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 548 Theft, Fraud or Misappropriation of Lesser Amount

Whoever commits theft, fraud or misappropriation, fraud in the delivery of things, of an amount not exceeding the sum resulting from two minimum wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

Art. 549 Customs Fraud and Minor Smuggling

Whoever totally or partially evades payment of duties and taxes on the import or export of goods and merchandise whose value is greater than five thousand and less than one hundred thousand Central American pesos, depending on whether it is customs fraud or smuggling, shall be punished with a fine equivalent to twice the value of the goods or merchandise introduced or exported.

Art. 550 Minor Tax Fraud

Whoever totally or partially evades payment of a tax obligation of less than ten minimum wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with a fine equivalent to twice the value defrauded or attempted to be defrauded.

Art. 551 Harmful Entry onto Another's Property

Whoever crosses planted land or plantations on another's property without justified reason and causes any damage that does not constitute a crime, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to twenty days of two hours daily.

Art. 552 Minor Damages

Whoever destroys, renders useless, causes to disappear or in any way damages movable or immovable property, totally or partially belonging to another, if the amount does not exceed two monthly minimum wages of the industrial sector, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

The same penalty shall be imposed on the owner or person in charge of livestock or domestic animals who, through carelessness or negligence, cause damage to another's property in the amount indicated.

TÍTULO V

OFFENSES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 553 Pollution of Water Resources and Protected Areas

Whoever throws garbage or waste of any nature into storm water channels, streams, rivers, lakes, lagoons, estuaries, ravines, beaches, seas or any other place not designated by the authority for that purpose, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily, if the act does not constitute a crime.

If the conduct is carried out in a protected area, one hundred to two hundred days fine and community service work of one hundred to two hundred days of two hours daily shall be imposed.

Art. 554 Mistreatment of Trees or Shrubs

Whoever affixes signs, posters, leaflets to trees or shrubs located in public places; or applies paint or any substance not intended for their preservation or ornamentation, or in any other way mistreats them, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

TÍTULO VI

OFFENSES AGAINST SANITATION AND PUBLIC APPEARANCE SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 555 Throwing Garbage and Sewage in Public Places

Whoever throws, tosses or dumps plastic bags, papers, sewage or garbage of any kind on public roads, squares, parks or other places of public access, shall be punished with ten to thirty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

The same penalty shall be incurred by whoever fails to place and maintain an adequate receptacle for users to deposit garbage, in collective and selective public transport vehicles.

Art. 556 Graffiti

Whoever without the owner's authorization, makes graffiti or posts posters or leaflets on walls, walls, doors or windows of public or private buildings, shall be punished with ten to twenty days fine, or community service work of ten to twenty days of two hours daily.

If the acts described above are carried out on property defined as cultural and historical heritage by the law on the matter, they shall be punished with twenty to sixty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

Art. 557 Destruction of Gardens

Whoever destroys or removes plants, flowers or ornamental objects or objects for public use in parks and public gardens, shall be punished with twenty to forty days fine, or community service work of ten to thirty days of two hours daily.

If the conduct is carried out in a protected area, one hundred to two hundred days fine and community service work of one hundred to two hundred days of two hours daily shall be imposed.

TÍTULO VII

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SERVICE SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 558 Disrespect and Negligence in the Provision of a Public Service

Twenty to fifty days fine and community service work of twenty to fifty days of two hours daily shall be imposed on the authority, official or public employee who in the exercise of his function or employment, or on the occasion thereof:

a)	Fails to show respect or consideration to the public he must serve;

b)	Delays proceedings unjustifiably, or imposes or subordinates them to conditions not provided for;

c)	Negligently informs about the requirements or conditions necessary to carry out a procedure; or

d)	Does not serve the public during the hours designated for that purpose.

TÍTULO VIII

OFFENSES RELATING TO NARCOTICS PSYCHOTROPICS AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES

SOLE CHAPTER

Art. 559 Failure to Indicate Risk of Drug Dependence

Whoever, being legally obligated, fails to indicate on the labels of pharmaceutical products the risks of drug dependence that their use implies, shall be punished with one hundred to two hundred days fine and special disqualification from exercising a profession, trade or industry related to the activity for three to twelve months.

Art. 560

Possession of Controlled Substances in Quantity Greater than Authorized
Whoever has in stock medications that produce dependence, in a quantity greater than that authorized by the Ministry of Health, shall be punished with one hundred to two hundred days fine, and special disqualification from exercising the profession, industry or trade related to the criminal activity for a period of three months to one year.

Art. 561

Possession of minor amounts of narcotics, psychotropic drugs or controlled substances
Whoever is found in possession of or is proven to have in their possession narcotics, psychotropic drugs or other controlled substances, in quantities less than five grams of marijuana or one gram, in the case of cocaine or any other controlled substance, shall be sanctioned with seventy to one hundred days fine and community service work of thirty to sixty days of two hours daily.

Art. 562 Criterion for application of criminal misdemeanors

The provisions contained in the articles of this Third Book shall be applied only when the act does not constitute a felony.

FOURTH BOOK
ADDITIONAL, REPEALING, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS

Art. 563 Prior mediation in criminal misdemeanors

To file an accusation for criminal misdemeanors, the prior mediation procedure must be exhausted, in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code, which may be carried out before lawyers and public notaries, public defenders, mediators, rural judicial facilitators, promoters or justice facilitators of civil society organizations, mediation centers, university and popular legal clinics, Human Rights organizations, and any institution or organization with capacity to intermediate between the parties in conflict.

Mediation in criminal misdemeanors has a restorative purpose. The accused and the victim shall participate in it and, when appropriate, other persons or members of the affected community, the latter as interested third parties, and they shall participate jointly in the resolution and follow-up of matters arising from the act.

The right to accuse in misdemeanors shall be exercised indistinctly by the directly offended party, by any administrative authority competent by reason of subject matter, or failing that, by a representative of the National Police.

Without prejudice to the control of legality and validity that corresponds, the judicial authorities shall facilitate the application of mediation at any stage of the process, including the execution phase.

Art. 564 Exercise of criminal action by the victim in less serious crimes

Without prejudice to the power of the Public Prosecutor's Office to exercise criminal action ex officio in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code, in less serious crimes, the victim may exercise it directly before the competent court, without the need to exhaust the administrative channel; when there is a detainee, the action may be exercised within forty-eight hours from the beginning of the detention. In this case, the National Police and the Public Prosecutor's Office shall provide facilities to the victim or their representative to formulate the accusation.

Once the accusation is admitted, the judge shall send a copy of it to the Public Prosecutor's Office, which may intervene at any time during the process to assist in the action exercised by the victim of less serious crimes of public action.

Art. 565 Professional judge

Trials for crimes of domestic or intrafamily violence, cattle rustling, extortive kidnapping and organized crime shall be conducted with a professional judge. This provision is also applicable to crimes contained in the following chapters: crimes against sexual freedom and integrity; money, property or asset laundering; crimes related to narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances; terrorism; bribery; influence peddling; embezzlement; misappropriation of public funds, fraud and illegal exactions.

CHAPTER II REPEALING PROVISIONS

Art. 566 Repeals

The following are repealed:

1. Article 222

of Decree No. 1824, "General Law on Negotiable Instruments" published in La Gaceta Nos. 146, 147, 148, 149 and 150 of July 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6, 1971.

2.	Decree No. 297, "Criminal Code Law", published in La Gaceta No. 96 of May 3, 1974.

3.	Decree No. 505, "Law of Reforms to the Criminal Code of 1974, relating to the Crime of Cattle Rustling", published in La Gaceta 231 of October 10, 1974.

4.	Decree No. 506, "Reform to the Criminal Code relating to kidnappings, assaults, etc., and their penalties", published in La Gaceta No. 231 of October 10, 1974.

5.	Law No. 230, Reform of Title and articles of Book II of the Criminal Code, relating to Public Health", published in La Gaceta No. 53 of March 3, 1976.

6.	Decree No. 8 "Repeal of repressive laws", published in La Gaceta No. 2 of August 23, 1979.

7.	Decree No. 82, "Law on control of weapons and similar elements", published in La Gaceta No. 115 of May 25, 1979.

8.	Decree No. 644, "Law on reforms in criminal matters", published in La Gaceta No. 42 of February 21, 1981.

9.	Decree No. 763, "Confiscation of assets for crimes against the maintenance of public order and Security", published in La Gaceta No. 162 of July 22, 1981.

10. Article 2

of Decree No. 1237, "Reform to the Law on protection of the cultural heritage of the Nation", published in La Gaceta No. 88 of April 19, 1983.

11.	Law No. 42, "Reform of law on customs fraud and smuggling", published in La Gaceta No. 156 of August 18, 1988.

12.	Law No. 67, "Law of Reform to article 494 of the Criminal Code", published in La Gaceta No. 245 of December 27, 1989.

13.	Law No. 109, "Law of Reform to the Criminal Code", published in La Gaceta No. 174 of September 11, 1990.

14.	Law No. 112 "Addition to the crime against the peace of the Republic", published in La Gaceta No. 191 of October 5, 1990.

15.	Law No. 150, "Law of reforms to the Criminal Code", published in La Gaceta No. 174 of September 9, 1992.

16.	Articles 8, 9, 10 and 12 of Law No. 168, "Law prohibiting the trafficking of hazardous waste and toxic substances", published in La Gaceta No. 102 of June 2, 1994.

17. Article 3

, of Law No. 176, "Regulatory law on loans between individuals", published in La Gaceta No. 112 of June 16, 1994.

18. Article 35

of Law No. 182, "Consumer protection law", published in La Gaceta No. 213 of November 14, 1994.

19.	Law No. 230, "Law of Reforms and additions to the Criminal Code", published in La Gaceta No. 191 of October 9, 1996.

20. Article 65

of Law No. 274 "Basic Law for the Regulation and Control of Pesticides, Toxic, Hazardous and other Similar Substances", published in La Gaceta No. 30 of February 13, 1998.

21.	Last paragraph of article 28 and articles 50 to 72 inclusive, of article 1 of Law No. 285 that reforms the "Law on narcotics, psychotropic drugs and other controlled substances; Money Laundering and Assets from Illegal Activities, published in La Gaceta No. 69 of April 15, 1999.

22.	Articles 106, 107 and 108 of Law No. 312, "Copyright and Related Rights Law", published in La Gaceta No. 166 of August 31, 1999.

23. Article 36

, paragraphs 1 and 2 of Law No. 322, "Law on protection of program-carrying satellite signals", published in La Gaceta No. 240 of December 16, 1999.

24.	Articles 23 and 24 of Law No. 324, "Law on Protection of Integrated Circuit Layout Designs", published in La Gaceta No. 22 of February 1, 2000.

25.	Articles 131 and 132 of Law No. 354 "Law on Patents for Inventions, Utility Models and Industrial Designs", published in La Gacetas Nos. 179 and 180 of September 22 and 25, 2000.

26. Article 102

of Law No. 380, "Law on trademarks and other distinctive signs", published in La Gaceta No. 70 of April 16, 2001.

27.	Articles 87 and 88 of Law No. 387, "Special law on exploration and exploitation of mines", published in La Gaceta No. 151 of August 13, 2001.

28.	Law No. 419, "Law of reforms and addition to the Penal Code of the Republic of Nicaragua", published in La Gaceta No. 121 of June 28, 2002.

29. Article 107

of Law No. 453, "Fiscal Equity Law", published in La Gaceta No. 82 of May 6, 2003.

30. Article 125

of Law No. 489 "Fishing and Aquaculture Law", published in La Gaceta No. 251 of December 27, 2004.

31.	Articles 120 to 134 of Law No. 510, "Special law for the control and regulation of firearms, ammunition, explosives and other related materials", published in La Gaceta No. 40 of February 25, 2005.

32.	Articles 10, 11, 12, 19, 20, 22, 23 and 24 of Law No. 513, "Reforms and incorporations to Law No. 240, "Law on Control of Illegal Migrant Trafficking", published in La Gaceta No. 20 of January 28, 2005.

33. Article 13

of Law No. 515, "Law on Promotion and Regulation of Credit Card Use", published in La Gaceta No. 11 of January 17, 2005.

34.	Law No. 559 "Special law on crimes against the environment and natural resources", published in La Gaceta No. 225 of November 21, 2005.

35.	Articles 109, 110, 140, 141, 142 and 143 of Law No. 562, "Tax Code of the Republic of Nicaragua", published in La Gaceta No. 227 of November 23, 2005.

36.	Articles 19, 20, 22, and 24 of Law No. 577, "Law of reforms and additions to Law No. 312. Copyright and related rights Law", published in La Gaceta No. 60 of March 24, 2006.

37.	Articles 1 and 2 of Law No. 578, "Law of reforms and additions to law No. 322, Law on protection of program-carrying satellite signals", published in La Gaceta No. 60 of March 24, 2006.

38.	Articles 19, 20 and 21 of Law No. 580, "Law of reforms and additions to Law No. 380, Law on trademarks and other distinctive signs", published in La Gaceta No. 60 of March 24, 2006.

39.	Law No. 581, "Special Law on the Crime of Bribery and Crimes against International Trade and International Investment", published in La Gaceta. No. 60 of March 24, 2006.

40.	Law No. 603, "Law repealing article 165 of the current Penal Code", published in La Gaceta No. 224 of November 17, 2006.

41. Article 52

, in fine of law No. 606, "Organic law of the Legislative Power of the Republic of Nicaragua", published in La Gaceta No. 26 of February 6, 2007.

42.	Articles 129 and 130 of Law No. 620 "General Law on National Waters", published in La Gaceta No. 169 of September 4, 2007.

All special laws that are contrary to the provisions of this Code are also repealed, except those special laws that contain crimes not established in this Code.

Chapter III Transitional provisions

Art. 567 Transitional provisions

The transitional regime of this Code shall be governed by the following rules:

1.	Crimes and misdemeanors committed prior to the entry into force of this Code shall be judged in accordance with the Penal Code of 1974, the laws that reform it and other special laws containing criminal offenses and misdemeanors.

2.	Once this Code enters into force, its provisions shall have retroactive effect, insofar as they favor the accused or sentenced person. Judges may proceed ex officio or at the request of a party to rectify sentences that have been issued before the entry into force of this Code, applying the most favorable provision.

3.	For the determination of the most favorable law, consideration must be given, in addition to the typical elements and the penalty that would correspond to the act, to aggravating or mitigating circumstances, generic or specific, the penalty corresponding to the concurrence of crimes and the causes of exclusion of criminal liability, if any. In addition, the penitentiary benefits that in each case might correspond shall be considered.

4.	For the assessment of recidivism as an aggravating circumstance, those crimes provided for in the repealed Penal Code that harm or endanger the same legal interest shall be understood as included within the same Title.

5.	For the purposes of criminal proceedings, the penalty shall be homologated as follows:
a)	Penalties more than correctional shall correspond to serious penalty;
b)	Correctional penalties shall correspond to less serious penalty.

6.	The denomination of the monthly minimum wage of the industrial sector, contained in this Code, corresponds to the amount equivalent to the monthly salary that appears in the list of positions in the industrial sector in accordance with the law.

Modifications made to the monthly minimum wage of the industrial sector shall not be considered as a variation to the criminal type, for the purposes of the principle of retroactive application of the most favorable criminal law.

7.	The statute of limitations for criminal prosecution of cases pending in the courts at the time the new Penal Code enters into force shall be governed by the provisions of the Penal Code of 1974 and the Criminal Procedure Code.

8.	For the purposes of this Code, the crime of murder contemplated in article 140 is equivalent to atrocious murder contained in article 135 of the Penal Code of 1974 that is repealed. Consequently, those accused of the crime of atrocious murder according to the repealed Penal Code shall continue to be prosecuted for the crime of murder and those convicted of the same crime shall have their sanction reviewed in accordance with the penalty for murder in this Penal Code.

9.	Those accused or sentenced for the crime of infanticide established in article 136 of the repealed Code must be tried for the crime of aggravated homicide under the circumstance contemplated in article 36 numeral 2 of this Code, and in cases of conviction for this crime, it must be reviewed in accordance with this provision.

10.	The provisions of the Penal Code of 1974 and its reforms, and those of the Criminal Procedure Code in which reference is made to serious insults, correspond to the crime of insults according to this Code.

11.	In those current norms that refer to the crime of contempt, it shall be understood that it refers to the misdemeanor or crime that corresponds according to this Penal Code.

CHAPTER IV FINAL PROVISIONS

Art. 568 Entry into force

This Code shall enter into force sixty days after its publication in La Gaceta, Official Gazette.

Given in the city of Managua, in the Session Hall of the National Assembly, on the thirteenth day of the month of November of the year two thousand seven.

(s) Eng. René Núñez Téllez	(s)	Dr. Wilfredo Navarro Moreira
President of the		Secretary of the
National Assembly		National Assembly
(There is a Seal)		(There is a Seal)

Therefore. Let it be held as Law of the Republic. Publish and Execute it. Managua, sixteenth of November of the year two thousand seven.

(s) Daniel Ortega Saavedra President of the Republic of Nicaragua.
(There is a Seal)
