Law No. 82 of October 24, 2013, WHICH ADOPTS PREVENTION MEASURES AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND REFORMS THE PENAL CODE TO CLASSIFY FEMICIDE AND

Law No. 82 of October 24, 2013, WHICH ADOPTS PREVENTION MEASURES AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND REFORMS THE PENAL CODE TO CLASSIFY FEMICIDE AND PUNISH ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN. - National - Codes - Legislation - VLEX 864656264
Smart legal information
Panama
|
+1 (305) 890 29 82
Products
Contents
Integrations
Log in
Sign up
Home
Legislation
Codes
National
Law No. 82 of October 24, 2013, WHICH ADOPTS PREVENTION MEASURES AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND REFORMS THE PENAL CODE TO CLASSIFY FEMICIDE AND PUNISH ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
Consolidated Text
Citations
24
Cited by
Versions
2
Related
Vincent
Published in
GOPAn of October 25, 2013
THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY DECREES:

Chapter I

General Provisions
Articles 1 to 4

Article 1

This Law aims to guarantee the right of women of any age to a life free of violence and to protect the rights of women victims of violence in a context of unequal power relations, as well as to prevent and punish all forms of violence against women, in compliance with the obligations undertaken by the State.

Article 2

This Law shall apply when the conduct described therein is directed against a woman of any age solely because she is a woman, in a context of unequal power relations, in the public or private sphere and in any other type of relationship, whether labor, teaching, academic, community or of any kind.
This Law must be interpreted according to the principles contained in the
Political Constitution of the Republic
, the laws and international human rights treaties or conventions ratified by the Republic of Panama, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and its Optional Protocol and the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women or Convention of Belém do Pará.

Article 3

Violence against women shall be understood as any action, omission or discriminatory practice based on belonging to the female sex in the public or private sphere, which places women at a disadvantage with respect to men, causes them death, harm or physical, sexual, psychological, economic or patrimonial suffering, as well as threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, including those perpetrated by the State or its agents.

Articulo 4

For the purposes of this Law, the following terms shall be understood as follows:
Sexual stalking. To pursue, spy on, observe in hiding and cautiously wait for a woman, with sexual or other purposes.
Sexual harassment. Any act or conduct of a sexual nature that is unwanted and that interferes with work, studies or the social environment, that is established as a condition of employment or creates an intimidating environment or that causes the victim harmful effects on her physical or psychological well-being.
Private sphere. That where interpersonal, domestic, family, couple or trust relationships take place, within which acts of violence against a woman are committed.
Public sphere. That where interpersonal relationships take place in the social, labor, community, educational, religious sphere or any other type of relationship that is not included in the private sphere.
Amicus curiae. Friend of the court or tribunal. It consists of presentations that may be made by third parties, external to a judicial dispute and who, without being a party to the proceedings, have a justified interest in the final resolution of the litigation, in order to express their opinions on the matter, through contributions of significance for the support of the judicial process.
Psychological damage. Deterioration, dysfunction, alteration, disorder or disease of psychogenic or psycho-organic origin that, as a result of a traumatic experience or harmful event, affects the affective and/or intellectual and/or volitional spheres and limits the capacity for individual, family, work, social and/or recreational enjoyment.
Femicide. To cause the death of a woman based on belonging to the female sex, due to discrimination or any other form of violence.
Harassment. Act or omission, not necessarily with sexual motivations, with abuse of power, that damages the tranquility, self-esteem, health, integrity, freedom and security of the victim, prevents her development and violates equity. It may consist of a single harmful event or a series of events whose sum produces the damage and includes the refusal to give women the same employment opportunities, not applying the same selection criteria, not respecting their permanence or general working conditions, the disqualification of the work performed, threats, intimidation, humiliation, exploitation and all types of discrimination based on their condition as a woman.
Judicial mistreatment. Unequal treatment by judicial authorities, based on sexual stereotypes, that places women at a disadvantage. It includes the failure to recognize and apply international conventions for the protection of human rights, not giving due importance to crimes of violence against women, not taking into account the syndrome of affective dependence that women may suffer in the assessment of the case, limiting victims in their testimony during the hearing and not assessing the risk or danger to the victim or the threats or violence in the couple relationship at the time of granting bail bonds for release.
Couple relationship. The interpersonal relationship between a man and a woman, whether or not they have cohabited or cohabit, who maintain or have maintained an intimate or romantic relationship or who have procreated a son or daughter together, regardless of whether they are or have been spouses.
Reparation to the victim. Set of measures aimed at bringing the victim's situation closer to the state in which she would have been had the criminal act not occurred.
Representative of collective or diffuse interests. Associations or organizations recognized by the State, whose interests are related to the defense of women's rights, which allow them to intervene in criminal proceedings for crimes of violence against women.
Revictimization. Subjecting the victim to a new violation of her legitimate rights, as a result of the management of the social and governmental institutions involved in the prevention, detection, care and punishment of violence against women.
Violence against reproductive freedom. That which violates the right of women to decide freely and responsibly the number of pregnancies or the interval between births, in accordance with the provisions of the law.
Teaching and educational violence. Any conduct by teaching staff that affects the self-esteem of female students with acts of discrimination based on their sex, limitations and/or physical characteristics. It includes discrimination against female teachers and professors based on their condition as women and the sexual harassment and harassment of teachers and students.
Violence in public and private health services. Unequal treatment against women by health personnel. It includes refusing to provide medical care to a woman, who by law has this right, not providing comprehensive emergency care in cases of violence against women, negligence in recording on suspicion forms, violating confidentiality, not taking into account the risks faced by the affected person and not complying with the obligation to report.
Violence in the community sphere. Individual or collective acts that violate fundamental rights of women and promote their denigration, discrimination, marginalization or exclusion from groups, associations, civic clubs or other collectives, in the public sphere. It includes violence exercised in political parties, unions, business organizations, sports organizations and civil society.
Physical violence. Act of aggression in which bodily force is intentionally used directly or by means of any object, weapon or substance, that causes or may cause damage, physical suffering, injuries, disability or illness to a woman.
Institutional violence. That exercised by personnel in the service of the State, professionals, personnel and agents belonging to any organ or institution of the State, at the national, local or regional level, whose purpose is to delay, obstruct or prevent women from having access to public policies and resources for their performance, and to exercise the rights provided for in this Law or any other.
Labor and wage violence. That which is exercised by persons who have an employment relationship with the victim, regardless of the hierarchical relationship. It includes sexual harassment, harassment based on belonging to the female sex, exploitation, wage inequality for comparable work and all types of discrimination based on their sex.
Media violence. That publication or dissemination of stereotyped messages and images through any mass media that, directly or indirectly, promotes the exploitation of women or their images, insults, defames, dishonors, humiliates or violates the dignity of women, as well as the use of women in pornographic messages or images, legitimizing unequal treatment or constructing sociocultural patterns that reproduce inequality or generate violence against women.
Obstetric violence. That which health personnel exercise over the body and reproductive processes of women, expressed in abusive, dehumanized, humiliating or rude treatment.
Patrimonial and economic violence. Action or omission, in the context of unequal power relations between men and women, that affects the use, enjoyment, administration, availability or accessibility of a woman to material goods, causing her damage, losses, transformation, theft, destruction, retention or destruction of objects, work instruments, personal documents, goods, rights or other economic resources, as well as the unjustified limitation of access to and management of common goods or economic resources.
Political violence. Discrimination in access to opportunities to occupy public positions or posts and to resources, as well as to positions of popular election or relevant positions within political parties.
Political violence against women includes all those actions and omissions, based on gender elements and occurring in the exercise of political rights, that have the purpose or result of diminishing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment and/or exercise of these rights or of the prerogatives inherent to a public office.
This type of violence can take place in any sphere: political, economic, social, cultural, civil, within the family or domestic unit or in any international relationship, in the community, in a party or political institution. That is, it includes the public and private spheres.
Political violence can be perpetrated by any person or group of persons, including State agents, work colleagues, such as hierarchical superiors and subordinates; political parties or their representatives, media and in general any person or groups of persons.
Psychological violence. Any act or omission that may consist of negligence, abandonment, neglect, jealousy, insults, humiliation, devaluation, marginalization, indifference, destructive comparisons, rejection, restriction of self-determination and/or threats.
Sexual violence. Act of physical or psychological violence against a woman, whatever her relationship with the aggressor, with the intent to violate the freedom and sexual integrity of women, including rape, sexual humiliation, forcing to view pornographic material, forcing to engage in or witness sexual relations with third parties, recording or disseminating without consent images by any means, forced prostitution and the denial of the right to use family planning methods, both natural and artificial, or to adopt protective measures against sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, even in marriage or in any couple relationship.
Symbolic violence. Messages, icons or signs that transmit or reproduce sexist stereotypes of domination or aggression against women in any public or private sphere, including social media.
Numeral 24 modificado por la ley N° 202, que modifica la
ley 82 de 2013
, sobre violencia contra la mujer, y la
ley 7 de 2018
, referente a la prevención de actos discriminatorios, publicada en la Gaceta Oficial de Panamá de 8 de marzo de 2021.

Chapter I

Guiding Principles
Articles 5 to 12

Article 5

Responsibility.
The State is responsible for respecting the rights of women and for contributing to the elimination of violence against them, as set forth in the international instruments ratified by the Republic of Panama, such as the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women or Convention of Belém do Pará, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other human rights conventions.

Article 6

Comprehensiveness.
The care of women victims of violence, which includes indirect victims, must include information, prevention, guidance, protection, sanction, reparation and biopsychosocial stabilization.

Article 7

Autonomy.
The State recognizes and protects the independence of women to make their own decisions without interference.

Article 8

Coordination.
Public or private entities and media outlets shall carry out coordinated and articulated actions in order to provide prevention, care and comprehensive responses to all forms of violence against women.

Article 9

Differentiated care.
The State shall guarantee high priority care to the specific needs and circumstances of women in situations of vulnerability or at risk to guarantee their effective access to the rights provided for in this Law.

Article 10

Equality in income.
It implies that there be equal remuneration and valuation for work, without distinction of sex, including domestic work.

Article 11

Equality of respect.
It implies the recognition of women as persons and that they be given equal respect as men.

Article 12

Non-discrimination.
To promote equality and equity in the participation of women with respect to men in work, politics and the right to association, creating the necessary conditions for the elimination of political environments hostile to women. In the labor field, it is prohibited to request proof of pregnancy to access paid employment. To evaluate under equal conditions with men, the merits of women to occupy a position, without discrimination based solely on being a woman.

Chapter III

Rights of Women Victims of Violence
Articles 13 and 14

Article 13

Women have the right to a dignified life free from physical, sexual, psychological and patrimonial violence, to privacy, not to be subjected to torture or cruel and degrading treatment or to any form of discrimination. They also have the right to real and effective equality, to freedom and autonomy, to the free development of personality, to physical, mental, sexual and reproductive health and to personal security, in addition to the rights recognized in law or in international treaties and conventions ratified by the Republic of Panama.

Article 14

Women, especially those who are victims of any form of violence provided for in this Law, have the right to:
Receive comprehensive care from public and private health services, with sufficient, accessible and quality coverage.
Access information about the location where care, emergency, support and comprehensive personal and/or family recovery services are provided.
Receive guidance, legal advice and free, immediate and specialized technical-legal assistance, from the moment the act constituting violence is brought to the attention of the authority; it is the State's responsibility to guarantee this right. This right extends to their family members.
Receive compensation when comprehensive care, support and recovery generate costs. The court hearing a criminal case shall order the aggressor to cover the costs of this care and assistance described in the preceding numerals, if there is a conviction against him. In these cases, the victim shall not be required to provide any type of bond.
Receive clear, complete, truthful and timely information in relation to their rights in general and to the mechanisms and procedures established in this Law and other concordant norms, taking into account ethnic, cultural and generational diversity.
Give their informed consent for medical-legal examinations in cases of sexual violence and choose the sex of the practitioner for the performance of these, within the possibilities offered by the service. Health service providers shall promote the existence of practitioners of both sexes for the care of victims of violence.
Receive immediate and comprehensive assistance and multidisciplinary, medical, psychological, psychiatric and specialized forensic care under the terms and conditions established in the legal system for them and their sons and daughters, as well as support for training and job placement and assistance from an interpreter in the event that they do not speak Spanish.
Access truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-repetition in the face of acts constituting violence and to be heard personally by the judicial authority and by the competent administrative authority.
Obtain stabilization of their situation in accordance with the terms provided for in this Law.
Decide whether they can be confronted with the aggressor in any of the care spaces and in administrative, judicial or other proceedings.
Receive, in the case of women with disabilities, deprived of liberty or belonging to any other group of persons in situations of special vulnerability, dignified and equal treatment with all family members, to have adequate spaces and conditions of equity, opportunities and autonomy so that they can exercise their rights, as well as to have their participation guaranteed in matters related to their family and social environment.
Receive reparation for the damage, which must include, in addition to economic compensation, measures aimed at providing the victim with medical, psychological, moral and social reparation.
Receive safe, dignified and free shelter for them and any member of their family who may be at risk.
Receive humane treatment that respects their integrity and the full exercise of their rights, avoiding revictimization.
Be valued and educated free from behavioral stereotypes and sociocultural practices based on concepts of inferiority or subordination.
Decide on their reproductive life in accordance with the law, as well as the number of pregnancies and when to have them.
Obtain protection of their privacy, guaranteeing the confidentiality of proceedings, except for requests from judicial authorities.
Participate in the process and receive information on the status of the case.
Have efficient mechanisms to report officials for non-compliance with established deadlines and other irregularities.
Obtain, from their employers, the necessary permits to receive required treatments or follow up on judicial processes without affecting their labor rights.
To make use of the right granted in this numeral, female workers must, in the first instance, present to their employer proof of having filed the complaint, and proof, each time, of having attended the corresponding proceeding.
The use of these permits, provided they are justified in each case, shall not affect remuneration nor eliminate or compensate for any other leave to which one is entitled under current legislation.
Numeral 20 added by law No. 202, which amends
law 82 of 2013
, on violence against women, and
law 7 of 2018
, regarding the prevention of discriminatory acts, published in the Official Gazette of Panama on March 8, 2021.

Chapter IV

Obligations of the State

Article 15

Article 15

For the purposes of this Law, the State shall have the following obligations:
To strengthen and institutionalize the bodies responsible for addressing violence against women, and to ensure the sustainability of the National Committee against Violence against Women.
To allocate a budget item for the National Committee against Violence against Women in the budget of the National Women's Institute to guarantee compliance with the objectives of the public policies for awareness-raising and prevention provided for in this Law.
To coordinate and/or execute continuing education programs, with a frequency of no less than one year, for governmental and non-governmental offices, with special emphasis on justice system personnel, health personnel and police authorities, that guarantee adequate prevention, protection and care for women victims of violence.
To implement in all spheres the recommendations of international human rights bodies regarding women's human rights, and to promote the removal of sociocultural patterns that lead to and sustain gender inequality and power relations over women.
To establish procedural protocols reaching all State institutions involved with women's human rights, specifically indicating the procedure to be followed and the competencies of each according to their area of attention.
To promote actions to develop in governmental and non-governmental institutions plans for prevention, detection and attention to situations of sexual harassment or harassment based on sex or any other form of violence against women, which includes the establishment of a complaints procedure for the reporting, investigation and sanctioning of aggressors in all governmental institutions.
To establish gender units or women's protection units or to strengthen existing ones, in all State institutions and ministries, provided with the necessary budget items for the development and execution of programs for prevention, training, detection and attention to situations of any form of violence against women.
To guarantee free and expeditious access to justice for women victims of violence.
To encourage the cooperation and participation of civil society, as well as its advice through amicus curiae briefs, engaging private entities and non-State public actors in the prevention of violence against women.
10. To guarantee the existence and availability of economic resources that allow compliance with the objectives of this Law.
To carry out all actions conducive to making effective the principles and rights recognized by the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women or Convention of Belém do Pará and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other normative instruments.

Chapter V

National Committee against Violence against Women
Articles 16 to 20

Article 16

The National Committee against Violence against Women is hereby created, hereinafter CONVIMU, attached to the National Women's Institute, which shall preside over it as the governing body for policies relating to the prevention and eradication of violence against women, responsible for interinstitutional coordination, the promotion and monitoring of awareness-raising campaigns and the generation of spaces for discussion for the agreement and promotion of public policies for the prevention of violence against women and femicide, which are considered matters of national urgency and social interest, in accordance with international conventions on said matter ratified by the Republic of Panama.

Article 17

CONVIMU shall have as its purpose the joining of efforts, instruments, policies, services and interinstitutional actions for the prevention, attention, sanction and eradication of violence against women, with functions of advising, monitoring and oversight of public policies on violence against women.

Article 18

CONVIMU shall be composed of the heads or representatives of:
The National Women's Institute.
The National Women's Council.
The Judicial Branch, Unit for Access to Justice and Gender.
The Public Prosecutor's Office.
The Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences.
The Ministry of Government.
The Ministry of Social Development.
The Ministry of Health.
The Ministry of Education.
The Ministry of Labor and Labor Development.
The Ministry of Public Security.
The Ombudsman's Office.
The University of Panama, Women's Institute.
The Association of Municipalities of Panama.
Women's organizations of civil society that are active with demonstrable track record in defense against violence and promotion of women's human rights, that express their interest in writing to the National Women's Institute, upon call, and meet the requirements as determined by this Law and its regulations.

Article 19

The Executive Secretariat of CONVIMU shall prepare the draft regulations for its internal operation and shall present it to its members for their consideration and approval, within three months following the date of entry into force of this Law.

Article 20

CONVIMU shall have the following responsibilities:
l. To prepare and monitor the comprehensive plan to prevent and eradicate violence against women.
To promote knowledge of and respect for women's human rights, with the objective of transforming sociocultural models of conduct of women and men, including the formulation of formal and non-formal education and instruction actions, with the purpose of preventing and eradicating stereotyped behaviors that permit and foster violence against women.
To contribute to designing a basic training module on human rights and citizenship for women that must be implemented by institutions and shelters, care and protection centers for victims.
To provide technical support to the National Women's Institute in its role as advisory body, when required to monitor compliance with this Law and applicable international instruments, following up on interinstitutional coordination and ensuring that the measures established in this Law to prevent and eradicate violence against women are fully and effectively complied with.
To promote the culture of reporting violence against women within the framework of the effectiveness of institutions to guarantee their safety and integrity.
To ensure that the media do not foster violence against women and that they contribute to the eradication of all types of violence to strengthen respect for human rights and the dignity of women, and to report the violation of any provision of this Law by a media outlet.
To monitor that non-profit organizations and civic and social associations adapt their constitutive statutes to allow the entry and equal participation of women and men at all levels of management, and to report any discrimination against women by them.
8 To present an annual report to the three Branches of the State on the situation of violence against women, its manifestations, magnitude, advances and setbacks, its consequences and impact.

Chapter VI

Public Policies for Awareness-Raising, Prevention and Care
Articles 21 to 35

Articulo 21

Awareness, prevention and care policies are the set of public orientations and guidelines that must be executed by the competent bodies and instances, in order to guide actions aimed at ensuring the rights and guarantees enshrined in this Law.

Articulo 22

The awareness and prevention measures established in this Law are binding for all organs of Public Administration, justice and traditional authorities, within their respective areas of competence. To this end, the State shall develop public policies aimed at:
l. Raising awareness, training and capacitating persons engaged in awareness-raising, prevention and care of victims of any form of violence against women, as well as those who provide care to aggressors.
Supporting and guiding women, families and/or environments at risk of violence provided for in this Law.
Advising social media outlets for an adequate approach to the subject matter and the dissemination of women's rights.
Developing socio-educational campaigns for the prevention of violence, knowledge of benefits, services, victims' rights and respect for values in all instances of socialization.
Promoting and facilitating information to citizens, community organizations and local networks to make effective a life free of violence.
Monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness and compliance with the functions assigned by this Law to each institution.
State entities, within the scope of their respective competences, shall regulate legal norms and take the corresponding budgetary and administrative measures to guarantee the right of women to a life free of violence, in accordance with this Law and other laws and international treaties on the protection of human rights.
This provision must be complied with within two months following the entry into force of this Law.

Articulo 23

Institutions shall coordinate among themselves, according to their competence in matters of prevention, care and eradication of violence against women, to comply with the obligations established in Chapters IV and V of this Law, in addition to those provided for in other laws.

Articulo 24

Municipalities and comarca authorities shall have the following powers, in accordance with the mandates of international conventions, in addition to those attributed to them by law:
Including the issue of violence against women and training in international conventions for the protection of women's rights that are law of the Republic, in municipal and comarca training and development programs.
These topics must be included in the continuous and permanent training of personnel working in corregidurías, traditional authorities and persons who care for victims, with a frequency of not less than one year, as well as in dissemination and information programs that contribute to eradicating violence against women in all its forms, guaranteeing respect for the dignity of women and promoting equality between men and women. To this end, the modules to be used shall be validated in the different national indigenous languages and communication systems with CONVIMU.
Managing and supporting the creation of educational programs on equality and equity between the sexes aimed at local, comarca authorities and communities.
Managing and supporting the creation of safe shelters for victims.
Entering into cooperation, coordination and consultation agreements on the subject with civil society organizations, international organizations and others.
Promoting the creation of local networks against domestic, sexual and other types of violence against women aimed at the prevention and protection of women victims of violence, in coordination with the National Women's Institute.
Managing and creating community self-help groups for women victims, supported and accompanied by persons from non-governmental organizations and institutions working on the subject, as non-hierarchical and confidential spaces for support, exchange, reflection and information.
Promoting training programs for community leaders on women's human rights, awareness-raising and training on masculinity and violence against women issues, as well as existing legislation, their responsibilities, available resources and services, including the obligations of the Public Prosecutor's Office and the Judicial Branch, with basic elements of care and support for victims.
Informing that any person may report any act of violence against women, even if a minor, even if the victim is not a relative or acquaintance.
Establishing as a requirement for the assignment of corregidores and personnel who care for or interview victims or complainants who appear before corregidurías and other comarca authorities not having a history of violence against women.
Applying protection measures when authorized to do so, in order to guarantee the protection of victims.
All police authorities must consult the register of aggressors upon receiving a complaint to verify whether the person reported is a repeat offender.

Articulo 25

The Ministry of Social Development shall have the following obligations:
Executing and promoting in coordination with the National Women's Institute and all State institutions the promotion and application of public policies aimed at the social, cultural, political and economic development of women, especially those who are in a situation of vulnerability, with the purpose of guaranteeing the full exercise of their rights and a life free of violence.
Mainstreaming in poverty reduction and social protection programs socio-educational components, promotion and defense of the rights of victims of gender violence to impact the lives of women and their families and society, prioritizing women in situations of vulnerability.
Guaranteeing resources to the National Women's Institute for the creation and comprehensive operation of shelters and/or reception centers per province for women victims of violence. This care must be oriented towards immediate integration into their family, social and work environment.
Establishing in coordination with the Ministry of Government recommendations and observations on the contents and programs broadcast in social media outlets to prevent the use of women as sexual objects, sexist language and any other content that stimulates forms of violence against women.

Articulo 26

The National Women's Institute, in addition to those established in the law that creates it, shall have the following powers:
To promote, guide, coordinate, execute and implement the policies and programs established in this Law and in others that fall within its competence to be implemented in the different Organs of the State at the national level, in the various municipal institutions, in the university, union, business and religious spheres, in organizations for the defense of women's rights and in others of civil society with experience in the matter.
To coordinate with the Organs of the State, the municipalities and the traditional authorities the design of training plans for their officials or collaborators, as well as with the other entities that intervene in the prevention of the acts established by this Law.
To advise on the scope and impact of violence on the lives of women, the family, the community and society, in coordination with the competent authorities, the Network of Governmental Mechanisms for Equal Opportunities for Women and the local networks for the prevention of violence against women and citizen coexistence.
To establish the guidelines for programs, projects and actions with the participation of specialized agencies and local networks for the prevention of violence against women and citizen coexistence with the advice of the National Women's Council.
To ensure that all institutions establish, periodically update, maintain, expand, improve and provide technical sustainability for the systems for recording cases, complaints, sanctions and services related to violence against women disaggregated by sex, origin, ethnicity, age and other variables that allow for official data, which shall be reported to both the National Institute of Statistics and Census and the National Women's Institute.
To facilitate the reporting of acts of violence against women, through the use of information and communication technology tools to obtain information, advice and follow-up on the prevention of violence against women and assistance to those who suffer it.
To act as a specialized advisory body in judicial proceedings for violence against women at the request of the competent authorities.

Articulo 27

The Ministry of Health shall develop the following actions with the purpose of raising awareness, preventing and addressing violence against women:
To provide, in coordination with the National Women's Institute, mandatory, continuous and permanent training and awareness-raising to all health personnel on the problem of violence against women.
To design specific interdisciplinary protocols, in coordination with CONVIMU, and coordinate the preparation of the single form that must be used by all agencies in the critical route, to avoid revictimization.
To detect early and address all types and modalities of violence against women, primarily in the areas of primary health care, emergencies, medical clinic, obstetrics, gynecology, traumatology, pediatrics and mental health, specifying the procedure to be followed for the care of women victims of violence, safeguarding the privacy of the person assisted and promoting a non-sexist medical practice. Said procedure must ensure the obtaining and preservation of evidentiary elements.
To provide, through the application of interinstitutional protocols, multidisciplinary treatment and care to women victims of violence, ensuring specialized assistance for sons, daughters and close family circle, whether or not they are witnesses to the violence, and in the reeducation of aggressors.
To systematize institutional statistics from public and private health service delivery units on suspicion forms and other instruments for collecting data on violence against women in order to ensure that they are sent to the competent authorities and the National Institute of Statistics and Census.
To define violence against women as a public health problem and incorporate it into the national and priority action plans of the health sector, allocating the necessary human, material and financial resources for its adequate approach.
In the case of conscientious objection, to guarantee the presence of professionals in public health institutions in remote places, who can terminate a pregnancy when necessary and when the woman has the right to have it performed in cases permitted by law, with her consent.
To promote respect for women's decisions regarding the exercise of their sexual rights and reproductive rights provided for by law.
To give priority attention to women victims of violence.
To promote the duty to report that health personnel have, exploring the risks faced by the affected person, to maintain confidentiality, to ensure the correct completion of suspicion forms and to guarantee respect and care for the dignity of women victims of violence.
To define actions and allocate resources to immediately initiate retroviral treatment against HIV/AIDS for all victims of sexual assault who arrive at medical care centers and to make emergency contraception available to them, with the informed consent of the victim.

Articulo 28

The Ministry of Education shall have the following obligations:
To ensure that official and private educational institutions incorporate at all levels of schooling and at the undergraduate and graduate level the training of teaching staff, students and administrative personnel in respect for rights, freedoms, sexual health and reproductive health, self-esteem, autonomy and equality between men and women as part of the educational curriculum.
To provide specific guidance to the affected person and/or their guardian, according to the circumstances, if the existence of any type of violence against women is detected, as well as to inform them about their rights, resources, services and available support.
To eliminate sexist content in all educational texts and teaching materials that promote the construction of discriminatory social representations and justifications for sexual hierarchies.
To raise awareness and train fathers and mothers about the consequences of violence against women and its impact on the personal and academic development of students and the educational community.
To enter into cooperation and coordination agreements on the matter with the National Women's Institute, civil society organizations or other governmental entities to design and disseminate educational materials that promote the prevention and care of violence against women.
To develop protocols for psycho-pedagogical offices in the care of girls, boys, adolescents and their mothers, fathers and family members in order to offer safe and confidential spaces for relief, support and guidance.
These protocols must contain, at a minimum, the following components:
a. Interview in a sensitive and supportive manner about the occurrence of violence against women in the private sphere.
b. Exploration of the risks faced when the possibility of occurrence of violence is considered.
c. Confidentiality.
d. Accurate information and list of resources, services and available support.
e. Obligation to report if there is a crime.
f. Channeling of affected persons to a specialized care space.

Articulo 29

The Ministry of Labor and Labor Development shall have the following obligations:
Develop awareness, training and incentive programs for companies and unions to eliminate labor violence against women and promote equal rights, opportunities and treatment in the workplace to guarantee respect for the principle of non-discrimination in:
a. Access to employment, in matters of recruitment and selection, which includes not requiring a pregnancy test to access a job position.
b. Professional career, in matters of promotion and training.
c. Permanence in the job position.
d. The right to equal remuneration for equal work.
e. The right to work in an environment free from harassment, sexual harassment or favoritism.
Promote through specific programs the obligation to establish an agile and effective complaints procedure, as well as the prevention of sexual harassment against women in companies and unions.
Promote policies aimed at training and labor inclusion of women victims of violence.
Promote respect for the labor rights of women victims of violence, particularly when they must be absent from their job position to comply with professional, administrative or judicial decision requirements.
Develop a model complaints procedure against all types of labor violence, which serves as a basis to be adapted and used mandatorily by private companies.
Fine those who violate the provisions of this Law regarding discrimination or violence in employment.

Articulo 30

The Ministry of Government shall have the following obligations:
Raise awareness at all hierarchical levels on the issue of violence against women within the framework of respect for human rights.
Include in its training programs specific content on the human rights of women and non-violence.
Promote policies to facilitate women's access to administrative police justice, through the creation, operation and strengthening of information centers, legal counseling and free legal representation.
Promote agreements with professional associations, academic institutions and civil society organizations to provide specialized and free legal assistance.
Guarantee access to specific care services for women deprived of liberty.
Establish as a requirement to grant legal status to non-profit organizations and civic and social associations that their constitutive statutes allow the entry and equal participation of women and men at all management levels, without any type of discrimination against the female sex.
Fine media outlets that engage in discrimination or violence against women, determining the amount of the fine in proportion to the severity of the offense.

Articulo 31

The Ministry of Public Security shall have the following obligations:
Foster in police and security forces the development of interdisciplinary services that provide support to women who suffer violence to optimize their care, referral to other services and compliance with judicial provisions.
Update protocols for police forces and monitor their compliance, in order to provide adequate responses to avoid revictimization and facilitate proper care, assistance and police protection to women who come to file complaints at police stations.
Create a specialized police force to intervene in addressing violence against women in coordination with government institutions.
Create and implement a computerized registry of aggressors and disaggregated statistics, which must be consulted by institutions directly involved in the detection, care, investigation and prosecution of violence against women.
Raise awareness and train police forces on the issue of violence against women within the framework of respect for human rights.
Include in training programs and at all hierarchical levels of police forces subjects and/or specific content on the human rights of women and especially against violence against women.
Guarantee the protection of women victims of violence, ensuring the presence of police specialized in handling this problem and their specific training in risk assessment instruments and indicators.
Guarantee that in each police zone or barracks there is a unit trained in violence against women, who is the person who interviews the victims or complainants who present themselves.
Establish a specialized unit on violence against women in the Police of each province and several in the metropolitan area of Panama, which provide training, information and support to the community, to other members of the Institution and to the Public Prosecutor's Office, in coordination with the National Women's Institute. This unit must oversee compliance with the police action protocol by all Police personnel and the registration of cases in the care forms.

Articulo 32

The Public Prosecutor's Office shall have the following obligations:
Strengthen the implementation of the Secretariat for Human Rights, Access to Justice and Gender in support of women victims of violence.
Provide victims with guidance and counseling for their effective care and protection.
Issue the necessary measures so that the victim receives emergency medical care.
Provide the agencies responsible for compiling statistics by gender with the necessary references on the number of victims served.
Provide victims with comprehensive information about public or private institutions responsible for their care.
Provide victims with objective information that allows them to recognize their situation.
7 Promote a culture of respect for the human rights of women and guarantee the safety of those who file complaints.
Enter into cooperation, coordination and agreement agreements on the matter with other government institutions or private or international organizations on the subject of women's human rights.
9 Promote the training of all personnel responsible for the administration of justice in matters of women's human rights.
Consult the registry of aggressors before deciding on the application or non-application of a protection measure to accurately assess the risk faced by the victim.
Interview the victim separately from the aggressor.

Articulo 33

In the Judicial Branch the following obligations are established:
The Unit for Access to Justice and Gender must maintain a computerized registry of aggressors, based on convictions for acts of violence provided for in this Law, specifying, at a minimum, the age, marital status, profession or occupation of the woman who suffers violence, as well as of the aggressor, relationship with the aggressor, nature of the facts, measures adopted and their results and the sanctions imposed on the aggressor.
The courts that intervene in cases of violence provided for in this Law must submit annually the relevant information for said registry.
Judges may admit amicus curiae and/or representatives of collective or diffuse interests, organizations or public or private entities dedicated to the protection of women's rights.
Strengthen the Office for the Protection of Victims, so that legal advice and free legal representation are provided to women victims and survivors of violence, without distinction of their socioeconomic situation.

Article 34

The National Council of Journalism shall have the following obligations:
To promote the dissemination of messages and permanent awareness and consciousness-raising campaigns, directed at the population in general and in particular at women, about the most relevant problems of women and their right to live a life free of violence.
2 To promote in the mass media respect for the human rights of women and the treatment of violence against women.
To provide training to professional personnel of the media on the issue of violence against women.
To promote the elimination of sexism in information.
To promote, as a matter of social and business responsibility, the dissemination of advertising campaigns to prevent and eradicate violence against women.
To raise awareness among directors, technicians and professional guilds of communication so that they promote a respectful image of women.
To highlight the systematic dissemination of the achievements of women in different spheres.

Article 35

Non-governmental organizations, with representation at the national level in the fight against violence against women, may participate with representation or with amicus curiae briefs in cases related to the issue, and enter into agreements with governmental institutions on the human rights of women.

Chapter VII

Criminal Provisions
Articles 36 to 48

Article 36

The following is added

article 42-A

to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Article 42-A

Customs or cultural or religious traditions may not be invoked to prevent criminal investigation or as exculpatory defenses to perpetrate, inflict, consent to, promote, instigate or tolerate the crime of violence against women or any person.

Article 37

Numeral
1
of article
30
of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 50

The penalties established by this Code are:
Principal:
a Imprisonment.
b. Weekend arrest.
c. Day-fines.
d. Multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment.

Article 38

The

article 54

of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 54

Weekend arrest consists of the confinement of the sentenced person in a penitentiary center for a period of forty-eight hours, which shall be served according to the circumstances of each case, between six o'clock in the evening on Friday and six o'clock in the morning on the following Monday.
The arrest shall have a minimum of twelve and a maximum of two hundred weekends for the commission of a single crime.
This penalty shall not be applied in the case of crimes against Life and Personal Integrity, Domestic Violence, Against Sexual Freedom and Integrity and Against Trafficking in Persons, if the victim is a woman.

Article 39

The following is added

article 62-A

to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Article 62-4

Multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment consists of an intervention program for pre-treatment diagnostic evaluation, psychoeducational intervention and evaluation of effectiveness and program follow-up, structured according to the punishable conduct, carried out by qualified, qualified and accredited professionals in behavioral sciences and clinical psychology and psychiatry, with the collaboration of social work and mental health nursing, aimed at modifying the attitudes, beliefs and behaviors of the aggressor.

Article 40

Numerals
2
and
8
of article
132
of the
Criminal Code
are repealed.

Article 41

The following is added

article 132-A

to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Article 132-A

Whoever causes the death of a woman, in any of the following circumstances, shall be punished with a penalty of twenty-five to thirty years of imprisonment:
When there is a relationship of a couple or there had been an unsuccessful attempt to establish or reestablish a relationship of this nature or of affective intimacy or there are kinship ties with the victim.
When there is a relationship of trust with the victim or of a labor, teaching nature or any other that implies subordination or superiority.
When the act is committed in the presence of the victim's sons or daughters.
4 When the perpetrator has taken advantage of any condition of risk or physical or psychological vulnerability of the victim.
As a result of group rituals or for revenge.
For the contempt or abuse of the victim's body, to satisfy sexual instincts or the commission of acts of genital mutilation or any other type of mutilation.
When the victim's body is exposed, deposited or thrown in a public or private place or when the victim has been held incommunicado, whatever the time, prior to her death.
To cover up a rape.
When the victim is in a state of pregnancy.
For any motive generated by reason of her condition as a woman or in a context of unequal power relations.

Article 42

The

article 135

of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 135

Whoever induces or assists another to commit suicide shall incur imprisonment of one to five years, if the suicide is completed.
The penalty shall be twelve to fifteen years of imprisonment and multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment in a state or private health center that has specialized care when a woman is induced to suicide through mistreatment.

Article 43

The final paragraph of

article 137

of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 137

The penalty shall be six to ten years of imprisonment if the injury occurs:
When the injury occurs as a consequence of the use of a firearm in a public place or place of habitual transit of persons or adjacent to residential areas, for trivial reasons or in order to facilitate the commission of another punishable act, as a result of acts of domestic violence or violence against a woman, when it occurs to a public servant in the exercise of his or her functions or by reason thereof or when the injury has been caused with the purpose of extracting a vital organ from the victim, the imprisonment shall be twelve to fifteen years.

Article 44

The following is added

article 138-A

to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Article 138-A

Whoever engages in psychological violence through the use of threats, intimidation, blackmail, persecution or harassment against a woman or forces her to do or refrain from doing, tolerate exploitation, threats, demands for obedience or submission, humiliations or vexations, isolation or any other similar conduct shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years.
If the conduct described in the preceding paragraph produces psychological harm, the penalty shall be increased from one-third to one-half of the maximum penalty.

Article 45

The

article 178

of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 178

Whoever harasses, harasses, stalks or sexually discriminates against a person with whom he or she has a labor, school or religious relationship, regardless of the hierarchical relationship, shall be punished with a penalty of two to four years of imprisonment and multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment in a public or private health center.

Article 46

The first paragraph of

article 200

of the
Criminal Code
reads as follows:

Article 200

Whoever harasses or assaults physically, psychologically or patrimonially another member of the family shall be punished with imprisonment of five to eight years and multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment in a state or private health center that has specialized care, provided that the conduct does not constitute crimes punished with a greater penalty.

Article 47

The following is added

article 214-A

to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Articulo 214-A

Any person who commits economic violence against a woman shall be punished with a penalty of five to eight years of imprisonment, by engaging in any of the following conducts:
Diminishes, limits or restricts the free disposal of her property or patrimonial rights.
Forces a woman to sign documents that affect, limit, restrict her patrimony or put it at risk, or that exempt him from economic responsibility.
Destroys or conceals documents proving ownership or personal identification or property, personal objects or work instruments that are indispensable for her to carry out her economic activities.

Articulo 48

The denomination of Chapter VIII of Title XII of Book Two of the
Criminal Code
shall read as follows:

Capitulo VIII

Breach of Protection Measures and Sanctions

Artículo 49

Articulo 49

Article 397-A is added to the
Criminal Code
, as follows:

Articulo 397

A. Whoever fails to comply with protection measures ordered in favor of a woman within a criminal proceeding shall be punished with a penalty of imprisonment from six months to one year.

Capitulo VIII

Procedural Provisions
Articles 50 to 56

Articulo 50

Numeral
2
of article
333
of the
Criminal Procedure Code
shall read as follows:

Articulo 333

Special protection measures for victims of domestic violence and other crimes, ...
Order that the alleged aggressor for domestic violence use any security instrument, with a receiver on the victim, for the duration of the proceeding, warning him not to approach her within less than two hundred meters. In the event that this order is breached, the detention of the alleged aggressor shall be ordered for the duration of the proceeding. Upon the imposition of this measure, the victim shall always be informed of the risk to her life implied by approaching within less than two hundred meters of the alleged aggressor.

Articulo 51

The public official or personnel in the service of the State who, knowing of the commission of a crime, does not report it shall be subject to a disciplinary proceeding.
In the event that a report is made and the commission of the crime is not proven, he or she shall be exempt from any legal liability by reason of the report referred to in this article, except when the crimes of slander or insult are configured.

Articulo 52

With the mere report of an act of violence against a woman or several women that may constitute a crime, the competent authority may issue protection measures, as appropriate.

Articulo 33

In cases of sexual violence, the report may be made by the woman who has suffered it or by a third party. When the report is made by a third party, the woman shall be summoned to ratify it. The competent judicial authority shall take the necessary measures to maintain the confidentiality of the case and shall continue the investigation ex officio.

Articulo 34

At every stage of the proceeding, the presence of a companion shall be admitted, provided that the woman victim of violence so requests. To protect the victim, the necessary protection measures provided for by law must be requested from the beginning of the judicial investigation, as well as free legal assistance to the victim and her family members through public defender services, to guarantee the effective exercise of their rights.

Articulo 55

The Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences, in accordance with the functions prescribed by law and in the practice of scientific and/or technical expert examinations required by the competent authority, shall seek expeditious attention and guidance to the parties and the application of procedural protocols for the correct approach and comprehensive assessment of cases, and shall include in its training programs specific content on the human rights of women and non-violence against them.

Articulo 56

The State, in accordance with international human rights conventions ratified by the Republic of Panama, shall be jointly and severally liable for any action or omission by personnel in the service of the State that obstructs, delays or denies compliance with the sanctions provided for in this Law, and may exercise against such personnel the action of recovery if convicted, without prejudice to administrative or civil liabilities.

Capitulo IX

Creation of Specialized Prosecutor's Offices and Courts
Articles 57 to 60

Articulo 57

The Public Prosecutor's Office shall create specialized prosecutor's offices for the investigation of crimes of Violence against Women, which shall operate twenty-four hours a day in each Judicial District.
The State shall provide the Public Prosecutor's Office and the Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences with the budgetary, physical, material, scientific and human resources required for the operation of these specialized prosecutor's offices.

Articulo 58

The Judicial Branch shall create specialized courts, which shall hear exclusively crimes of Violence against Women established in this Law, which shall operate twenty-four hours a day in each Judicial District, in accordance with the rules of jurisdiction. These courts shall be established progressively throughout the Republic.
The State shall provide the Judicial Branch with the budgetary resources required for the operation of these specialized courts.

Articulo 59

The competent judge shall monitor compliance with the penalty of specialized multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment on violence against women.

Articulo 60

The multidisciplinary therapeutic treatment referred to in the preceding article shall be the responsibility of the Ministry of Health and the Social Security Fund which, together with the National Women's Institute, the University of Panama and the National System for Gender Training, shall train mental health professionals (psychiatry, psychology, social work) to evaluate and provide individual and group therapeutic treatment, monitoring it for aggressors or offenders until its completion.
The monitoring shall consist of the submission of periodic reports to the competent judge, who shall not terminate the proceeding until having received final certification of the completion of the treatment by the team in charge.

Capitulo X

Care for Women Victims of Violence during the Proceeding
Articles 61 to 70

Articulo 61

At least one comprehensive care center per province shall be built, with multiple services, for women victims and survivors of violence, with duly trained and sensitized personnel for care in the matter, subject to the responsibility of the National Women's Institute in coordination with the Public Prosecutor's Office and other public institutions and private entities, which shall manage and contribute within their assigned budgets.

Articulo 62

At least one shelter or reception center for women survivors of violence per province shall be built. The shelters shall have trained and specialized personnel in the matter. In the province of Panama, shelters shall be built in Panama Centro, San Miguelito, Panama Este and Panama Oeste up to a minimum of four shelters.
Their location may not be provided to persons not authorized to go to them. It is the responsibility of the shelters to ensure the safety of women and their sons and daughters and other persons in the family circle who are temporarily in them. The shelters shall work in a coordinated manner with the comprehensive care centers.

Articulo 63

In care measures, women in special risk situations shall be taken into account. A center for urgent cases of violence against women and general guidance shall be established through a three-digit telephone line, operating twenty-four hours a day.
When the situation requires it, transportation services for the victims and their sons and daughters to a confidential location shall be included to guarantee their protection and safety.

Articulo 64

Comprehensive care centers shall provide the necessary follow-up to victims for their physical and psychological recovery through comprehensive programs, with the purpose that they may fully participate in public, social and private life. This care shall be extended to the sons and daughters who accompany them and must include information about the institutions responsible for providing free legal advice and representation.

Articulo 65

The State shall provide immediate medical or economic assistance to victims, partially or totally or in a supplementary manner, from the special reparations fund created by
Law 31 of 1998
, on the protection of crime victims. Payment shall be ordered to be made in the shortest time possible.

Articulo 66

Private companies are obligated, as part of their corporate social responsibility, to facilitate for their female employees who face situations of violence against women the necessary time for procedures that guarantee their comprehensive care.

Articulo 67

Private companies and public institutions are obligated to develop a disciplinary complaints procedure for any type of violence against their female employees, provided for in this Law, based on a model provided by the Ministry of Labor and Labor Development.

Articulo 68

Organizations, civic clubs, awards and associations with legal status and non-profit are obligated to allow men and women, under equal conditions, entry, participation and free access, at all levels, in management and decision-making positions.
All organizations referred to in the preceding paragraph must submit to the Ministry of Government, within a period not exceeding three months, counted from the entry into force of this Law, the necessary amendments to their statutes that establish clearly and explicitly that women may participate in them under equal conditions.

Articulo 69

The Ministry of Government shall reject applications for legal status submitted by organizations whose statutes or regulations do not conform to the provisions of the preceding article, and shall require existing ones to comply with the provisions of said article within the established period or shall proceed to cancel their legal status.

Articulo 70

If it is proven that any media outlet has engaged in discrimination or violence against women, it shall be sanctioned by the Ministry of Government with a fine of one thousand balboas (B/.1,000.00) to three thousand balboas (B/.3,000.00), depending on the severity of the violation.

Capitulo XI

Reparation for Damage Caused to the Victim

Artículo 71

Articulo 71

Reparation to the victim shall be proportional to the damage caused. Reparation must be decreed by the judicial authority that hears the specific case. When the victim has died, the right to reparation extends to their successors, in accordance with what is established by law.
The affected party may claim civil reparation for damages and losses, according to the common rules governing the matter. In cases of conviction for the crimes provided for in this Law, the court shall order, in the same sentence, that the victim be compensated for costs, if any, of:
Medical or psychological treatment,
Physical and occupational therapy and rehabilitation,
Transportation and expenses for temporary housing and care of minors that are necessary.
Legal representative's fees.
Lost profits.
Moral damage.
Psychological damage.
Any other loss suffered by the victim.

Capitulo XII

Budgetary Allocations

Artículo 72

Articulo 72

The resources to carry out the programs and implementation of actions derived from this Law shall be covered by the budget authorized to the entities and autonomous institutions of the State, in relation to the following aspects:
Creation of specialized prosecutor's offices and courts with jurisdiction over crimes of Violence against Women.
Strengthening of the expert services of the Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences for the investigation of crimes established by this Law.
Strengthening and adequate functioning of CONVIMU, attached to the National Women's Institute, and its Executive Secretariat.
Strengthening of the protection service for procedural subjects and persons linked to the administration of criminal justice.
Strengthening of the Free Legal Advice Department for Crime Victims and implementation of the special reparations fund created by
Law 31 of 1998
, on the protection of crime victims.

Capitulo XIII

Final Provisions
Artículos 73 a 78

Articulo 73

(transitional).
While the specialized prosecutor's offices and courts are being created, the Public Prosecutor's Office and the Judicial Branch shall determine which units, structures and courts shall hear the crimes established in this Law.

Articulo 74

(transitional).
The State and provincial, municipal and traditional governments, as well as the public institutions responsible for implementing this Law, shall have the obligation to disseminate widely and in a didactic manner at all levels of the population the content of its provisions.

Articulo 75

This Law is of social interest. All measures derived from it shall guarantee the prevention, care, punishment and eradication of any type of violence against women during their life cycle and shall promote their comprehensive development and full participation in all spheres.

Articulo 76

This Law shall be regulated by the Executive Branch, within sixty calendar days, counted from its entry into force, for which it shall appoint an inter-institutional commission.

Articulo 77

This Law modifies numeral 1 of article 50, articles 54 and 135, the final paragraph of article 137, article 178, the first paragraph of article 200, the title of Chapter VIII of Title XII of Book Two of the Unified Text of the
Penal Code
and numeral 2 of article 333 of the
Criminal Procedure Code
; adds articles
42-A
,
62-A
,
132-A
,
138-A
,
214-A
and
397-A
and repeals numerals
2
and
8
of article
132
of the Unified Text of the
Penal Code
.

Articulo 78

This Law shall enter into force two months after its promulgation.
LET IT BE COMMUNICATED AND COMPLIED WITH.
Bill 649 of 2013 approved in third debate at the Justo Arosemena Palace, city of
Panama, on the twenty-first day of the month of October of the year two thousand thirteen,
NATIONAL EXECUTIVE BRANCH, PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC.
PANAMA, REPUBLIC OF PANAMA, OCTOBER 24, 2013.
Navigation index
Contents

Capitulo I. Disposiciones Generales

arts. 1 a 4

Capitulo I. Principios Rectores

arts. 5 a 12

Capitulo III. Derechos de las Mujeres Victimas de Violencia

arts. 13 y 14

Capitulo IV. Obligaciones del Estado

art. 15

Capitulo V. Comité Nacional contra la Violencia en la Mujer

arts. 16 a 20

Capitulo VI. Politicas Publicas de Sensibilización, Prevención y Atención

arts. 21 a 35

Capitulo VII. Disposiciones Penales

arts. 36 a 48

Capitulo VIII. Quebrantamiento de Medidas de Protección y de Sanciones

art. 49

Capitulo VIII. Disposiciones Procesales

arts. 50 a 56

Capitulo IX. Creación de Fiscalias y Juzgados Especializados

arts. 57 a 60

Chapter X. Assistance to Women Victims of Violence during the Process

arts. 61 to 70

Chapter XI. Reparation of Damage Caused to the Victim

art. 71

Chapter XII. Budgetary Allocations

art. 72

Capitulo XIII. Final Provisions

arts. 73 a 78
Premium features
Historical and future versions
Legislative alerts
Legal analysis
PDF version
Interrelation with models, doctrine and case law
Advanced search
Request your trial
Subscribers can access the informed version of this case.
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can view a list of all legislation and case law cited in a document.
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can view a list of all documents citing the case
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can view a list of all versions of the law with the different amendments
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can view all amendments to a case
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can access a visual representation of a case and its relationships with other cases. As an alternative to case lists, the Precedent Map makes it easier to find which case is most relevant to your search. At the same time you will also have a reference to the degree of acceptance of the case.
Request your trial
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Subscribers can view a list of results connected to their documents via topics and citations found by Vincent.
Register for a trial and make the most of our service, including these benefits.
Why should I register with vLex?
location-globe-view
More than 100 countries
Access more than 120 million documents from more than 100 countries, including the largest collection of legislation, case law, forms and legal books and journals.
content-books-1
Thousands of data sources
Updated every day, vLex brings together content from more than 750 providers giving access to more than 2500 legal and news sources from the leading providers in the sector.
space-robot-1
Quickly find what you need
Thanks to advanced Artificial Intelligence developed by vLex,
we editorially enrich
legal information to make it accessible, including instant translation into 14 languages to guarantee access to information and the ability to conduct comparative searches.
lightbulb-3
More than 2 million registered users
Founded more than 20 years ago, vLex provides high quality content and a very intuitive service for lawyers, law firms, government institutions and law schools around the world
Related searches:
violencia domestica en panama
+1 (305) 890 29 82
Legislation
Regulations
Case law
Official Gazettes
Books and Journals
Tags
Legislative initiatives
Index of sources
Discover vLex Mobile
Terms of use
©2024 vLex.com All rights reserved
CLOSE
VLEX uses login cookies to provide you with a better browsing experience. If you click on 'Accept' or continue browsing this website we consider that you accept our
cookie policy
.
ACCEPT
