All information about the regulation can be found HERE.

All information about the regulation can be found HERE.

I INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Subject of the Law

Article 1

This law regulates the prevention of domestic violence and the conduct of state authorities and institutions in preventing domestic violence and providing protection and support to victims of domestic violence.
This law does not apply to minors who commit domestic violence.

Purpose of the Law

Article 2

The purpose of this law is to regulate in a general and uniform manner the organization and conduct of state authorities and institutions and thereby enable effective prevention of domestic violence and urgent, timely and effective protection and support to victims of domestic violence.

Prevention of domestic violence, imminent danger of domestic violence, domestic violence

Article 3

Prevention of domestic violence consists of a set of measures to detect whether there is an imminent danger of domestic violence and a set of measures that are applied when imminent danger is detected.
Imminent danger of domestic violence exists when the behavior of the potential perpetrator and other circumstances indicate that he is ready to commit or repeat domestic violence for the first time in the immediately forthcoming period.
Domestic violence, within the meaning of this law, is an act of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence by the perpetrator against a person with whom the perpetrator is in a current or former marital or extramarital or partnership relationship or against a person with whom he is a blood relative in the direct line, and in the collateral line up to the second degree or with whom he is related by affinity up to the second degree or to whom he is an adopter, adoptee, foster child or foster parent or against another person with whom he lives or has lived in a common household.

Application of this law to certain criminal offenses

Article 4

This law also applies to cooperation in preventing domestic violence (Articles 24-27) in criminal proceedings for criminal offenses:
1)	stalking (Article 138a of the Criminal Code);
2)	rape (

Article 178. of the Criminal Code);

3)	sexual intercourse with a helpless person (

Article 179. of the Criminal Code);

4)	sexual intercourse with a child (

Article 180. of the Criminal Code);

5)	sexual intercourse by abuse of position (

Article 181. of the Criminal Code);

6)	prohibited sexual acts (

Article 182. of the Criminal Code);

7)	sexual harassment (Article 182a of the Criminal Code);
8)	procuring and enabling sexual intercourse (

Article 183. of the Criminal Code);

9)	mediation in prostitution (

Article 184. of the Criminal Code);

10)	display, procurement and possession of pornographic material and exploitation of minors for pornography (

Article 185. of the Criminal Code);

11)	inducing a child to attend sexual acts (Article 185a of the Criminal Code);
12)	neglect and abuse of a minor (

Article 193. of the Criminal Code);

13)	domestic violence (

Article 194. of the Criminal Code);

14)	failure to provide maintenance (

Article 195. of the Criminal Code);

15)	violation of family obligations (

Article 196. of the Criminal Code);

16)	incest (

Article 197. of the Criminal Code);

17)	human trafficking (

Article 388. of the Criminal Code);

18)	other criminal offenses, if the criminal offense is a consequence of domestic violence.
This law also applies to the provision of protection and support to victims of criminal offenses from paragraph 1. of this Article (hereinafter: criminal offenses specified by this law).

Application of other regulations

Article 5

Unless otherwise specified by this law, the prevention of domestic violence, in proceedings against perpetrators of criminal offenses specified by this law and the provision of protection and support to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses specified by this law shall be governed by the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Law on Civil Procedure, the Family Law and the Law on Police.

Article 6*

(Ceased to be valid)
II COMPETENT AUTHORITIES AND INSTITUTIONS

Article 7

The police, public prosecutor's offices, courts of general jurisdiction and misdemeanor courts, as competent state authorities, and social welfare centers, as institutions, are responsible for preventing domestic violence and providing protection and support to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses specified by this law.
In addition to the competent state authorities and social welfare centers, other institutions in the field of child, social protection, education, upbringing and health (hereinafter: state authorities and institutions competent for the application of this law), as well as bodies for gender equality at the level of local self-governments, participate in preventing domestic violence through providing assistance and reporting violence, as well as providing support to victims of violence.
Support to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses specified by this law may also be provided by other legal entities and natural persons and associations.

Police

Article 8

The head of the regional police administration appoints police officers who have completed specialized training to prevent domestic violence and provide protection to victims of violence (hereinafter: competent police officer).

Public Prosecutor's Office

Article 9

In every public prosecutor's office, except those of special jurisdiction, the public prosecutor appoints deputy public prosecutors who have completed specialized training to exercise the competencies of the public prosecutor's office in preventing domestic violence and prosecuting perpetrators of criminal offenses specified by this law.

Courts

Article 10

The president of each court of general jurisdiction and misdemeanor court appoints judges who have completed specialized training to adjudicate in cases of preventing domestic violence and for criminal offenses specified by this law.
Cases of preventing domestic violence are considered to be proceedings for the extension of urgent measures, proceedings for determining measures of protection from domestic violence provided by the Family Law (hereinafter: measures of protection from domestic violence) and misdemeanor proceedings for misdemeanors provided by this law (

Article 36)

Social Welfare Center

Article 11

The head of each social welfare center appoints among the employees of the center a team of experts to assist in preventing domestic violence and provide support to victims of violence.
III PROCEDURE
General Rules

Article 12

State authorities and institutions competent for the application of this law are obliged to quickly, effectively and in a coordinated manner prevent domestic violence and the commission of criminal offenses specified by this law and to provide the victim with protection, legal assistance and psychosocial and other support for their recovery, empowerment and independence.

a)	Prevention of domestic violence
Reporting and recognition of domestic violence

Article 13

Everyone must report without delay to the police or public prosecutor domestic violence or imminent danger thereof.
State and other authorities, organizations and institutions are obliged to immediately report to the police or public prosecutor any knowledge of domestic violence or imminent danger thereof.
Competent state authorities and social welfare centers (Articles 8-11) are obliged to recognize domestic violence or danger thereof within their regular duties.
Recognition may result from studying a report submitted by the victim of violence to anyone, by observing traces of physical or other violence on the victim and other circumstances indicating the existence of domestic violence or imminent danger thereof.
The public prosecutor to whom violence or imminent danger thereof is reported is obliged to immediately forward the report to police officers, so that they can inform the competent police officer (

Article 14. paragraph 1)

Conduct of police officers

Article 14

Police officers are obliged to immediately notify the competent police officer of any domestic violence or imminent danger thereof, regardless of how they learned of it, and have the right to, on their own or at the request of the competent police officer, bring the potential perpetrator to the competent organizational unit of the police for the purpose of conducting proceedings.
Detention in the competent organizational unit of the police for the purpose of conducting proceedings may last a maximum of eight hours.
During the proceedings in the competent organizational unit of the police, the potential perpetrator must be instructed and enabled to contact and use the services of a defense counsel and legal assistance in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Serbia.

Procedure of the competent police officer

Article 15

The competent police officer must provide the potential perpetrator who has been brought to the competent organizational unit of the police with an opportunity to comment on all relevant facts, collect necessary information from other police officers, immediately assess the risk of imminent danger of domestic violence (hereinafter: risk assessment) and, under the conditions specified by this law (

Article 17

paragraph 1), impose an emergency measure to prevent domestic violence (hereinafter: emergency measure).
If the potential perpetrator has not been brought to the competent organizational unit of the police, the competent police officer assesses the risk immediately upon receiving notification from police officers about violence or imminent danger thereof.
Before completing the risk assessment, the competent police officer may, if necessary, request the opinion of the social welfare center.

Risk assessment

Article 16

The risk assessment is based on available information and is conducted in the shortest possible time.
When assessing risk, particular consideration is given to whether the potential perpetrator has previously or immediately before the risk assessment committed domestic violence and whether he is prepared to repeat it, whether he has threatened murder or suicide, whether he possesses weapons, whether he is mentally ill or abuses psychoactive substances, whether there is a conflict over custody of a child or over the manner of maintaining personal relations between the child and the parent who is the potential perpetrator, whether an emergency measure has been imposed on the potential perpetrator or a protection measure against domestic violence has been determined, whether the victim experiences fear and how she assesses the risk of violence.
The competent police officer immediately submits all available information about domestic violence or imminent danger thereof and the risk assessment - if it indicates imminent danger of violence - to the basic public prosecutor in whose area the victim's residence or domicile is located, to the social welfare center and to the coordination and cooperation group.
If the competent police officer establishes the existence of danger that is not imminent, he submits all available information about domestic violence or danger thereof and his risk assessment to the basic public prosecutor and the social welfare center.

Emergency measures

Article 17

If after the risk assessment he establishes imminent danger of domestic violence, the competent police officer issues an order imposing an emergency measure on the perpetrator who has been brought to the competent organizational unit of the police (

Article 15 paragraph 1)

The emergency measures are: a measure of temporary removal of the perpetrator from the dwelling and a measure of temporary prohibition for the perpetrator to contact and approach the victim of violence.
Both emergency measures may be imposed by order.
The order contains: the name of the body issuing it, data about the person to whom the emergency measure is imposed, the type of emergency measure being imposed and its duration, the day and hour of imposing the emergency measure and the obligation of the person to whom the emergency measure has been imposed to report to the police officer who imposed it upon its expiration.
The order is delivered to the person to whom the emergency measure has been imposed. If that person refuses to receive the order, the competent police officer composes a note about it, whereby the order is considered delivered.
The competent police officer submits the order, immediately after its delivery, to the basic public prosecutor in whose area the victim's residence or domicile is located, to the social welfare center and to the coordination and cooperation group, and the victim of violence is notified in writing about the type of emergency measure that has been imposed.

Procedure of the public prosecutor

Article 18

After receiving the notification, risk assessment and order, the basic public prosecutor studies the information and evaluates the risk assessment of the competent police officer.
If after that he establishes imminent danger of domestic violence, he is obliged to submit to the court a motion to extend the emergency measure, within 24 hours from the hour of delivery of the order to the person to whom the emergency measure was imposed.
Along with the motion, the basic public prosecutor submits to the court the risk assessment of the competent police officer, his evaluation of his risk assessment and other evidence indicating imminent danger of domestic violence.

Procedure of the first instance court

Article 19

The motion to extend the emergency measure is submitted to the basic court in whose area the victim's residence or domicile is located, and the motion is decided by a single judge.
The court extends the emergency measure if after evaluating the risk assessment of the competent police officer, evaluating the risk assessment made by the basic public prosecutor, assessing the attached evidence and allegations from the motion of the basic public prosecutor and assessing

the statement of the person to whom the emergency measure was imposed, it establishes imminent danger of domestic violence, otherwise it rejects the motion as unfounded.
The decision on the motion is issued without holding a hearing, within 24 hours from receipt of the motion to extend the emergency measure.

Appeal against the decision of the basic court

Article 20

The basic public prosecutor and the person to whom the emergency measure was imposed may file an appeal against the decision of the basic court to the higher court, within three days from the day of receipt of the decision, through the basic court that issued the decision.
The basic court is obliged to forward the appeal and all case files to the higher court within 12 hours from receipt of the appeal.
The appeal is decided by a panel of the higher court consisting of three judges, within three days from the day it received the appeal from the basic court.
The higher court may reject the appeal and uphold the decision of the basic court or grant the appeal and modify the decision of the basic court. It may not annul the decision of the basic court and return the case to the basic court for new proceedings.
The appeal does not stay the execution of the decision of the basic court.
The law governing civil procedure applies mutatis mutandis to the procedure for deciding on the extension of an emergency measure, unless otherwise specified by this law.

Duration of emergency measures

Article 21

The emergency measure imposed by the competent police officer lasts 48 hours from delivery of the order. The court may extend the emergency measure for an additional 30 days.
If the emergency measure of temporary removal of the perpetrator from the dwelling is extended, the person to whom it was imposed may, accompanied by police officers, take necessary personal belongings from the dwelling.

b)	Special provisions on criminal procedure
Obligation to report a criminal offense

Article 22

A person who has knowledge of a committed criminal offense specified by this law is obliged to report it to the police or the public prosecutor.

Urgency in deciding on measures to secure the presence of the accused

Article 23

In criminal proceedings conducted for criminal offenses specified by this law, the court is obliged to decide within 24 hours on the motion of the public prosecutor for determining a measure prohibiting approach, meeting or communication with a specific person and visiting specific places, a measure prohibiting leaving the place of residence and a measure prohibiting leaving the dwelling.
IV COOPERATION IN PREVENTING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Persons designated for liaison

Article 24

Liaison persons are appointed in the police administration, basic and higher public prosecutor's office, basic and higher court and social welfare center.
They are appointed by the head of the police administration, public prosecutor, president of the court and head of the social welfare center, from among competent police officers and judges and deputy public prosecutors who have completed specialized training, and employees of the social welfare center.
Liaison persons exchange on a daily basis information and data relevant to the prevention of domestic violence, detection, prosecution and trial for criminal offenses determined by this law and for providing protection and support to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses determined by this law.
The minister responsible for internal affairs, the minister responsible for judicial affairs and the minister responsible for family protection matters jointly prescribe the manner of exchanging information and data between liaison persons.

Coordination and Cooperation Group

Article 25

A coordination and cooperation group is established in the territory of each basic public prosecutor's office.
It examines each case of domestic violence that has not been concluded by a final court decision in civil or criminal proceedings, cases where protection and support should be provided to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses under this law, prepares an individual plan for protection and support of the victim and proposes to the competent public prosecutor's office measures for concluding court proceedings.
The coordination and cooperation group holds meetings at least once every 15 days, and keeps minutes of the course of the meeting.
Representatives of educational, upbringing and health institutions and the National Employment Service, representatives of other legal entities and associations and individuals who provide protection and support to victims may attend the meetings as needed.
The coordination and cooperation group adopts rules of procedure which further regulate its manner of work and decision-making.

Composition of the coordination and cooperation group

Article 26

The coordination and cooperation group consists of representatives of basic public prosecutor's offices, police administrations and social welfare centers, from the territory for which the group is established.
Members of the coordination and cooperation group are appointed by the heads of the bodies, from among deputy basic public prosecutors who have completed specialized training and competent police officers and employees of social welfare centers who work on cases of domestic violence.
The coordination and cooperation group is chaired by a group member from among deputy basic public prosecutors.
If a higher public prosecutor's office is competent for prosecuting perpetrators of criminal offenses determined by this law, the higher public prosecutor appoints his deputy, who has completed specialized training, to participate in the work of the group and chair it.

Rules on cooperation

Article 27

The minister responsible for judicial affairs, the minister responsible for internal affairs and the minister responsible for family protection matters jointly adopt rules on cooperation, which further regulate mutual rights.
The rules on cooperation determine the obligations and cooperation of state bodies and institutions competent for the application of this law in preventing domestic violence and providing protection and support to victims of domestic violence and victims of criminal offenses determined by this law.
V TRAINING
Specialized training

Article 28

Competent police officers and public prosecutors, deputy public prosecutors and judges who apply this law are obliged to complete specialized training according to a program adopted by the Judicial Academy.
Specialized training is conducted by the Judicial Academy for public prosecutors, deputy public prosecutors and judges, in cooperation with other professional institutions and organizations, and for police officers specialized training is conducted by the Criminal Police Academy.
Upon completion of specialized training, the Judicial Academy and the Criminal Police Academy issue certificates of completed training to training participants.
The issuance and form of the certificate are further regulated by an act of the Judicial Academy and the Criminal Police Academy.
VI PROTECTION AND SUPPORT TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND VICTIMS OF CRIMINAL OFFENSES DETERMINED BY THIS LAW
Right to information

Article 29

State bodies and institutions competent for the application of this law are obliged to provide, at the first contact with a victim of domestic violence or a victim of a criminal offense under this law, complete information to the victim about bodies, legal entities and associations that provide protection and support to her, in a manner and language that the victim of violence understands.

Right to free legal aid

Article 30

A victim of domestic violence and a victim of a criminal offense under this law has the right to free legal aid, according to a special law.

Individual plan for protection and support of the victim

Article 31

Upon receipt of a risk assessment which has established an immediate danger of domestic violence, the coordination and cooperation group prepares an individual plan for protection and support of the victim, which contains comprehensive and effective measures of protection and support for the victim, but also for other family members who need support.
The victim also participates in the preparation of the individual plan for protection and support of the victim, if she wishes and if her emotional and physical condition allows it.
Protection measures must provide safety to the victim, stop the violence, prevent it from recurring and protect the rights of the victim, and support measures must enable the victim to be provided with psychosocial and other support for her recovery, empowerment and independence.
The individual plan for protection and support of the victim determines the executors of specific measures and deadlines for their implementation, as well as a plan for monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of planned and undertaken measures.
An individual plan for protection and support of the victim is also prepared for victims of criminal offenses under this law.
VII RECORDS OF DATA ON CASES OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
Records

Article 32

The competent police administration maintains records of reported cases of domestic violence and of the imposition and enforcement of urgent measures and enforcement of protection measures against domestic violence.
The police administration record contains:
1) data on reported cases of domestic violence (participants in the event, time, place, collected statements, circumstances of the case, data on the possible victim, etc.);
2) data on the reported possible perpetrator (name, surname, unique personal identification number, address of residence or stay, data on previously imposed protection measures against domestic violence);
3) data on the risk assessment and names of the bodies to which the risk assessment was submitted;
4) data on the imposition of urgent measures (date and number of the order imposing urgent measures, their duration and time of commencement of their duration);
5) data on the extension and enforcement of urgent measures (number and date of the basic court decision on the extension of urgent measures, data on the enforcement of urgent measures);
6) data on the enforcement of protection measures against domestic violence.
The basic court maintains a record of its decisions on proposals for the extension of urgent measures and on imposed protection measures against domestic violence.
The basic court record on proposals for the extension of urgent measures contains:
1) data on the person for whom the urgent measure was extended (name, surname, unique personal identification number, address of residence or stay, data on previously imposed protection measures against domestic violence);
2) number and date of the decision by which the urgent measure was extended;
3) number and date of the decision by which the proposal to extend the urgent measure was rejected;
4) data on the appeal against the decision made on the proposal for the extension of urgent measures;
5) data on the decision made on the appeal.
The basic court record on imposed protection measures against domestic violence contains:
1) data on the person for whom a protection measure against domestic violence was imposed (name, surname, unique personal identification number, address of residence or stay, data on previously imposed protection measures against domestic violence);
2) data on the court decision on imposing protection measures against domestic violence (number and date of the decision, type of measure imposed and its duration);
3) data on the appeal against the court decision on imposing protection measures against domestic violence;
4) data on the decision made on the appeal;

5) data on the extension or termination of protection measures against domestic violence.
The basic public prosecutor's office maintains a record of proposals for the extension of urgent measures and requests for the imposition of protection measures against domestic violence.
The basic public prosecutor's office record contains:
1) data on the person for whom the extension of urgent measures was proposed (name, surname, unique personal identification number, address of residence or stay, data on previously imposed protection measures against domestic violence);
2) data on the extension of urgent measures (date and number of the proposal for the extension of urgent measures, name of the court to which the extension of urgent measures was proposed, court decision on the public prosecutor's proposal, data on the decision on the appeal);
3) data on the filing of a lawsuit for the imposition of protection measures against domestic violence;
4) type of protection measure against domestic violence whose imposition is requested;
5) data on the court decision regarding the lawsuit for the imposition of a protection measure against domestic violence (number and date of the decision, type of measure imposed and duration of the measure);
6) data on the extension and termination of the protection measure against domestic violence.
The competent social welfare centre maintains a record of the implementation of individual protection and support plans for the victim. The social welfare centre record contains:
1) name, surname, unique personal identification number and address of residence or stay of the victim;
2) data on the individual protection and support plan for the victim;
3) data on planned victim protection measures;
4) data on planned victim support measures;
5) data on the executors of specific protection and support measures and deadlines for their implementation;
6) data on the monitoring plan and assessment of the effectiveness of planned and implemented measures.
The records of police administrations, basic courts, basic public prosecutor's offices and social welfare centres are maintained in electronic form and constitute the Central Record of Cases of Domestic Violence (hereinafter: Central Record), which is maintained by the Republic Public Prosecutor's Office.
Data may be entered into the Central Record only with the use of appropriate protected access codes. Data are kept in the records and in the Central Record for ten years and are then deleted.
Access to the record

Article 33

Access to data from the Central Record is permitted only for the purpose of exercising the competences provided by this law and with the use of protected access codes.
The deputy public prosecutor who exercises the competences of the public prosecutor's office in preventing domestic violence and prosecuting perpetrators of criminal offences specified by this law (

Article 9) has the right to access all data from the Central Record

The competent police officer has the right to access the Central Record only in the part containing data from the records of regional police administrations and competent social welfare centres, competent courts only in the part containing data from the records maintained by basic courts, and competent social welfare centres - only in the part containing data from the records maintained by social welfare centres.

Protection of personal data

Article 34

State bodies and institutions competent for the implementation of this law are obliged to protect personal data, in accordance with the law governing the protection of personal data.
For the collection of data contained in the records, the consent of the person to whom the data relate is not required.
VIII MONITORING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAW
Council for Combating Domestic Violence

Article 35

The Government establishes the Council for Combating Domestic Violence (hereinafter: Council), which monitors the implementation of this law and improves the coordination and effectiveness of preventing domestic violence and protection against domestic violence.
The members of the Council consist of representatives of state bodies and institutions competent for the implementation of this law.
The Council may, as necessary, include in its work representatives of scientific and other professional institutions and associations whose activities are related to protection against domestic violence.
The composition, manner of work and decision-making of the Council shall be regulated in more detail by the Government act on the establishment of the Council.
IX PENAL PROVISIONS
Misdemeanours

Article 36

A person who violates an urgent measure imposed or extended on them shall be punished for a misdemeanour by imprisonment of up to 60 days.
A responsible person in a state or other body, organization or institution who does not immediately report to the police or public prosecutor or does not respond to a report or obstructs the reporting or response to any knowledge of domestic violence or imminent danger thereof shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine of 50,000 dinars to 150,000 dinars (

Article 13 paragraph 2)

A conviction for the misdemeanour referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article may be enforced before it becomes final, in accordance with the Law on Misdemeanours.
X TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Deadline for adopting by-laws

Article 37

By-laws provided for by this law shall be adopted within three months from the entry into force of this law, except for acts adopted by coordination and cooperation groups, which shall be adopted within 30 days from the date of their establishment.

Deadline for establishing coordination and cooperation groups and the Council and appointing liaison persons

Article 38

By the date of commencement of application of this law, coordination and cooperation groups and the Council shall be established and liaison persons shall be appointed.

Final provision

Article 39

This law enters into force on the eighth day from the date of publication in the "Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia", and shall be applied from
1 June 2017.
