Warning: This unofficial consolidated text of the regulation represents only an informative working tool, for which the authority assumes no liability or other responsibility.

Warning: This unofficial consolidated text of the regulation represents only an informative working tool, for which the authority assumes no liability or other responsibility.
The unofficial consolidated text of the Act on the Prevention of Domestic Violence comprises:	Act on the Prevention of Domestic Violence – ZPND (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 16/08 of 15 February
2008),	Act Amending the Act on the Prevention of Domestic Violence – ZPND-A (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 68/16 of 4 November 2016),	Act Amending the Social Assistance Act – ZSV-H (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 54/17 of 29 September 2017),	Long-Term Care Act – ZDOsk (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 196/21 of 17 December 2021).

A C T
ON THE PREVENTION OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (ZPND)

(unofficial consolidated text No. 3)

Part One: GENERAL PROVISIONS

1. člen (purpose of the act)

(1)	This Act defines the concept of domestic violence, determines the role and tasks of state authorities, holders of public authorisations, providers of public services and other providers of services in the field of social welfare, long-term care, health, upbringing and education, bodies of local self-government communities (hereinafter: authorities and organisations) and non-governmental organisations in dealing with domestic violence, and lays down measures for the protection of victims of domestic violence.
(2)	For the prevention of domestic violence and for the protection and assistance of victims, in addition to the measures laid down by this Act, measures laid down by other acts and regulations issued on their basis shall also apply.
(3)	This Act partially transposes into the legal order of the Republic of Slovenia Directive 2012/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 establishing minimum standards on the rights, support and protection of victims of crime, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA (OJ L No. 315 of 14 November 2012, p. 57),
as corrected by Corrigendum (OJ L No. 287 of 31 October 2015, p. 87).

2. člen

(definition of family members)
(1)	Family members within the meaning of this Act are:	spouse or cohabiting partner,	relative in the direct line,	relatives in the collateral line up to and including the fourth degree,	person related by affinity in the direct line,	person related by affinity in the collateral line up to and including the second degree,
adopter and adoptee,	foster parent and child placed in a foster family,	guardian and ward,	persons who have a child in common,	persons living in a common household,	persons in a partnership, regardless of whether they live in a common household.
(2)	Persons referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be considered family members within the meaning of this Act even if the relationship or community has ceased.
(3)	A family member within the meaning of this Act shall also include a new spouse or cohabiting partner or partner in a concluded or unconcluded partnership of a family member or a child of any of the family members referred to in the first paragraph of this Article.

3. člen

(definition of domestic violence)
(1)	Domestic violence (hereinafter: violence) is prohibited.
(2)	Violence is any use of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence by one family member (hereinafter: perpetrator of violence) against another family member (hereinafter: victim) or neglect or stalking of the victim regardless of the age, sex or any other personal circumstance of the victim or perpetrator of violence, and corporal punishment of children.
(3)	Physical violence is any use of physical force or threat of the use of physical force which compels the victim to do or omit something or to suffer something or restricts their movement or communication and causes them pain, fear or humiliation, regardless of whether bodily injuries have occurred.
(4)	Sexual violence is conduct of a sexual nature to which the victim does not consent, is forced into or does not understand its meaning due to their stage of development, threats of the use of sexual violence, and public disclosure of sexual content about the victim.
(5)	Psychological violence is conduct and dissemination of information by which the perpetrator of violence causes the victim fear, humiliation, feelings of inferiority, endangerment and other mental distress, even if committed using information and communication technology.
(6)	Economic violence is unjustified control or restriction of the victim in disposing of income or managing property which the victim independently disposes of or manages, or unjustified restriction of disposal or management of common property of family members, unjustified non-fulfilment of financial or property obligations towards a family member, or unjustified transfer of financial or property obligations to a family member.
(7)	Neglect is a form of violence where the perpetrator of violence omits due care for the victim who needs it due to illness, disability, age, developmental or other personal circumstances.
(8)	Stalking is deliberate repeated unwanted establishment of contact, pursuit, physical intrusion, observation, loitering in places where the victim moves, or other form of unwanted intrusion into the victim's life.

3.a	člen
(prohibition of corporal punishment of children)

(1)	Corporal punishment of children is prohibited.
(2)	Corporal punishment of children is any physical, cruel or degrading punishment of children or any act intended to punish children which has elements of physical, psychological or sexual violence or neglect as an educational method.

4. člen (special protection and care)

(1)	A minor family member (hereinafter: child) enjoys special protection against violence.
(2)	A child is a victim of violence also if they are present during the perpetration of violence against another family member or live in an environment where violence is perpetrated.
(3)	Special care in dealing with violence and providing assistance to victims is given to elderly persons and persons with disabilities and persons who are unable to care for themselves due to personal circumstances.

5. člen

(duty to act)
Authorities and organisations are obliged to carry out all procedures and measures necessary to protect the victim according to the degree of their endangerment and to protect their interests, while ensuring respect for the victim's integrity. If the victim of violence is a child, the interests and rights of the child take precedence over the interests and rights of other participants in the procedure.

6. člen (duty to report)

(1)	Authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations which, in the course of their work, learn of circumstances on the basis of which it can be concluded that violence is being perpetrated, are obliged to immediately notify the social work centre thereof, except in cases where the victim expressly objects thereto and there is no suspicion of a criminal offence prosecuted ex officio.
(2)	Everyone, especially professional workers in health care and staff of childcare, educational institutions and social welfare institutions, and providers of content for children in sports and cultural associations, regardless of the provisions on the protection of professional secrecy, shall immediately notify the social work centre, police or state prosecutor's office when they suspect that the victim of violence is a child or a person who is unable to care for themselves due to personal circumstances.

7. člen

(victim's companion)
(1) A victim of violence may choose a person (hereinafter: companion) who may accompany them in all proceedings related to violence and in proceedings where the perpetrator of violence is involved.
(2) For the presence of a companion in the proceedings referred to in the preceding paragraph, it is sufficient that the victim declares before the commencement of the proceedings or during the proceedings that a certain person is accompanying them and that they wish that person to be present in the proceedings.

(3) A companion may be any adult person who is not treated as a perpetrator of violence in the proceedings.
(4) A companion assists the victim in protecting their integrity in proceedings before authorities and organisations, assists in finding solutions and provides psychological support to the victim.
(5) The authority conducting the proceedings shall prohibit a person from accompanying the victim in the proceedings if they do not meet the condition referred to in the third paragraph of this Article or if there is a probability that the person will not be able to perform the tasks referred to in the preceding paragraph due to family or other connections with the victim or the perpetrator of violence.

8. člen

(victim's right to an advocate)
A victim of violence has the right to a female advocate or male advocate (hereinafter: advocate) who, in accordance with special regulations, protects the victim's interests in proceedings and activities concerning them.

9. člen

(protection of victim's identity)
(1) Data on the basis of which the victim or their family could be identified must not be communicated to the public about victims or perpetrators of violence. Communication of data is permissible only if an adult victim expressly consents thereto and does not thereby expose children or their personal data.
(2) Parents or a child's guardian, foster parent, adoptive parent are obliged, within the framework of exercising care for the child, to protect them from exposure to the public.

9.a člen
(protection of data about the victim)
Authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations protect as a professional secret data about the accommodation of the victim and their children or other measures for their protection.

9.b člen
(informing victims)
Authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations ensure that victims receive appropriate and timely information about available support services and legal remedies in a language they understand.

Drugi del: MREŽA IN NALOGE ORGANOV IN ORGANIZACIJ TER NEVLADNIH ORGANIZACIJ

10. člen

(role of authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations)
(1) Authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations are obliged, within the framework of tasks and powers determined by laws and other regulations, to give priority to cases of violence,

to ensure mutual notification and assistance with the aim of preventing and detecting violence, eliminating causes and providing assistance to the victim in establishing conditions for a safe life.
(2) The female minister or male minister (hereinafter: minister) responsible for family matters shall specify in more detail the procedures for mutual notification and provision of assistance referred to in the preceding paragraph.
(3) Ministers responsible for the operation of the police, health organisations, social welfare and educational institutions shall determine, in agreement with the minister responsible for family matters, rules and procedures ensuring coordinated operation of authorities and organisations, which authorities and organisations in the aforementioned areas must observe when dealing with cases of violence.
(4) Professional workers in authorities and organisations who, within the framework of the rules and procedures referred to in the preceding paragraph, perform tasks in the field of violence, shall, within the framework of continuing education, training and qualification, regularly undergo mandatory education in particular on the prevention and detection of violent acts, prosecution, trial and enforcement of sanctions for such violent acts, on equality between women and men, on the needs and rights of victims and the prevention of secondary victimisation to the extent determined by the ministers referred to in the preceding paragraph.
(5) Responsible persons in authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations shall ensure training of all professional workers who, in the course of their work, encounter victims or perpetrators of violence.
(6) Judges and state prosecutors who, in the course of their work, encounter victims or perpetrators of violence, shall, within the framework of continuing education, training and qualification, regularly undergo mandatory education in the areas referred to in the fourth paragraph of this Article.

11. člen (nacionalni program)

(1) The National Assembly, on the proposal of the Government, shall adopt a resolution on the national programme for the prevention of domestic violence and violence against women (hereinafter: national programme) for a period of six years.
(2) The national programme shall be prepared by the ministry responsible for family matters in cooperation with other ministries and shall include in particular: an assessment of the situation and identification of key problems in the field of prevention of domestic violence and violence against women; fundamental objectives, guidelines and tasks in the field of prevention of domestic violence and violence against women in the period covered by the national programme; holders of action plans for the implementation of guidelines and tasks from the national programme in individual areas; preventive activities; data that will be collected, processed, linked, stored, analysed and reported within the framework of state statistical activities; guidelines for mandatory and regular systematic education and training of professional workers of all authorities and organisations; ensuring financial and other resources also for the operation of non-governmental organisations in the field of violence prevention; guidelines for working with children who are victims of sexual abuse; work with perpetrators of violence.

12. člen (akcijski načrti)

(1) Action plans are implementing acts of the national programme that define the necessary activities for a particular area for a period of two years.
(2) Proposals for action plans based on reports on the previous two-year period and any additional proposals from individual ministries shall be prepared by a working group established for this purpose by the ministry responsible for family matters, and the joint action plan for a two-year period shall be submitted to the Government for adoption.
(3) Ministries shall send the ministry responsible for family matters the report referred to in the preceding paragraph no later than two months before the expiry of each action plan.

13. člen

(reporting on the implementation of the national programme)
The Government shall report to the National Assembly every two years on the implementation of the national programme.
The report shall state the measures and activities carried out in the previous two-year period.

14. člen

(tasks of social work centres)
(1) A social work centre provides the victim and the perpetrator of violence with services under the law governing social welfare, whereby the objective of the treatment is to eliminate immediate danger and ensure the victim's long-term safety by eliminating the causes or circumstances in which violence occurs through resolving their social and material living conditions.
(2) A social work centre shall treat with particular care cases of violence where the victim of violence is a child, especially when there is a suspicion of sexual abuse of children.
(3) A social work centre may, at the request of the victim, obtain from the institution for serving prison sentences information about free exits, any escape from serving a prison sentence and the anticipated date of release of a convict who committed violence against the victim or their children.
(4) A social work centre may refer the perpetrator of violence to appropriate social welfare, educational, psychosocial or health programmes implemented by authorities and organisations and non-governmental organisations. The centre shall verify with the provider of the programme referred to in the preceding sentence the participation of the perpetrator in the programme to which they were referred. Non-participation or irregular attendance of the programme to which the perpetrator of violence was referred constitutes an aggravating circumstance for the perpetrator of violence in court proceedings under this law.
(5) A multidisciplinary team shall be established at the social work centre for dealing with domestic violence. Participation in the team is mandatory for all invitees.
(6) The composition of the multidisciplinary team and the method of work shall be determined by the minister responsible for
family matters.

15. člen (načrt pomoči žrtvi)

(1)	After examining the circumstances of the case, the social work centre is obliged to offer the victim forms of assistance under the law governing social welfare and to assess whether it is necessary to draw up a victim assistance plan, which it draws up together with the victim. It draws up an assistance plan if long-term action is required to establish a safe environment for the victim or if several assistance measures are needed and in other cases if it assesses that this is necessary.
(2)	The assistance plan is prepared within the framework of the multidisciplinary team referred to in the third paragraph of Article 14 of this Act. The social work centre also invites other bodies and organisations that are or will be dealing with the victim or the perpetrator of violence within the scope of their field of activity, as well as non-governmental organisations, to participate in the team. The responsible persons of the bodies and organisations invited to prepare the assistance plan are obliged to ensure the participation of representatives of the bodies and organisations.
(3)	If the victim of violence is a child, the assistance plan shall also provide for measures for the protection of the child under the regulations governing family relations.

16. člen

(služba za koordinacijo in pomoč žrtvam)
(1)	At the social work centre, a coordination and victim assistance service is established with the aim of providing assistance to victims of violence, implementing the intervention service, linking the activities of bodies and organisations, and monitoring and analysing the phenomena of domestic violence. The coordination and victim assistance service provides services under the law governing social welfare, urgent measures to protect the child's interests under the law governing family relations, and other tasks in accordance with regulations.
(2)	The coordination and victim assistance service includes the intervention service and crisis centres.

17. člen (nevladne organizacije)

(1)	Non-governmental organisations in the field of addressing and protecting against violence, within the framework of their programmes, provide protection and psychosocial assistance to victims, organise programmes for teaching perpetrators of violence about non-violent behaviour in interpersonal relationships with the aim of preventing further violence and changing violent behavioural patterns, and cooperate with bodies and organisations from various fields, such as: the police, the state prosecutor's office, the court, the social work centre, health organisations, educational institutions.
(2)	Non-governmental organisations cooperate with bodies and organisations in dealing with individual cases of victims and perpetrators of violence. Non-governmental organisations, within the framework of the programmes they implement, are also involved in the direct implementation of measures to protect the victim.

17.a	člen
(sredstva iz proračuna)
Iz proračuna Republike Slovenije se zagotavljajo sredstva za:	implementing tasks from the national programme;	monitoring and studying the situation in the field of violence;	training in the field of violence, especially violence against children, including sexual abuse of children;	financing programmes for recognising and learning positive parenting skills in the field of child-rearing;
developing measures to prevent violence, monitoring implementation and evaluating the effectiveness of these measures by preparing proposals for improvement;	preparing, inter-ministerial coordination and implementation of violence prevention programmes;	co-financing scientific research activities in the field of violence prevention.

Tretji del: UKREPI ZA ZAGOTOVITEV VARNOSTI ŽRTVE

18. člen

(varovanje življenja in zagotavljanje osebne varnosti žrtve)
(1)	The police protect life and ensure the personal safety of the victim in accordance with the regulations governing the tasks and powers of the police.
(2)	At the victim's request, the police shall ensure the safety of the victim and their escort when entering residential and other premises in which the victim resides or has in use, so that they can take from them things that are necessary to ensure their basic living needs and the basic living needs of their children, as well as things they need to carry out their work.
(3)	It is considered that the victim, when requesting police protection under the previous paragraph, has expressed explicit permission for police officers to enter residential and other premises in order to ensure their safety.
(4)	The police may discontinue the implementation of the procedure referred to in the second paragraph of this Article if the victim or their escort does not follow the police's instructions on ensuring safety, or if the victim does not act with the intention of obtaining the things referred to in the second paragraph of this Article.
(5)	Taking into account the circumstances from the previous procedure and on the basis of a new request from the victim, the police may exceptionally re-implement the procedure under this Article.
(6)	The police may refuse the victim's request referred to in the second paragraph of this Article if circumstances have arisen due to which the victim does not have the right to enter residential and other premises.

19. člen

(ukrepi sodišča zaradi nasilnih dejanj)
(1)	The court may, in respect of a perpetrator of violence who has physically injured the victim, or caused damage to their health, or otherwise unlawfully interfered with their dignity or other personal rights, in particular:	prohibit entry into the dwelling in which the victim lives;	prohibit staying within a certain proximity of the dwelling in which the victim lives;	prohibit staying and approaching places where the victim usually stays (for example workplace, school, kindergarten ...);	prohibit establishing contact with the victim in any way, including by means of distance communication and also through third parties;	prohibit establishing any meeting with the victim;	prohibit the publication of the victim's personal data, documents from court and administrative files and personal records relating to the victim;	decide on the assignment of the dwelling in joint use to the victim in accordance with Article 21 of this Act.
(2)	The court may also impose the measures referred to in the previous paragraph:
if the perpetrator of violence has threatened the victim that they will injure them or otherwise unlawfully interfere with their dignity or other personal rights;	if the perpetrator of violence has unlawfully entered the dwelling in which the victim lives, the premises where they work, or otherwise disturbed their peaceful possession;	if the perpetrator of violence unlawfully harasses the victim against their explicit will, for example by stalking or using means of distance communication;	if the perpetrator of violence unlawfully harasses the victim against their explicit will by using or publishing the victim's personal data, documents from court and administrative files and personal records relating to the victim.
(3)	Unless this Act provides otherwise, the court shall impose the measure referred to in the first paragraph of this Article for a maximum of 12 months. The victim may submit a proposal to extend the duration of the imposed measure before the expiry of the period for which the measure was imposed. The court may extend the duration of the measure several times, but each time for a maximum of 12 months, unless this Act provides otherwise.

19.a	člen (napotitev v programe)
(1)	If the court imposes a measure under the previous Article, it may refer the perpetrator of violence to appropriate social welfare, educational, psychosocial and health programmes implemented by bodies and organisations and non-governmental organisations.
(2)	The list of programmes and providers referred to in the previous paragraph is maintained by the ministry responsible for family matters.

20. člen

(ukrepi za zagotavljanje varstva otrok)
For ensuring the protection of children, the court may, in addition to the measures referred to in Article 19 of this Act:	prohibit the crossing of the state border by the child, except with a specifically designated person, body or organisation;	propose the withdrawal of the child's personal document in accordance with the law;	prohibit the issuance of a personal document to the child on the basis of an application by one or both parents or a third party;	prohibit the delivery of the child's personal document to one or both parents or a third party;	decide on an urgent medical examination of the child or treatment of the child and on other medical interventions.

21. člen

(relinquishment of jointly used dwelling)
(1) The court may order the perpetrator of violence who lives or has lived in a common household with the victim to relinquish the jointly used dwelling to the victim for exclusive use to the extent that the perpetrator had it in use himself.
(2) The court shall not limit the duration of the measure from the preceding paragraph if the perpetrator of violence is not the owner, co-owner or joint owner of the jointly used dwelling.
(3) If the victim and the perpetrator of violence are co-owners or joint owners of the jointly used dwelling, if they have a building right, right of usufruct or use on the land on which the jointly used dwelling is located, or if they have rented it together, the court shall limit the duration of the measure from

the first paragraph of this article to a maximum of 12 months. The court may extend the duration of the measure at the request of the victim for a further maximum of 12 months.
(4) The court shall limit the duration of the measure from the first paragraph of this article to a maximum of six months if the perpetrator of violence is alone or with a third person the owner, co-owner or joint owner of the jointly used dwelling, or if he has alone or with a third person a building right, right of usufruct or use on the land on which the dwelling is located, or if he has rented it alone or with a third person. If the victim, despite diligent efforts, cannot find other suitable living space within the time limit set by the court, the court may exceptionally extend the time limit from the preceding sentence at the request of the victim for a further maximum of six months, unless this would cause a disproportionately heavy burden on the third person.
(5) The perpetrator of violence who must relinquish the dwelling to the victim for exclusive use must refrain from all acts that might make such use difficult or hinder it.
(6) The victim to whom the dwelling has been relinquished for exclusive use shall bear the costs of regular management of the dwelling during the period of exclusive use.

22. člen

(housing protection in case of violence upon divorce)
(1) Upon dissolution of marriage, a spouse against whom the other spouse exercises violence or if he exercises violence against his children may request that the other spouse relinquish to him for exclusive use the dwelling in which they live together or have lived.
(2) The court may award the dwelling for exclusive use to the spouse who files the request from the preceding paragraph, even if conditions would otherwise exist for the award of only part of the dwelling, if this is necessary to prevent violence between the spouses or violence against children upon divorce.
(3) The court shall limit the duration of the measure from the preceding paragraph to a maximum of six months. At the request of the victim, the court may exceptionally extend the measure for a further maximum of six months.
(4) The spouse to whom the dwelling has been relinquished for exclusive use shall bear the costs of regular management of the dwelling during the period of exclusive use.
(5) The spouse who is obliged to relinquish the dwelling for use to the other spouse must refrain from everything that would make it difficult or prevent the use of the dwelling or part thereof by that spouse.
(6) The provisions of this article shall also apply to extramarital partners.

22.a člen
(court decision-making procedure on measures)
(1) For the court decision-making procedure on measures (hereinafter: procedure) under this act, the provisions of the act governing non-contentious procedure shall apply, unless otherwise provided in this act.
(2) For the procedure under this act, the district court has subject-matter jurisdiction.
(3) In procedures under this act, the court where the victim has permanent or temporary residence also has territorial jurisdiction.
(4) Procedures under this act are urgent and priority.

(5) In procedures under this act, when the court decides after a hearing has been held, it shall issue a decision within eight days.
(6) In procedures under this act, the public is excluded.
(7) In procedures under this act, the victim is exempt from payment of court fees.
(8) The court in procedures under this act decides on the costs of the procedure at its discretion.

22.b člen
(commencement of procedure under this act)
(1) The procedure under this act commences on the proposal of the victim. The social work centre may propose the commencement of the procedure with the consent of the victim.
(2) When the victim is a child, the procedure under this act commences on the proposal of a child older than fifteen years, the parents or one of the parents if parental rights have not been revoked, the guardian or the social work centre.
(3) When the victim is a person whose legal capacity has been revoked, the procedure under this act commences on the proposal of the guardian or the social work centre.
(4) The proposal from the first paragraph of this article must be submitted no later than six months from when the victim last suffered bodily injury, or the perpetrator of violence caused him damage to health, or otherwise interfered with his dignity or other personal rights.

22.c člen
(time limits for response to proposal)
The time limit for response to the proposal for commencement of the procedure under this act is eight days.

22.č člen
(decision on pronouncement of measure)
In the decision by which the court pronounces a measure under this act, it shall also pronounce a monetary penalty in case the perpetrator of violence does not act in accordance with the court's decision or violates the obligation from the fifth paragraph of Article 21 or the obligation from the fifth paragraph of Article 22 of this act. The monetary penalty shall be pronounced in accordance with the provisions of the act governing enforcement, on enforcement regarding the obligation to do, permit or refrain from something.

22.d člen
(pronouncement of measure without statement of perpetrator of violence)
(1) When it appears from the proposal that there is a probability that the perpetrator of violence endangers the life or seriously endangers the health of the victim or his children or this is necessary for the protection of the interests of the child, the court may issue a reasoned decision by which it decides on the measure without sending the proposal for response to the perpetrator of violence.
(2) In the case from the preceding paragraph, the proposal for commencement of the procedure shall be served on the perpetrator of violence together with the court's decision.

(3) Against the decision from the first paragraph of this article, an objection is permitted within eight days from service of the decision. The court that issued the decision shall decide on the objection. The objection does not stay the execution of the decision.

22.e člen
(prohibition of alternative dispute resolution)
In procedures conducted due to all forms of violence, alternative dispute resolution is excluded.

22.f člen (appeal)
(1) Against a decision by which the court decided on the proposal, except against the decision from the first paragraph of Article 22.d of this act, and against a decision by which it rejected the objection from the third paragraph of Article 22.d of this act, an appeal is permitted within eight days from service of the decision.
(2) The appeal does not stay the execution of the decision.
(3) The appellate court shall decide on the appeal within eight days.

22.g člen (protection of children)
(1) The court in deciding in procedures under this act shall also take into account the child's opinion if the child has expressed it himself or through a person he trusts and has chosen himself, and if he is capable of understanding its meaning and consequences.
(2) If measures under this act are pronounced for the protection of a child, the social work centre shall monitor their implementation.
(3) The social work centre shall also implement all other necessary measures for the protection of the child in accordance with the act governing family relations.
(4) If the court pronounces a measure from Article 19 of this act on a child who is a perpetrator of violence, the social work centre shall implement measures necessary for the protection of the child in a manner that respects the court's decision.

22.h člen (notification)
(1) The court shall immediately notify the police and the social work centre and the educational or educational institution attended by the child of the measures pronounced under this act.
(2) If the court pronounces a measure regarding the issuance, service or withdrawal of a personal document, it shall immediately notify the ministry responsible for internal affairs thereof.

23. člen

(enforcement of imposed measures and monetary penalties)

(1) If the perpetrator of violence violates a measure imposed by the court pursuant to the first, second, third, fourth or fifth indent of the first paragraph of Article 19 of this Act, the victim shall notify the police thereof, which shall act in accordance with the powers it has regarding violations of the measure prohibiting approach to a specific person, place or area, in accordance with the law governing the tasks and powers of the police. The police shall notify the court that imposed the measure of the established violations.
(2) A monetary penalty imposed in a court order shall be enforced by the court that imposed it, in accordance with the law governing enforcement.
(3) Enforcement in the case of vacation of a dwelling pursuant to Articles 21 and 22 of this Act shall be carried out by the court that imposed the measure, according to the rules of the law governing enforcement for the eviction and handover of immovable property.

24. člen (deleted)

Part Four: FREE LEGAL AID

25. člen

(free legal aid)
Unless otherwise provided in this Act, the law governing free legal aid shall apply to free legal aid for victims of violence.

26. člen

(conditions for granting free legal aid)
(1) Free legal aid under this Act shall be available, notwithstanding the provisions of the law governing free legal aid, to a person for whom a risk assessment has been made.
(2) An opinion on the risk to a person shall be given by the competent social work centre.

27. člen

(scope of granting free legal aid)
Free legal aid under this Act shall be granted for proceedings conducted due to measures under Articles 19, 20, 21 and 22 of this Act and for proceedings under the law governing family relations, if this is deemed urgently necessary in the opinion of the social work centre.

28. člen (priority treatment)

The competent authority for free legal aid shall treat applications filed under this Act as a priority.

Part Five: DATA COLLECTIONS

29. člen

(application of provisions of the law governing the protection of personal data)
For the processing of personal data contained in data collections and for the protection of the informational privacy of the individual, the provisions of the law governing the protection of personal data shall apply, unless otherwise provided in this Act for individual cases.

30. člen

(purpose of processing personal data)
For the purposes of assisting the victim, treating the perpetrator of violence, preparing a victim assistance plan, its implementation and monitoring, for scientific research purposes and for statistical purposes, social work centres shall process personal data and maintain data collections of persons they have treated as victims and as perpetrators of violence under this Act.

31. člen

(data collections in the field of domestic violence)
(1) Data on the victim and perpetrator of violence and data on the type of treatment of violence shall, for the purposes specified in Article 30 of this Act, be entered into existing data collections determined by the law governing social welfare.
(2) Entry of data into the data collections referred to in the preceding paragraph may be carried out when, in accordance with the first paragraph of Article 15 of this Act, an assessment has been adopted that it is necessary to prepare a victim assistance plan.

32. člen (data collection)

(1) Data contained in the data collections referred to in Article 31 of this Act shall be collected directly from the individual and from official collections maintained in the Republic of Slovenia by authorised bodies and organisations.
(2) Social work centres, when performing tasks on the basis of this Act, shall obtain free of charge the data they need for the purposes referred to in Article 30 of this Act and for the purposes of data collection under the law governing social welfare, from existing data collections of the following controllers: the Ministry of the Interior – data on the individual and family members (name and surname, sex, date of birth, data on citizenship, data on residence), data on concluded marriages, divorces and concluded partnerships from the central population register and data on households from other records of the Ministry of the Interior; the police – data on issued orders prohibiting approach; providers of educational activities – data on inclusion in an educational institution and data from the collection of data on children and adolescents who need help and counselling; the Ministry of Health, the National Institute of Public Health and other providers of health services – data on health status or disability; the Pension and Disability Insurance Institute of the Republic of Slovenia – data on insured persons and beneficiaries of rights from pension and disability insurance; the Public Scholarship, Development, Disability and Maintenance Fund of the Republic of Slovenia – data on paid maintenance compensation;
the Employment Service of Slovenia – data on unemployed persons and on the date and reasons for termination of registration in the register of unemployed persons and reasons for termination of payment of material rights; public social welfare institutions and concessionaires in the field of social welfare – data on beneficiaries of rights under the law governing parental protection and family relations and under the law governing social welfare, data on maintenance, on placement under guardianship and on the appointment of a guardian, on placement in foster care under the law governing the implementation of foster care activities, on inclusion in social welfare services or programmes and on treatment of domestic violence; employers – data on employment.
(3) In the cases referred to in the first and second paragraphs of this Article, it is not necessary to inform the individuals to whom the data relate in advance.
(4) Social work centres shall collect only those data they need for the treatment of an individual case.

33. člen (data retention)

Personal data entered into the data collections referred to in Article 31 of this Act shall be retained for a maximum of ten years after entry. After the expiry of this period, the data shall be archived.

The Act on the Prevention of Domestic Violence – ZPND (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 16/08) contains the following transitional and final provisions:

»Part Six: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

34. člen

(application of the provision on advocate)
The provision of Article 8 of this Act shall begin to apply upon the entry into force of a special law that will regulate the right of victims to an advocate.

35. člen

(deadline for submission of the national programme)
The Government shall submit to the National Assembly the national programme referred to in Article 11 of this Act no later than one year after the entry into force of this Act.

36. člen

(deadline for adoption of implementing regulations)
The procedures, rules and scope of training referred to in Article 10 of this Act must be adopted by the competent ministers within one year after the entry into force of this Act. The minister responsible for labour, family and social affairs shall determine the procedures for mutual notification and provision of assistance referred to in Article 10

and the implementing regulation referred to in the fourth paragraph of Article 14 of this Act within one year after the entry into force of this Act.

37. člen

(deadline for determining the area)
The founder of social work centres shall determine the area within the framework of the third paragraph of Article 16 of this Act within six months after the entry into force of this Act.

38. člen (entry into force)

This Act shall enter into force on the fifteenth day after its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia.«.

The Act Amending the Act on the Prevention of Domestic Violence – ZPND-A (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 68/16) contains the following transitional and final provision:

»26. člen (transitional period)
Until the expiry of the application of the Act on the Registration of Same-Sex Partnerships (Official Gazette of the RS, Nos. 65/05, 55/09 – CC dec., 18/16 – CC dec. and 33/16 – ZPZ, hereinafter: ZRIPS), a family member under this Act shall also include a partner from a registered same-sex partnership and a partner living in a long-term cohabitation that is not registered under ZRIPS, even if the partnership has ceased.

FINAL PROVISION

This excerpt sits under: Notice: The unofficial consolidated text of the regulation represents only an informative working tool, for which the body does not guarantee compensation or otherwise.

27. člen (commencement of validity)

This Act shall enter into force on the fifteenth day after its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia.".

The Act Amending the Social Assistance Act – ZSV-H (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 54/17) contains the following final provision:

"Article 20
This Act shall enter into force on the fifteenth day after its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, and shall begin to apply on 1 October 2018.

Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, the new Article 105a of the Act, Article 13 of this Act and

Article 15 of this Act shall apply from the date of entry into force of this Act

Notwithstanding the first paragraph of this Article, the new Article 87a of the Act shall apply from the date of entry into force of this Act and shall be valid until 14 April 2019.
Until the provisions of the first paragraph of this Article begin to apply, the provisions of the Social Assistance Act (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 3/07 – official consolidated text, 23/07 – corr., 41/07 – corr., 61/10 – ZSVarPre, 62/10 – ZUPJS, 57/12, 39/16, 52/16 – ZPPreb-1, 15/17 – DZ and 29/17) shall continue to apply with regard to matters regulated by these provisions.".

The Long-Term Care Act – ZDOsk (Official Gazette of the RS, No. 196/21) contains the following final provision:

"Article 158
(commencement of validity and application)
(1)	This Act shall enter into force on the day following its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, and shall begin to apply one month after entry into force, except for Articles 145, 146, 147, 148, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155 and 156 of this Act, which shall begin to apply on 1 January 2023, and in the cases referred to in Article 130 of this Act and in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth paragraphs of this Article.
(2)	The first indent of point 1 of the first paragraph of Article 10 and the third paragraph of Article 15 of this Act, which regulate the right to LTC in an institution referred to in the second paragraph of Article 58 of this Act, shall begin to apply on 1 January 2023.
(3)	The third indent of point 1 of the first paragraph of Article 10, Articles 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, the fourth paragraph of Article 34, the fifth paragraph of Article 35, the fourth paragraph of Article 39, the third paragraph of Article 57, point 6 of the third paragraph and the fifth paragraph of Article 65 of this Act, which regulate the right to a family member carer referred to in Section 5 of this Act, shall begin to apply on 1 January 2023.
(4)	Article 34 of this Act and the fourth indent of the second paragraph of Article 39 of this Act, which regulate the possibility of alternative provision of the right to LTC, shall begin to apply on 1 July 2024.
(5)	The second indent of point 1 of the first paragraph of Article 10, the second and fourth paragraphs of Article 15, the second paragraph of Article 34 of this Act, which regulate the right to LTC at home in accordance with the fifth paragraph of Article 58 of this Act, shall begin to apply on 1 July 2024.
(6)	Article 32 of this Act shall, for beneficiaries who exercise the right to LTC in the form of:	LTC in an institution in accordance with the second paragraph of Article 58 of this Act, begin to apply on
1.	January 2023;	LTC at home in accordance with the fifth paragraph of Article 58 of this Act, begin to apply on
1.	July 2024;	cash benefit in accordance with Article 18 of this Act, begin to apply on 1 July 2024;	family member carer referred to in Article 19 of this Act, begin to apply on 1 July 2024.

(7)	Article 33 of this Act shall, for beneficiaries who exercise the right to LTC in accordance with the fifth paragraph of Article 58, Article 18 and Article 19 of this Act, begin to apply on 1 July 2024.
(8)	Articles 84, 85, 86, 87 and 88 of this Act, which regulate the operation of the ZZZS, shall begin to apply on 1 January 2023.".

This excerpt sits under: Warning: The unofficial consolidated text of the regulation represents only an informative working tool, for which the body does not guarantee compensation or otherwise.
