DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE
NATIONAL PARLIAMENT LAW
7/2010
Law Against Domestic Violence
Preamble
Domestic violence is a problem of all times, perhaps one of the most complex social problems of our time.
In the last three decades, various guidelines arising from international legal texts have raised awareness of the need to prevent and investigate crimes of domestic violence, in addition to establishing reparatory measures for their victims, particularly with regard to equality and discrimination in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, already ratified by the Timorese State.
The principles of the international human rights instruments already ratified by Timor-Leste, including those of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, are reflected in the law now being approved.
Likewise, the measures enshrined in this law aim, in accordance with the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, to guarantee respect for human rights and the integrity of the family as the fundamental social and cultural unit of Timor-Leste, recognising that it is the family that is first obliged to a special duty of protection and defence of especially vulnerable groups such as women, children, the elderly and the disabled, against all forms of violence, exploitation, discrimination, abandonment, oppression, sexual abuse and other ill-treatment.
It is not, however, only within the family that protection of the most vulnerable must exist, it being the obligation of all citizens to prevent acts of domestic violence and facilitate assistance to its victims.
Finally, the State cannot fail to ensure protection to citizens, having a coordinating role with all public and private entities and community leaders in implementing the policy of preventing domestic violence and supporting victims.
The National Parliament decrees, pursuant to Article 92 and paragraph 1 of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic, to have force as law, the following:

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

Object
This law establishes the legal regime applicable to the prevention of domestic violence and the protection and assistance to its victims.

Article 2

Concept of domestic violence
1. For the purposes of this diploma, domestic violence is considered to be any act or sequence of acts committed in a family context, with or without cohabitation, by a family member against any of its members, when there is an ascendancy, namely physical or economic, in the family relationship, or by one person in relation to another with whom they had an intimate relationship, from which result or may result, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering, economic abuse, including threats such as intimidatory acts, bodily offences, aggression, coercion, harassment, or deprivation of liberty.
2. Forms of domestic violence include, among others:
a) Physical violence, understood as any conduct that offends bodily integrity or health;
b) Sexual violence, understood as any conduct that compels one to witness, maintain or participate in an unwanted sexual relationship, even within marriage, through intimidation, threat, coercion or use of force, or that limits or nullifies the exercise of sexual and reproductive rights;
c) Psychological violence, understood as any conduct that causes emotional harm and diminution of self-esteem, aimed at degrading or controlling the actions, behaviours, beliefs and decisions of another, through threat, constraint, humiliation, manipulation, isolation, constant surveillance, systematic persecution, insult, blackmail, ridicule, exploitation, limitation of the right to movement or any other means that causes harm to psychological health and self-determination;
d) Economic violence, understood as any conduct that constitutes retention, subtraction, partial or total destruction of personal objects, work instruments, prevention from working inside or outside the home, personal documents, goods, values and rights or economic resources, including those intended to satisfy personal and household needs.

Article 3

Family
For the purposes of this law, the following persons are considered members of a family covered by the following relationships:
a) Spouses or ex-spouses;
b) Persons who live or have lived in conditions analogous to those of spouses, even without cohabitation;
c) Ascendants and descendants of both or only one of the spouses or of those in the situation provided for in the previous paragraph, provided they are part of the same context of dependence and family economy;
d) Any other person who is part of the same context of dependence or family economy, including those who perform a domestic-labour activity therein on a continuous and subordinate basis.

CHAPTER II

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES

Article 4

Principle of equality
Every individual, regardless of ancestry, nationality, social condition, sex, ethnicity, language, age, religion, disability, political or ideological convictions, culture and educational level, enjoys the fundamental rights inherent to the dignity of the human person, being assured equal opportunities to live without violence and the right to preserve their physical and mental integrity.

Article 5

Principle of Consent
1. Without prejudice to other applicable provisions within the scope of criminal and criminal procedural legislation, any intervention to support the victim must be carried out after the victim gives their free and informed consent and is limited by full respect for their will.
2. The specific support intervention, under the terms of this law, for young victims of domestic violence, aged 16 years or over, depends solely on their consent.
3. The specific support intervention, under the terms of this law, for child or young victims of domestic violence, under the age of 16, depends on the consent of the legal representative, or in their absence or if they are the perpetrator of the crime, of the entity designated by law and the consent of the child or young person aged 12 years or over.
4. The consent of the child or young person aged between 12 and 16 years is sufficient to legitimise the specific support intervention under the terms of this law, if circumstances prevent the receipt, in due time, of a declaration on the consent of the legal representative, or in their absence or if they are the perpetrator of the crime, of the entity designated by law.
5. The child or young victim of domestic violence, under the age of 12, has the right to express themselves, according to their age and degree of maturity, on the specific support under the terms of this law.
6. The victim may, at any time, freely revoke their consent, by themselves or through their legal representative.

Article 6

Protection of the victim who lacks capacity to give their consent
1. Outside the scope of criminal proceedings, any intervention to support the victim who lacks capacity to give their consent may only be carried out for their direct benefit.
2. Whenever, under the terms of the law, an adult lacks, by virtue of mental disturbance, illness or similar reason, capacity to consent to an intervention, it may not be carried out without the authorisation of their representative, or in their absence or if they are the perpetrator of the crime, of an authority or of a person or body designated under the terms of the law.
3. The victim in question must, as far as possible, participate in the authorisation process.

Article 7

Principle of information
The State, through the criminal police bodies, the Public Prosecution Service, the Public Defender's Office, and the medical and social services, ensures that the victim is provided with adequate information for the protection of their rights.

Article 8

Professional obligations and rules of conduct
Any intervention providing technical support to the victim must be carried out in observance of professional standards and obligations, codes of conduct, standardised operational procedures, universal principles of human rights, as well as the rules of conduct applicable to the specific case.

Article 9

Public awareness raising
The Government develops public awareness campaigns, through the media, in order to promote a culture of non-violence and combat gender-based stereotypes, based on respect for the rights and duties of all and with a view to changing behaviours likely to generate violence against particularly vulnerable groups

Article 10

Information
1. The Government must prepare informative and training material on the prevention and identification and factors of domestic violence, giving particular attention to material intended for professionals, as well as the transcription, publication and dissemination of international texts on this issue.
2. The Government must also prepare and distribute, free of charge, throughout the national territory, a guide intended for victims of domestic violence, containing practical information on their rights as well as the instruments available to them.
3. The Government prepares training actions and information material specifically for the Heads of Suco and Aldeia, taking into account the privileged position of community leaders for the dissemination of information.

Article 11

Education
1. The Government, as a means of combating violence, integrates into school curricula topics related to human rights, in particular issues related to gender, including the values of affection, sexuality and the principle of negotiated conflict resolution.
2. The member of Government responsible for education is responsible for preparing the curricula for each cycle of education.

Article 12

Study and research
The State, by itself or in cooperation with other institutions, supports and encourages study and research in the field of factors of physical, psychological, sexual and economic domestic violence.

CHAPTER III

INSTITUTIONAL COOPERATION

Article 13

State intervention
1. The Government is responsible for the promotion and development of the National Action Plan for prevention and support in the field of domestic violence, in collaboration with the whole of society and in particular with the family and local government bodies, under the terms of this law.
2. The Government is responsible for the coordination and articulation of sectoral policies, measures and actions, at national and community level.
3. The programmes provided for in this chapter are implemented in phases, as defined in the National Action Plan on domestic violence.
4. Medical support, legal support and police services are due from the entry into force of this law.

Article 14

Coordinating entities
1. The Government ensures the existence of a public entity that collaborates in the definition, coordination and monitoring of the National Action Plan referred to in the previous article.
2. The public entity referred to in the previous number and the member of Government responsible for promoting equality must collaborate with, among others, the members of Government responsible for the areas of security, health, education, justice and social solidarity.
3. The Government prepares an annual report on the activities carried out and the programme for the following year, which are sent to the National Parliament.

CHAPTER IV

SUPPORT AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS
SECTION I
SUPPORT TO VICTIMS

Article 15

Assistance to victims
1. The Government, through the member responsible for social solidarity, establishes, manages and supervises the national network of support centres for victims of domestic violence, which are responsible for direct assistance, refuge and guidance of victims.
2. The support centres are composed of reception centres and shelters, which work in a coordinated manner.
3. In districts where there are no shelters, the reception centres operate in coordination with the nearest shelter.
4. The Government, through the member responsible for social solidarity, prepares a set of operational guidelines to supervise the creation and management of the support centres mentioned in the previous numbers.

Article 16

Objectives of shelters
1. The objectives of shelters are:
a) To temporarily accommodate victims of domestic violence, accompanied or not by minor children, whenever, for security reasons, they cannot remain in their habitual residence;
b) To guarantee psychological assistance and/or medical care, social assistance and legal support appropriate to the victim's situation;
c) In cases where justified, to promote, during the stay in the shelter, the personal, professional and social skills of users, capable of avoiding possible situations of social exclusion and contributing to their effective social reintegration.
2. The Government, through the member responsible for social solidarity, defines, through complementary legislation, the procedures common to all shelters, namely with regard to victims' rights, access to information, admissions, maximum length of stay and outpatient treatment.

Article 17

Rights and duties
1. Users and minor children accommodated in shelters enjoy, in particular, the following rights:
a) Accommodation and food in conditions of dignity;
b) Enjoyment of a space of privacy and a certain degree of autonomy in conducting their personal life appropriate to their age and situation;
c) Benefit from a safe and healthy space within the house;
d) Access to the school closest to the shelter.
2. It is a special duty of users and minor children accommodated in shelters to comply with the respective operating rules.

Article 18

Free of charge
The services provided through the national network of support centres for victims of domestic violence are free of charge.

Article 19

Reporting
Reception centres must report to the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) or to the Public Prosecution Service situations of victims of domestic violence of which they become aware, for the purposes of instituting criminal proceedings, respecting the confidentiality and privileged nature of information shared between the victim and their counsellor, analogous to the relationship established between a doctor and patient.
SECTION II
ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS

Article 20

Emergency assistance service
1. An emergency service is created to assist victims of domestic violence, with the purpose of informing them about the measures appropriate to their situation.
2. The emergency service provides a telephone helpline, of an anonymous nature, for a time period and under the conditions to be established by ministerial order.
3. In cases of urgency, the service shall communicate to the competent police services the need for immediate intervention and, if appropriate, shall proceed to refer victims to shelters.

Artigo 21.º

Direct assistance to victims
1. Specialised assistance services are created for filing complaints regarding the commission of crimes relating to domestic violence, assistance and guidance of the respective victims at hospital services, organisations of the reference network of support services for victims of domestic violence and the PNTL.
2. The implementation of the services provided for in the preceding paragraph is carried out in phases, through a joint order of the member of Government responsible for domestic violence and for the areas of security, health and social solidarity.
3. The Government, through the body responsible for social security, guarantees specialised information and training for officials working in the services referred to in paragraph 1.

Artigo 22.º

Assistance in hospital services
Whenever a patient reveals having been a victim or the clinical diagnosis allows the conclusion that a crime relating to domestic violence has occurred, the specialised hospital assistance service is called to intervene in order to, namely:
a) Provide assistance and medical follow-up to victims of domestic violence taking into account the needs of victims, particularly children;
b) Proceed with the safeguarding of evidence relating to possible crimes, namely through the carrying out of forensic medical examinations or tests or adopting other precautionary measures appropriate to the specific case;
c) Inform the victim of the rights that assist them and the measures that may be adopted, as well as the obligation of hospital authorities to report the facts to the police authorities;
d) Immediately communicate the facts to the police authorities or the Public Prosecution Service;
e) Prepare a report of the situation and measures carried out and forward it to the competent authorities;
f) Refer the victim to a shelter, if the situation justifies it, and the victim requests it.

Artigo 23.º

Duties of social assistance services
It is the responsibility of the assistance and support services, namely:
a) Provide services appropriate to the needs of victims of domestic violence, in accordance with their Professional Code of Ethics and standardised operational procedures;
b) Provide special services to children who are victims of domestic violence;
c) Report cases of domestic violence to law enforcement agents, in compliance with the Professional Code of Ethics;
d) Conduct counselling sessions with victims of domestic violence;
e) Facilitate, in case of need, the removal of the victim to a place that is appropriate to their needs, particularly in the case of child victims;
f) Prepare reports and other documentation relating to cases assisted for use by the Police, Public Prosecution Service and Courts;
g) At the victim's request, provide support and accompany them in court;
h) Participate in promoting the creation of safety networks for victims of domestic violence at community level.

Artigo 24.º

Police assistance
1. The specialised police assistance services intervene in cases of crimes relating to domestic violence through communication from hospital services and victim support services.
2. The specialised police assistance services in the district services of the PNTL are responsible for:
a) Providing the victim with all necessary collaboration, namely informing them of their rights;
b) Referring the victim, when requested, to a shelter or support centre;
c) Ensuring, whenever this proves necessary, that the victim receives immediate medical and psychosocial assistance provided by specialised personnel;
d) Ensuring, in case of danger to psychological stability, that an assessment is made by a mental health professional, so that the victim may continue to have the necessary support from the competent bodies;
e) Preparing a summary report of the observation carried out, the measures adopted and the evidence collected, to be attached to the criminal complaint to be forwarded to the Public Prosecution Service, within five days after becoming aware of the facts;
f) Communicating to the Public Defender's Office through a summary report, if the victim does not have the financial means to appoint a lawyer without prejudice to their livelihood, within a maximum period of five days after becoming aware of the facts.

Artigo 25.º

Legal assistance
1. In all procedural acts the victim of domestic violence must be accompanied by a lawyer or public defender, if they do not have the financial means to appoint a lawyer.
2. It is the responsibility of the lawyer or public defender, namely:
a) Provide legal advice to victims of domestic violence;
b) Report the occurrence of cases of violence to the Police and the Public Prosecution Service, whenever this does not imply a breach of professional secrecy;
c) Advise victims, witnesses and family members about the progress of judicial proceedings related to cases of domestic violence;
d) Monitor the treatment given to cases by law enforcement agents and judicial operators, namely the Police, the Public Prosecution Service and the Courts;
e) Contact relevant entities, bodies and community groups for the purposes of dealing with cases of domestic violence;
f) Advise victims with regard to access to other services that may be necessary;
g) Facilitate access by the parties to information relating to specific cases under the terms indicated in this law and in other legal provisions in force.

Artigo 26.º

Measures for the reintegration of victims
1. It is the responsibility of the Government to promote and support the creation and operation of associations, or other organisations, if it considers the existing conditions insufficient.
2. Support associations have the objective of protecting victims of domestic violence, giving priority to programmes aimed at their support and accompaniment, personal and professional development in accordance with their social needs.

Artigo 27.º

Support measures for aggressors
The Government, through the member responsible for promoting equality, must encourage the development of public or private initiative projects directed at aggressors in order to raise their awareness and lead them to adopt non-violent behaviour.

Artigo 28.º

Assistance by the Public Prosecution Service
It is the responsibility of the Public Prosecution Service, in addition to its obligations within the scope of criminal proceedings, within the scope of the fight against domestic violence:
a) Provide direct assistance to victims who seek the respective services and inform them of their rights and ways to exercise them, namely through the services of the Public Defender's Office, if they do not have the means to appoint a lawyer without prejudice to their own livelihood and that of their family;
b) Refer victims to hospital care or to shelters, if this has not yet been done.

CAPÍTULO V

MAINTENANCE

Artigo 29.º

Right to maintenance
The victim who is a spouse or former spouse, lives or has lived in conditions analogous to those of spouses, even without cohabitation, is a descendant or ascendant of the aggressor, has the right to receive maintenance, provided they prove their need.

Artigo 30.º

Amount of maintenance obligation
The amount of the maintenance obligation is fixed taking into account the possibilities of the provider and the needs of the recipient, namely the possibility of the latter providing partially for their own subsistence.

Artigo 31.º

Modalidade da obrigação
1. O conteúdo da obrigação de alimentos pode ser fixado por acordo escrito entre o alimentante e o alimentando, ou o seu representante legal em caso de menoridade ou incapacidade, ou ainda fixado pelo tribunal competente.
2. Se, depois de ficado o montante por acordo ou decisão judicial, as circunstâncias determinantes da sua fixação se modificarem, pode o montante da prestação de alimentos ser aumentado ou reduzido, igualmente por acordo ou decisão judicial.

Artigo 32.º

Prestação de alimentos provisória
1. O Tribunal pode, a todo o momento, oficiosamente ou a requerimento da vítima ou do Ministério Público, conceder uma prestação de alimentos provisória.
2 . Não há lugar, em caso algum, à restituição de uma prestação de alimentos provisória já recebida.
3. No caso de insuficiência económica do arguido, os alimen-tos devidos são suportados pelos Serviços do Ministério da Solidariedade Social.

Artigo 33.º

Assistência Social de Reinserção
1. O Ministério responsável pelos serviços sociais apoia as vítimas no processo de reintegração social assim como na prestação de alimentos quando tal se mostrar necessário.
2. A extensão e a natureza do apoio a providenciar é definido por diploma do membro do Governo responsável pela solidariedade social.

Artigo 34.º

Processo
1. O pedido de prestação de alimentos pode ser apensado ao processo criminal correspondente.
2. Aplica-se no demais as regras previstas nos artigos 831.º e seguintes do Código de Processo Civil.

CAPÍTULO VI

ASPECTOS CRIMINAIS

Artigo 35.º

Crimes de violência doméstica
Para efeitos de aplicação da presente lei consideram-se crimes de violência doméstica:
a) Os tipos legais consagrados nos artigos 153.º, 154.º, 155.º e 156.º do Código Penal;
b) Os tipos de ilícito previstos nos artigos 138.º,139.º 141.º, 145.º,146.º, 167.º, 171.º, 172.º, 175.º, 177.º, 178.º e 179.º, sempre que para além do preenchimento dos elementos típicos de facto constantes da norma incriminadora ocorra alguma das circunstâncias descritas no artigo 2.º desta lei.

Artigo 36.º

Natureza pública dos crimes de violência doméstica
Os crimes de violência doméstica referidos no artigo 35.º têm natureza pública.

Artigo 37.º

Medidas de coacção
Para além das medidas de coacção previstas no Código de Processo Penal, no caso de crime de violência doméstica, o arguido pode ser sujeito, por determinação do juiz do processo, à medida de afastamento coercivo do local de residência da família sempre que haja indícios de violência que, razoavel-mente, façam prever que os actos de agressão se possam vir a repetir de forma a criar perigo para a vida ou para a integridade física, psíquica ou sexual da vítima, assim como à proibição de contacto com esta última.

Artigo 38.º

Escolha e determinação da pena
1. O tribunal pode substituir a pena de prisão por pena de multa desde que estejam reunidos os pressupostos previstos no artigo 67.º do Código Penal, a segurança da vítima esteja assegurada, o agressor concorde sujeitar-se a tratamento ou acompanhamento pelos serviços de apoio à vítima e seja proveitoso para a manutenção da unidade familiar.
2. O arguido pode ainda ser condenado a uma pena acessória de proibição de contacto com a vítima, pelo período máximo de 3 anos, sempre que se considere que a aplicação da pena principal for insuficiente para prevenir a repetição de actos idênticos.

Artigo 39.º

Protecção de testemunhas
Sempre que se revelar necessário, o tribunal competente aplica medidas processuais para a protecção de testemunhas em processos relativos a violência doméstica, às vítimas e às pessoas com conhecimento dos factos constitutivos do objecto do processo ou outras informações relevantes para a decisão, nos termos da lei aplicável.

Artigo 40.º

Segredo profissional
1. O pessoal técnico e não-técnico, em serviço nos centros de acolhimento, nas casas de abrigo e nos serviços especiali-zados de assistência, está obrigado a segredo profissional em relação aos factos de que tenha tomado conhecimento unicamente em razão da relação profissional estabelecida com as vítimas ao seu cuidado.
2. Sendo solicitado o consentimento de uma vítima ao seu cuidado e obtido esse consentimento de livre vontade, cessa o dever de segredo profissional do pessoal referido, se chamado a depor ou a prestar outras informações às entidades judiciárias.

CAPÍTULO VII

DISPOSIÇÕES FINAIS

Artigo 41.º

Regulamentação
Compete ao Governo aprovar as normas necessárias à implementação e desenvolvimento da presente lei no prazo de 180 dias.

Artigo 42.º

Entrada em vigor
A presente lei entra em vigor no dia seguinte ao da sua publicação.
Aprovada em 3 de Maio de 2010.
O Presidente do Parlamento Nacional,
Fernando La Sama de Araújo
Promulgada em 21 / 06 / 2010.
Publique-se.
O Presidente da República,
Dr. José Ramos Horta
