Cláudio Ximenes

Cláudio Ximenes

PENAL CODE

Approved by Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April, based on the legislative authorization conferred by Law 13/2008, of 13 October, and amended by Law 6/2009, of 15 July

KÓDIGU PENÁL

Aprovadu ho Dekretu-Lei19/2009, iha 8 Abríl, ho baze iha autorizasaun ne'ebé Lei 13/2008, iha 13 Outubru, fó,
no alteradu ho Lei 6/2009, iha 15 Jullu

2nd Edition Court of Appeal, 2010

Technical details / Fixa téknika

Title: Penal Code

Translation, annotation and systematization: Cláudio Ximenes Edition: Court of Appeal
2nd Edition, Dili, March 2010 Print run: 3000 copies

Títulu: Kódigu Penál Tradusaun, anotasaun no sistematizasaun: Cláudio Ximenes
Edisaun: Tribunál ba Rekursu Edisaun daruak, Dili, Marsu 2010
Tirajen: ezemplár 3000

Preface / Prefásiu

Ho Kódigu Penál ne'ebé moris iha 7 Juñu 2009 Timór-Leste hametin tan nia
sistema-jurídiku.

Maibé, hanesan lei hotu-hotu, ema sira-ne'ebé servisu iha tribunál no sidadaun sira presiza lee no kompreende Kódigu Penál Timór ne'e, liuliu hodi hatene hahalok ne'ebé maka lei konsidera krime no hahalok ne'ebé maka lei la konsidera krime ka iha situasaun ne'ebé maka hahalok ida fó-fatin ba pena no iha situasaun ne'ebé maka hahalok ida la fó-fatin
ba pena.

Hamutuk ho difikuldade sira-ne'ebé ita hasoru kuandu ita aplika Kódigu foun ruma, ita iha difikuldade boot ida-tán: ita seidauk domina ita nia lian ofisiál Tetun no
Portugés.

Versaun Tetun laiha karik, ema sira-ne'ebé ladún hatene Portugés sei iha difikuldade boot atu iha asesu ba kódigu ne'e.

Tanba ne'e maka ha'u hodi-biit tradús Kódigu ida-ne'e
ba Tetun.

With the Penal Code in force from 7 June 2009, Timor-Leste took another step in the consolidation of its legal system.

But, like any law, the Timorese Penal Code needs to be read and understood, not only by those who work in the courts but also by citizens, who need to know when a conduct constitutes a crime or in what situations a certain conduct gives rise to a penalty and in what situations it does not.

The lack of mastery of the official languages – Tetum and Portuguese – is a difficulty to add to those inherent in the application of a new code.

Without a version in the Tetum language this code will be difficult to access for those who do not yet have sufficient knowledge of Portuguese.

For this reason, I took the risk of translating this statute into Tetum.

Ha'u hatene katak halo tradusaun ba textu jurídiku difisil tebes; difisil liu-tán tanba ha'u la'ós tékniku iha tradusaun; difisil liu-tán tanba tradusaun ne'e tenke halo ba lian ne'ebé sei dezenvolve-án daudaun.
Maibé ha'u fiar katak, nune'e, ha'u fo mós korajen ba jurista grupu ki'ikoan ida-ne'ebé, hamutuk ho ha'u, estuda tiha ona ka estuda daudaun Tetun tuir perspetiva jurídika iha Centro de Formação Jurídica atu hakás-án liu-tán hodi dezenvolve ita nia lian Tetun atu sai hanesan lian iha servisu iha Timór-Leste
nia tribunál.

Kona-ba ortografia ha'u hakás-an atu tuir padraun ortográfiku ba lian Tetun ne'ebé Institutu Nasionál ba
Linguístika, iha Universidade Nasionál Timór-Loro Sa'e, dezenvolve, nu'udar Dekretu
1/2004 haruka.

Atu garante nafatin rigór iha konseitu jurídiku ida-idak, ha'u adota hanesan tetun lia-fuan portugés barak, ho laran-metin katak, kuandu ita uza beibeik ona, ita sei toman lia-fuan sira-ne'e. Tanba rigór mós, ha'u la uza termu tetun sira-

I did so with the awareness of the difficulties inherent in the translation of any legal text, done by someone who is not a translation technician and into a language still under development; but also with the certainty that, in doing so, I am encouraging the small group of jurists who were or are with me taking an approach to Tetum from a legal perspective at the Legal Training Centre to commit themselves even more to the development of this national language to make it more easily usable as a working language in the courts of Timor-Leste.

In orthography I was careful to respect the orthographic standard of the Tetum language developed by the National Institute of Linguistics of the National University of Timor-Leste, as imposed by Decree 1/2004.

To maintain the rigour of legal concepts I chose to adopt terms from Portuguese, which use will quickly make familiar. For the same reason I chose not yet to use some Tetum terms whose meaning in legal discourse still

ne'ebé seidauk iha signifikadu metin iha diskursu jurídiku.

Iha publikasaun ne'e hatama mós, ho nota iha rodapé, signifikadu ba liafuan balu ne'ebé uza iha ne'e, hodi fasilita deit sira nia kompreensaun, ho laran metin katak aban-bairua sei tau-hamutuk iha glosáriu ida termu jurídiku sira-ne'ebé uza daudaun iha ne'e.

Livru ida-ne'e tau hamutuk Kódigu Penál Timór, lei ne'ebé fo autorizasaun ba Governu atu aprova kódigu ne'e ho dekretu-lei no mós lei ne'ebé altera kódigu ne'e nia artigu 141, sira hotu iha versaun Portugés no Tetun.

Ha'u agradese ba PNUD nia Programa ba Justisa tanba apoiu hodi publika livru ida-
ne'e. Dili, 13 Outubru 2009

needs to be consolidated.
In this publication an attempt is made to indicate, in footnotes, the meaning of some of the terms used, only to facilitate their understanding, in the expectation that in the future a glossary of the legal terms used here will be organized.

This book contains the Portuguese and Tetum versions of the Timorese Penal Code, of the law that authorizes the Government to approve the code by decree-law, as well as of the law that amended article 141 of the code.

I thank the UNDP Justice Programme for having financed the publication of this book.

Dili, 13 October 2009

Cláudio Ximenes
Tribunál ba Rekursu nia Prezidente / President of the Court of Appeal

PENAL CODE

Approved by Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April, based on the legislative authorization conferred by Law 13/2008, of 13 October, and amended by Law 6/2009, of 15 July

INDEX

Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April (Approves the Penal Code)

PENAL CODE

BOOK I - GENERAL PART

TITLE I - APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW SOLE CHAPTER - GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 1 - Principle of legality Article 2 - Prohibition of analogy

Article 3

Application of criminal law in time Article 4 - Exceptional or temporary law Article 5 - Moment of commission of the act Article 6 - Place of commission of the act

Article 7 - Principle of territoriality

Article 8

Acts committed outside the national territory Article 9 - Restrictions on the application of Timorese law Article 10 - Subsidiary application

TITLE II - CRIME

CHAPTER I - GENERAL PREREQUISITES

Article 11 - Action and omission

Article 12 - Criminal liability

Article 13 - Liability for acting on behalf of another

Article 14 - Subjective imputation Article 15 - Types of intent

Article 16

Types of negligence Article 17 - Error regarding circumstances Article 18 - Error regarding unlawfulness Article 19 - Aggravation by result

Article 20

Lack of criminal capacity by reason of age Article 21 - Lack of criminal capacity by reason of mental disorder

CHAPTER II - FORMS OF CRIME

Article 22 - Preparatory acts Article 23 - Attempt

Article 24 - Punishability of attempt Article 25 - Non-punishable attempt

Article 26

Voluntary desistance Article 27 - Cases of complicity Article 28 - Subsequent repentance CHAPTER III - PERPETRATORS OF CRIME

Article 29 - Perpetrators Article 30 - Authorship Article 32 - Complicity

Article 33

Fault in complicity Article 34 - Unlawfulness in complicity CHAPTER IV - CONCURRENCE AND CONTINUING CRIMES

Article 35 - Concurrence of crimes

Article 36 - Punishment in case of concurrence Article 37 - Concurrence of sanctions

Article 38 - Prison sentence with suspended execution in legal cumulation

Article 39

Supervening knowledge of concurrence Article 40 - Crime and other offence

Article 41 - Continuing crime Article 42 - Concurrence of norms

CHAPTER V - GROUNDS FOR EXCLUSION

SECTION I - GROUNDS FOR EXCLUSION OF UNLAWFULNESS

Article 43

Exclusion of unlawfulness Article 44 - Self-defence Article 45 - State of necessity Article 46 - Conflict of duties Article 47 - Consent

SECTION II - GROUNDS FOR EXCLUSION OF GUILT

Article 48 - Excess of self-defence

Article 49

Exculpatory state of necessity Article 50 - Exculpatory undue obedience TITLE III - OF CIRCUMSTANCES SOLE CHAPTER - GENERAL RULES

Article 51

Determination of the measure of penalty Article 52 - General aggravating circumstances Article 53 - Recidivism

Article 54 - Criminal habituality

Article 55 - General mitigating circumstances

Article 56

Circumstances of extraordinary mitigation Article 57 - Degrees of extraordinary mitigation

Article 58 - Concurrence of circumstances

TITLE IV - OF THE LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 59 - Penalties and security measures

Article 60

Limit of penalties and security measures Article 61 - Purpose of penalties and security measures Article 62 - Choice of penalty and security measure Article 63 - Effects of penalties and security measures Article 64 - Execution of penalties or measures depriving liberty

Article 65 - Concurrence of penalties and measures depriving liberty

CHAPTER II - PENALTY OF IMPRISONMENT

Article 66

Duration of the penalty of imprisonment Article 67 - Substitution of imprisonment by fine Article 68 - Suspension of execution of imprisonment

Article 69

Suspension of imprisonment conditioned on duties Article 71 - Suspension of imprisonment with supervision Article 72 - Modification of the suspension regime Article 73 - Revocation of suspension

Article 74 - Extinction of the penalty of imprisonment CHAPTER III - PENALTY OF FINE

Article 75 - Duration of the penalty of fine

Article 76

Imprisonment alternative to the penalty of fine Article 77 - Reduction or exemption from the penalty of fine

CHAPTER IV - PENALTY OF WORK IN FAVOUR OF THE COMMUNITY

Article 78 - Work in favour of the community Article 79 - Requirements

Article 80

Suspension, reduction or exemption from penalty Article 81 - Complementary legislation

CHAPTER V - PENALTY OF ADMONISHMENT

Article 82 - Admonishment

Article 83 - Execution of the penalty of admonishment CHAPTER VI - ACCESSORY PENALTIES

Article 84 - General principle

Article 85 - Temporary suspension from the exercise of public functions

Article 86 - Prohibition from the exercise of function Article 87 - Expulsion

Article 88 - Prohibition from driving

Article 89 - Revocation of the licence to carry weapons CHAPTER VII - DETERMINATION OF PENALTY

Article 90 - General principles

Article 91

Concrete determination of penalty Article 92 - Special case of the penalty of fine CHAPTER VIII - SECURITY MEASURES SECTION I - MEASURE OF INTERNMENT

Article 93 - Prerequisites Article 94 - Duration

Article 95 - Cessation of the measure

Article 96 - Substitution of the measure of internment Article 97 - Liberty for trial

Article 98

Revocation of liberty for trial Article 99 - Suspension of execution of internment

SECTION II - OTHER SECURITY MEASURES

Article 100 - Measure of professional disqualification

Article 101 - Prohibition from driving and revocation of the licence to use and carry weapons

CHAPTER IX - OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

Article 102 - Forfeiture of objects of crime Article 103 - Forfeiture of advantages

Article 104

Civil liability arising from crime Article 105 - Privilege of the injured party's credit

TITLE V - RIGHT TO COMPLAINT

Article 106 - Nature of crime

Article 107

Holder of the right to complaint Article 108 - Time limit for the exercise of the right Article 109 - Waiver and withdrawal of complaint

TITLE VI - EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY

CHAPTER I - PRESCRIPTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Article 110

Prescription periods Article 111 - Counting of the period Article 112 - Suspension of prescription

CHAPTER II - PRESCRIPTION OF PENALTIES AND SECURITY MEASURES

Article 113

Prescription periods for penalties Article 114 - Prescription of accessory penalties Article 115 - Prescription periods for security

measures

Article 116 - Suspension of prescription CHAPTER III - IMPRESCRIPTIBILITY

Article 117 - Crimes of genocide, against peace and humanity and of war

CHAPTER IV - OTHER GROUNDS FOR EXTINCTION

Article 118 - Other grounds Article 119 - Death of the agent Article 120 - Amnesty

Article 121 - Amnesty and concurrence of crimes Article 122 - Pardon

BOOK II - SPECIAL PART

TITLE I - OF CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND HUMANITY

CHAPTER I - CRIMES OF GENOCIDE AND AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 123 - Genocide

Article 124 - Crimes against humanity CHAPTER II - WAR CRIMES

Article 125 - War crimes against persons

Article 126 - War crimes by use of prohibited methods of warfare

Article 127 - War crimes by use of prohibited means of warfare

Article 128

War crimes against property protected by distinctive insignia or emblems

Article 129

War crimes against property Article 130 - War crimes against other rights CHAPTER III - AGAINST PEACE AND FREEDOM

Article 131 - Terrorist organisations Article 132 - Terrorism

Article 133 - Financing of terrorism Article 134 - Incitement to war

Article 135 - Racial or religious discrimination CHAPTER IV - COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 136 - Responsibility of military commanders and other superiors

Article 137 - Definitions

TITLE II - OF CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS CHAPTER I - AGAINST LIFE

Article 138 - Simple homicide

Article 139

Aggravated homicide Article 140 - Negligent homicide Article 142 - Infanticide

Article 143 - Exposure or abandonment

Article 144

Incitement or assistance to suicide CHAPTER II - AGAINST PHYSICAL INTEGRITY

Article 145

Simple offences against physical integrity Article 146 - Serious offences against physical integrity Article 147 - Aggravation

Article 148

Negligent offences against physical integrity Article 149 - Medical-surgical interventions and treatments

Article 150

Offences by means of poisonous substances Article 151 - Reciprocal bodily offences

Article 152

Participation in affray Article 153 - Ill-treatment of incapacitated person Article 154 - Ill-treatment of spouse Article 155 - Ill-treatment of minor Article 156 - Aggravation by result

CHAPTER III - AGAINST PERSONAL LIBERTY SECTION I - PERSONAL ASSAULTS

Article 157

Threats Article 158 - Coercion Article 159 - Serious coercion Article 160 - Kidnapping Article 161 - Abduction

Article 162 - Slavery

Article 163 - Trafficking in persons Article 164 - Aggravation

Article 165 - Trafficking in human organs Article 166 - Sale of persons

Article 167 - Torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment

Article 168 - Aggravation

Article 169 - Omission of denunciation

Article 170 - Freedom of assembly or demonstration SECTION II - SEXUAL ASSAULTS

Article 171 - Sexual coercion Article 172 - Rape Article 173 - Aggravation

SECTION III - SEXUAL EXPLOITATION

Article 174 - Sexual exploitation of third party Article 175 - Child prostitution

Article 176 - Child pornography SECTION IV - SEXUAL ABUSE

Article 177 - Sexual abuse of minor

Article 178

Sexual acts with adolescents Article 179 - Sexual abuse of person incapable of resistance

Article 180 - Sexual fraud

Article 181 - Sexual exhibitionism SECTION V - COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 182 - Aggravation

CHAPTER V - AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE

Article 183 - Invasion of privacy

Article 184 - Violation of secrecy Article 185 - Violation of domicile

Article 186 - Entry into other places closed to the public

Article 187 - Violation of correspondence or telecommunications

TITLE III - OF CRIMES AGAINST LIFE IN DEMOCRACY

CHAPTER I - AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

Article 188

Criminal association Article 189 - Incitement to the commission of crime Article 190 - Participation in riot

Article 191 - Impediment of the exercise of political rights

Article 192 - Influence peddling

Article 193

Disobedience to order of dispersal Article 194 - Abuse of public signs or uniform Article 195 - Usurpation of functions

CHAPTER II - AGAINST STATE SECURITY

Article 196 - Treason against the Homeland

Article 197 - Service or collaboration with enemy armed forces

Article 198

Sabotage against national defence Article 199 - Campaign against effort for peace Article 200 - Violation of State secret

Article 201 - Diplomatic infidelity Article 202 - Alteration of the Rule of Law

Article 203 - Attack against highest representative of organ of sovereignty

Article 204

Coercion against constitutional organs Article 205 - Disturbance of functioning of constitutional organ

Article 206

Outrage of national symbols CHAPTER III - AGAINST LIFE IN SOCIETY SECTION I - CRIMES OF COMMON DANGER

Article 207 - Driving without a licence

Article 208 - Driving under the influence of alcohol or psychotropic substances

Article 209 - Dangerous driving

Article 210 - Attack against the safety of transport Article 211 - Prohibited weapons

Article 212 - Drunkenness and intoxication

Article 213 - Qualification for the exercise of certain activities

Article 214

Adulterated or deteriorated products SECTION II - CRIMES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT

Article 215 - Against the environment Article 216 - Aggravation

Article 217 - Against flora or fauna

Article 218 - Against endangered or at risk of extinction species

Article 219 - Illegal fishing

Article 220

Illicit fishing methods Article 221 - Prohibited burning SECTION III - OTHER CRIMES

Article 222 - Impediment or disturbance of procession, ceremony or worship

Article 223 - Profanation of object or place of worship or veneration

Article 224 - Destruction, removal, concealment or profanation of corpse

Article 225 - Non-fulfilment of maintenance obligation Article 226 - Abduction of minor

Article 227 - Omission of assistance Article 228 - Refusal of medical assistance

CHAPTER IV - ELECTORAL CRIMES

Article 229

Fraud in registration Article 230 - Obstruction to candidacy Article 231 - Ineligible candidate Article 232 - Lack of electoral registers Article 233 - Illicit electoral propaganda

Article 234

Obstruction to freedom of choice Article 235 - Disturbance of electoral act

Article 236

Obstruction to supervision of electoral act Article 237 - Fraud in voting

Article 238 - Fraud in scrutiny Article 239 - Refusal of electoral office

Article 240

Violation of secrecy of scrutiny Article 241 - Duty of neutrality and impartiality Article 242 - Aggravation

CHAPTER V - AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY

Article 243 - Obstruction to public authority Article 244 - Disobedience

Article 245 - Removal of prisoners Article 246 - Escape

Article 247 - Assistance by official to escape Article 248 - Riot of prisoners

Article 249 - Misappropriation or destruction of objects under public power

Article 250

Breaking of marks, seals and notices TITLE IV - OF CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY

CHAPTER I - AGAINST OWNERSHIP

Article 251 - Simple theft Article 252 - Aggravated theft Article 253 - Robbery

Article 254

Violence after removal Article 255 - Theft of use of vehicle Article 256 - Simple breach of trust Article 257 - Aggravated breach of trust Article 258 - Simple damage

Article 259

Aggravated damage Article 260 - Damage with violence Article 261 - Usurpation of immovable property Article 262 - Alteration of landmarks Article 263 - Arson

Article 264 - Active repentance

Article 265 - Definitions

CHAPTER II - AGAINST PROPERTY IN GENERAL

Article 266

Simple fraud Article 267 - Aggravated fraud Article 268 - Computer fraud

Article 269 - Aggravated computer fraud Article 270 - Extortion

Article 271

Simple receiving Article 272 - Aggravated receiving Article 273 - Assistance to criminal Article 274 - Harmful administration Article 275 - Negligent administration

Article 276

Intentional bankruptcy or insolvency Article 277 - Negligent bankruptcy or insolvency

TITLE V - OF CRIMES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

Article 278

Falsity of testimony or statement Article 279 - Falsity of witness testimony, expert opinion, interpretation or translation

Article 280

Equivalence to desistance Article 282 - Denial of justice Article 283 - Coercion of magistrate

Article 284 - Obstruction to jurisdictional activity Article 285 - Slanderous denunciation

Article 286 - Non-reporting

Article 287

Prevarication by magistrate or official Article 288 - Prevarication by lawyer or public defender

Article 289 - Simulation of crime Article 290 - Personal favouritism

Article 291

Violation of secrecy of justice TITLE VI - OF CRIMES COMMITTED IN THE EXERCISE OF PUBLIC FUNCTIONS

Article 292

Passive corruption for illicit act Article 293 - Passive corruption for licit act Article 294 - Active corruption

Article 295 - Embezzlement Article 296 - Embezzlement of use

Article 297 - Abuse of power

Article 298 - Abusive employment of public force

Article 299 - Economic participation in business Article 300 - Refusal of cooperation

Article 301 - Aggravation

Article 302 - Concept of official

TITLE VII - OF CRIMES OF FALSIFICATION CHAPTER I - FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENT

Article 303 - Falsification of document or technical notation

Article 304 - Aggravated falsification

Article 305

Falsification of public document Article 306 - Use of another's identification document CHAPTER II - FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY

Article 307 - Counterfeiting of currency

Article 309 - Counterfeiting of stamped or embossed values

Article 310 - Counterfeiting of seals, dies, marks or stamps

Article 311 - Weights and measures Article 312 - Seizure and forfeiture

TITLE VIII - OF CRIMES AGAINST THE ECONOMY

Article 313 - Money laundering Article 314 - Tax fraud

Article 315 - Illicit import and export of goods or merchandise

Article 316 - Smuggling Article 317 - Misappropriation Article 318 - Exemption from penalty

Article 319

Irregular administration of public funds Article 320 - Disobedience to requisition of goods

Article 321 - Destruction of goods relevant to the economy

Article 322 - Illegal exploitation of gambling Article 323 - Disruption of public act

Law 13/2008, of 13 October (Legislative authorisation in criminal matters)

Law 6/2009, of 15 July (Amends article 141 of the Penal Code)

Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April (Approves the Penal Code)

Given the need to construct the legal system, the drafting and approval of the Penal Code of Timor-Leste was established by political leaders as one of the legislative priorities for guaranteeing the fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

The present legal instrument results from the work developed by a commission of Timorese and international technicians that acted under governmental guidance and in strict observance of the limits and content established in the law of legislative authorisation in criminal matters approved in the National Parliament.
The normative solutions enshrined, in addition to respecting the specific social and cultural realities of the Timorese community, also incorporate suggestions made by national and international organisations, contributions from various judicial operators working in Timor-Leste, as well as lessons drawn from comparative law.

It should be emphasised that the Penal Code now approved, more than a definitive point of arrival, constitutes rather a fundamental stage in the construction of the Timorese legal order, always open to future improvements that, in the future, the evolution of international law, judicial practice and the teaching of law may advise.

Thus,

In the exercise of the legislative authorisation granted under articles 1 and 2 of Law no. 13/2008, of 13 October and under the terms provided for in article 96 of the Constitution, the Government decrees, to have force of law, the following:

Article 1 Approval of the Penal Code

The Penal Code published in the annex and which forms an integral part of the present instrument is approved.

Article 2 Repealing provision

1.	The Indonesian Penal Code, in force in the legal order under the terms provided for in art.1 of Law 10/2003, is repealed.
2.	All legal provisions contained in separate legislation that are repealed:
a)	Provide for and punish acts criminalised by the Penal Code now approved;
b)	Establish solutions contrary to those adopted in the General Part of the Penal Code.

Article 3 Entry into force

The present instrument and the Penal Code enter into force on the 60th day following their publication.

Approved in Council of Ministers on 18 March 2009.

The Prime Minister,
(Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão)

The Minister of Justice, (Lúcia M. B. F. Lobato)

Promulgated on 30/03/09 Publish.

The President of the Republic, (José Ramos Horta)

Annex

PENAL CODE

I	– The restoration of independence and the approval of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste in 2002, determined the need for the country to adopt its own modern legal order, which would enshrine the fundamental rights set out in the constitutional precepts and reflect the social reality of the country. The maintenance in force of the Indonesian Penal Code was necessary to ensure the validity of a criminal law of the State, but proved inadequate to the new reality of the country and in various circumstances, determined legal solutions contrary to the constitutional principles now enshrined.

Since the Timorese people have their own specificity and identity, the need arose to draft their own Penal Code, with a philosophy that was intrinsic to them and guided by principles and values inherent to modern societies, which would respond to the current demands placed on the Country.

A commission of Timorese and international technicians, created by the I Constitutional Government, proceeded to draft a Draft Penal Code which, despite the approval of the Law of Legislative Authorisation in criminal matters, was not promulgated at the end of the legislature

At the beginning of 2008, with a new executive, a new proposal for a Law of legislative authorisation for the approval of the Penal Code is presented to the National Parliament and the work of revising the draft Penal Code is resumed, with the instrument having been subject to amendments and subjected to a broad public discussion.

After the approval of the legislative authorisation, it fell to the Council of Ministers of the IV Constitutional Government to approve the Penal Code.

II	– The General Part constitutes Book I of the Penal Code, and integrates the fundamental principles of criminal law enshrined in the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste in the conventions, treaties and international agreements received in the Timorese internal legal order.

Because it is a code based on a Democratic Rule of Law, the General Part enshrines the principle of human dignity, respect for the individual freedom of each citizen and the responsibility of the State to intervene only when there are unsustainable injuries to legal interests fundamental to life in society, and the State must, in these circumstances, assume the right to punish and the social duty to reintegrate the agent into society.

Also reflecting a Rule of Law are the principle of legality, the principle of guilt and the principle of humanity.

The enshrinement of the principle of legality, as a fundamental principle of Criminal Law, provided for in article 31 of the Constitution, determines that any action or omission can only be considered a crime and be punished as such, when provided for in the law. Observance of this principle requires the prohibition of the application of analogy in matters of qualification of crimes, and the Court cannot through an analogical interpretation of the norms contained in the Penal Code qualify a fact as a crime, define a state of dangerousness or determine a penalty or security measure.

The principle of non-retroactivity of criminal law, which prevents the retroactive application of criminal law, except when it proves concretely more favourable to the defendant, is also a corollary of the principle of legality.

The principle of humanity, enshrined in articles 29 and 32 of the Constitution, is the guiding principle that underlies the prohibition of the application of the death penalty, as well as the determination of penalties or security measures of a perpetual nature or of unlimited or indefinite duration.

Necessity, proportionality and adequacy are guiding principles of the normative options that inform the present Code and underlie the application of each penalty or security measure, these always having as their purpose the protection of legal interests essential to life in society and the social reintegration of the agent.

The principle of guilt is observed as a prerequisite for the application of the penalty, determining that there is no penalty without guilt (nulla poena sine culpa), this principle being a form of limitation of the power of the State, since the measure of the penalty can never exceed the measure of guilt. The principle of guilt is also reflected in the treatment given to error regarding unlawfulness, in the enshrinement of non-imputability by reason of age and in the verification of psychic anomaly, which exclude the criminal responsibility of the agent for lack of guilt.

Regarding the legal consequences of the punishable act, it is observed that the penalty must always be executed in a pedagogical and resocialising manner, with this Code presenting different means of applying non-institutional sanctioning measures.

When, as an alternative, a custodial or non-custodial penalty must be applied, the court is required to give reasoned preference to the non-custodial penalty whenever it adequately and sufficiently achieves the purposes of punishment and satisfies the requirements of reprobation and prevention of crime (

artigo 62º)

Thus, the application of alternative penalties is prioritized, especially in situations of minor and medium-level crime, with particular emphasis on the penalty of fine and the penalty of community service, which are enshrined as ways to better ensure the intended social reintegration of the offender.

The fine penalty is set in days, thus allowing better adaptation to the agent's guilt and their economic conditions, with the amount set for each day of fine varying according to the economic and financial situation of the convicted person and their personal obligations.

On the other hand, in order to differentiate the fine penalty, as a principal penalty, from the fine substituting the prison sentence, different rules are established for converting the fine into days of imprisonment, in case of non-payment of the fine.

Regarding community service, as a non-institutional sanctioning measure, the Code is concerned with clarifying and systematizing some fundamental aspects of its regime, leaving its development and concrete application to autonomous law.

The prison sentence should only be applied when all other penalties prove inadequate to achieve the objectives of prevention and reprobation. A minimum duration of 30 days and a maximum of 25 years is established for the prison sentence, and the maximum limit may be increased to 30 years in cases specially provided for by law.

A corollary of the offender's social reintegration is the institute of suspension of execution of the prison sentence, applicable in cases where the measure of the sentence in concrete terms does not exceed 3 years and the requirements of prevention of future crimes do not prevent its enforcement. The suspension of execution of the prison sentence may be conditioned on compliance with duties or rules of conduct, or subject to monitoring by reintegration services.

For those not criminally responsible by virtue of mental abnormality, security measures of limited temporal duration are established, namely the measure of confinement, whenever reasons of dangerousness so advise. The application of measures of a perpetual nature is not permitted, and the obligation to cease security measures is established whenever the state of dangerousness that legitimized them ends, admitting, in the case of foreigners, that the measures may be replaced by expulsion from the country.

The Penal Code, in defense of the fundamental values and legal interests for life in society, distinguishes crimes of a public nature, which must necessarily be protected by the State, from those which, being less serious, are dependent on the exercise of the right to file a complaint by the holder of that right, as already enshrined in criminal procedural legislation. Thus, all those crimes are considered semi-public which, in the Special Part of the Penal Code, determine the obligation to exercise the complaint in the description of the respective legal type.

Regarding the extinction of criminal responsibility and its effects, the limitation periods for criminal proceedings, penalties, security measures and accessory penalties are set in the general part, as well as situations of suspension are defined. However, the imprescriptibility of criminal proceedings and penalties was chosen when they concern war crimes, crimes against peace, or crimes against humanity and freedom.

Finally, other cases of extinction of responsibility are regulated, such as the death of the agent, amnesty, and pardon.

III – It is recognized that the Special Part of Penal Codes is the one that generates the greatest impact on public opinion, insofar as it translates into the selection of goods, interests and values that in a given society and at a given historical moment justify being protected by criminal law, being, consequently, elevated to the category of

criminal legal interests. In the specific case of the Penal Code of Timor-Leste, the legislator sought to embody in the normative solutions found the choices that the Constitution had previously already enshrined as being the collective sentiment of Timorese society.

The systematization adopted in this part follows the history of the country and reflects the fundamental interests and values that built this young nation.

It is not surprising, therefore, that the first title of this book protects, respectively, peace, humanity and freedom as primordial values of democratic societies, in respect for the hierarchy of values that the Fundamental Law indicates and taking into account the international obligations assumed by the Country by subscribing to and ratifying the Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Title II enshrines crimes against persons, with particular protection of eminently personal legal interests, highlighting the protection of life, physical integrity, personal freedom, sexual freedom, and the protection of private life.

It should be noted that voluntary termination of pregnancy is a punishable crime under the terms of article 145 of this Code.

In this title and with regard to crimes against physical integrity, the introduction of crimes of ill-treatment of minors and ill-treatment of spouse assumes particular relevance, fundamental typifications for the affirmation of the Rule of Law and for the protection of human rights in Timorese society.

The criminalization of slavery and trafficking in persons is also highlighted, the fruit of the humanist conception that presided over the elaboration of this Code.

Title III provides for crimes against life in democracy, highlighting crimes against public tranquility, State security and life in

society, as well as electoral crimes and crimes against public authority.

In this title, and within the scope of crimes against life in society, the provision of specific types of crimes against the environment stands out, reflecting a growing concern of society in the preservation of natural resources and the protection of the environment, punishing unsustainably harmful conduct against fauna, flora, and natural habitats.

The protection of property is enshrined in Title IV of this Book, where a normative system is constructed based on the legal types of crime most common in various criminal legislations such as theft, robbery, breach of trust and damage. These types are defined as simple or aggravated, considering the circumstances of value, the nature of the thing appropriated, the means and forms of action, violence, as well as any other circumstances likely to significantly increase the guilt or unlawfulness of the agent.

Crimes against the administration of Justice and crimes committed in the exercise of public functions are listed in Titles V and VI, which enshrine the punishment of falsity of procedural acts, forms of obstruction of jurisdictional activity, its non-exercise as denial of justice, as well as identifying, among others, acts of bribery, prevarication by magistrate or official and by lawyer or public defender. Other activities of personal favoritism in the field of justice and the classic incriminations of false accusation, simulation of crime and failure to report a crime are also criminalized.

In the exercise of public functions, in general, the conduct of officials that subsumes crimes of corruption, embezzlement, abuse of power or public force, or economic participation in business by those who hold public offices or functions is criminalized. In this domain, the Penal Code expands the concept of

public official to include other analogous situations such as an official of international organizations, a foreign public official who exercises activity in the country, or a person who has been called to perform or participate in the performance of an activity included in the public administrative or jurisdictional function.

Title VII typifies crimes of falsification of documents, technical notations, currency and sealed or stamped securities, weights and measures, marks, stamps and seals, diversifying the respective punishments according to the nature, probative or fiduciary value and public use or destination of the falsified objects, providing for the possibility of seizure and forfeiture of objects intended for their practice.

Finally, in Title VIII, crimes against the economy are defined, proceeding to the incrimination of money laundering, in line with the most recent doctrine on the criminalization of anti-economic activities, tax fraud and situations of smuggling and customs evasion, with regard to customs or border issues. The criminal punishment of disobedience to the requisition of goods ordered by the Government is maintained, as well as behaviors likely to disturb, harm or prevent the performance of certain public acts such as public tender or judicial auction.

It should be noted that, throughout this Diploma, an attempt is made to find a balance for abstract criminal frameworks, taking into account the type of crime, its seriousness, the hierarchy of legally protected interests by each of the norms and the maximum limit enshrined for the prison sentence.

Also characteristic of the legislative options adopted by the Penal Code is the different treatment given to more serious crime where, in general, the legal type of crime provides only for a prison sentence.

In minor and medium-level crime, as a rule, the possibility for the court, depending on the cases, to resort, as an alternative, to the penalty of deprivation of liberty or the fine penalty follows directly from the provision of the norm, enshrining the criminal policy orientation of recognizing the fine as an autonomous penalty instead of complementary to the principal penalty.

The approval of this Code provides the Timorese State with yet another legal instrument, modern and adequate for the provision of a public-criminal service of greater quality and respect for the fundamental rights of citizens, requiring continuous training of magistrates, public defenders, lawyers, court officials and other judicial actors who in their daily lives make these legal diplomas their working instruments, strengthening the national legal order and the Democratic Rule of Law.

BOOK I GENERAL PART

TITLE I

APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW

CHAPTER ONE GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 1 Principle of legality

1.	No action or omission may be classified as a crime without a law prior to its commission defining it as a crime and imposing the respective penalty.
2.	Security measures may only be applied to states of dangerousness whose prerequisites are defined in prior law.

Article 2 Prohibition of analogy

To classify an action or omission as a crime, define a state of dangerousness or determine the respective legal consequences, recourse to analogy is not permitted.

Article 3

Application of criminal law in time

1.	No one may be punished for an act defined as a crime at the time of its commission if a subsequent law ceases to consider it a crime.
2.	In this case, if there has already been a conviction decision, even if final, the execution and its criminal effects cease.
3.	The law subsequent to the commission of the crime applies to prior conduct whenever it proves concretely more favourable to the agent and, in cases of final decisions, if any advantage can still be derived.

Article 4

Exceptional or temporary law

Exceptional or temporary law continues to apply to acts committed during its validity even if the period of duration has elapsed or the circumstances that determined it have ceased.

Article 5 Moment of commission of the act

The act is considered committed at the moment of the action or omission, regardless of the moment when the typical result occurs.

Article 6

Place of commission of the act

The act is considered committed in the place where, in any form, the action or omission occurred, in whole or

in part, as well as where the typical result was produced or should have been produced.

Article 7 Principle of territoriality

Unless an international treaty or convention provides otherwise and whatever the nationality of the agent, Timorese criminal law is applicable to acts committed in the territory of Timor-Leste and aboard ships or aircraft registered or flying the Timorese flag.

Article 8

Acts committed outside the national territory

Unless a treaty or convention provides otherwise, Timorese criminal law is applicable to acts committed outside the territory of Timor-Leste in the following cases:
a)	When they constitute the crimes provided for in articles 196 to 206, 229 to 242 and 307 to 313;
b)	When they constitute the crimes provided for in articles 123 to 135, 161 to 169 and 175 to 178 provided that the agent is found in Timor-Leste and cannot be extradited or a decision is made not to surrender him;
c)	When they are committed against Timorese provided that the agent habitually lives in Timor-Leste and is found here;
d)	When they are committed by Timorese or by foreigners against Timorese, provided that the agent is found in Timor-Leste, the acts are equally punishable by the legislation of the place where they were committed and constitute a crime that admits extradition and extradition cannot, in the case, be granted;
e)	If they are crimes that the Timorese State, by international convention or treaty, has undertaken to try.

Article 9

Restrictions on the application of Timorese law

1.	Timorese criminal law is only applicable to acts committed outside the national territory when the agent has not been tried with a final decision in the place of commission of the act or, having been tried, evades total or partial compliance with the sanction.
2.	Even if, under the terms of the preceding number, Timorese criminal law is applicable, the act is tried according to the law of the country in which it was committed if this is concretely more favourable to the agent.
3.	In the cases referred to in the preceding number, the applicable sanction is converted into the one corresponding to it in the Timorese criminal system or, if there is no correspondence, into the one that Timorese law provides for the act.
4.	In the case that the agent is tried in Timor-Leste, having been tried previously in the place of commission of the act, account is taken of the penalty that has already been served abroad.
5.	The regime provided for in number 2 does not apply to the crimes identified in paragraphs a) and b) of the preceding article.

Article 10 Subsidiary application

Unless otherwise provided, the norms of this Code are applicable to acts punishable by special legislation.

TITLE II OF CRIME

CHAPTER I GENERAL PREREQUISITES

Article 11 Action and omission

1.	When a legal type of crime comprises a certain result, the act encompasses not only the action adequate to produce it but also the omission of the action adequate to avoid it, unless the intention of the law is otherwise.
2.	The commission of a result by omission is only punishable when a legal duty rests upon the omitter that personally obliges him to avoid that result.

3.	In the case provided for in the preceding number, the penalty may be extraordinarily mitigated.

Article 12 Criminal liability

1.	Criminal liability for the offences provided for in this Code falls to natural persons and is non-transferable.
2.	Legal persons are only criminally liable for the offences provided for in this Code or in special legislation when and under the conditions that the law expressly establishes.

Article 13

Liability for acting on behalf of another

Whoever acts as holder of an organ of a legal person, or mere de facto association, or as representative of another, is punishable even if the conditions, qualities or relations provided for in the respective type of crime are not verified in him, but rather in the person of the represented party.

Article 14 Subjective imputation

Only an act committed with intent, or in cases specially provided for by law, with negligence, is punishable.

Article 15 Types of intent

1.	Acts with intent whoever, representing an act that fulfils a type of crime, acts with the intention of carrying it out.
2.	Also acts with intent whoever represents the realization of an act that fulfils a type of crime as a necessary consequence of his conduct.
3.	When the realization of an act that fulfils a type of crime is represented as a possible consequence of the

conduct, there is intent if the agent acts conforming to that realization.

Article 16 Types of negligence

1.	Acts with negligence whoever, by not proceeding with the care to which, according to the circumstances, he is obliged and capable:
a)	Represents as possible the realization of an act that fulfils a type of crime but acts without conforming to that realization; or
b)	Does not even come to represent the possibility of realization of the act.
2.	The types of negligence referred to in the preceding number take the form of gross negligence whenever the circumstances show that the agent acted with recklessness or temerity, not observing the elementary duties of prudence required in the case.

Article 17

Error as to circumstances

1.	Error as to the elements of fact or law of a legal type of crime, as well as error as to prohibitions whose knowledge is reasonably indispensable for the agent to become aware of the unlawfulness, excludes intent.
2.	The regime provided for in the preceding number includes error as to the existence of the prerequisites of a cause of exclusion of unlawfulness or culpability.
3.	The punishability of negligent conduct is reserved whenever the law provides for it and the respective prerequisites are verified.

Article 18

Error as to unlawfulness

1.	Ignorance of the law does not exclude the unlawfulness of the conduct that violates it.

2.	Error as to the unlawfulness of an act, if unavoidable, excludes culpability.
3.	If the error as to unlawfulness is avoidable, the penalty may be extraordinarily mitigated.

Artigo 19º Agravação pelo resultado

When the penalty applicable to an act is aggravated by reason of the production of a result, the aggravation is always conditioned upon the possibility of imputing that result to the agent at least on grounds of negligence.

Artigo 20º Inimputabilidade em razão da idade

1.	Minors under 16 years of age are criminally non-imputable.
2.	To young persons over 16 and under 21 years of age, the provisions of this statute apply in all matters not covered by autonomous legislation, with respect to the application and execution of criminal sanctions.

Artigo 21º

Inimputabilidade em razão de anomalia psíquica

1.	A person is non-imputable who, by reason of a psychic anomaly, is incapable, at the time of commission of the act, of evaluating the unlawfulness thereof or of determining himself in accordance with that evaluation.
2.	A person may be declared non-imputable who, by reason of a psychic anomaly, has, at the time of commission of the act, appreciably diminished capacity to evaluate the unlawfulness or to determine himself in accordance with that evaluation.
3.	The proven incapacity of the agent to be influenced by penalties may constitute an indication of the situation provided for in the preceding paragraph.

4.	Imputability is not excluded when the psychic anomaly has been provoked by the agent with the intention of committing the act.

CAPÍTULO II FORMAS DO CRIME

Artigo 22º Actos preparatórios

Preparatory acts are not punishable, except where legal provision provides otherwise.

Artigo 23º Tentativa

There is an attempt when the agent initiates the execution of a crime he has decided to commit, performing part or all of the acts objectively adequate to produce the result and the result does not occur by reason of circumstances beyond his will.

Artigo 24º Punibilidade da tentativa

1.	An attempt is punishable only in intentional crimes to which corresponds a penalty of imprisonment whose maximum limit exceeds 3 years and in other cases that the law expressly determines.
2.	Except where otherwise provided, an attempt is punishable with the penalty corresponding to the consummated crime extraordinarily mitigated.

Artigo 25º Tentativa não punível

An attempt is not punishable when the means employed by the agent is manifestly inadequate or the object essential to the consummation of the crime is non-existent.

Artigo 26º

Desistência voluntária
An attempt by a person who voluntarily desists from continuing the execution of the crime, prevents the consummation or occurrence of the result, or makes a serious effort to prevent one or the other, is not punishable.

Artigo 27º

Casos de comparticipação

In case of participation, an attempt by a person who voluntarily desists from continuing the execution of the crime, prevents the consummation or occurrence of the result, or makes a serious effort to prevent one or the other, is not punishable, even if the other participants continue the execution of the act or consummate it.

Artigo 28º Arrependimento posterior

In crimes without violence or serious threat against persons, where the damage is repaired, the thing restored or the situation legalized before a report is made or a denunciation or complaint is received, the penalty may be extraordinarily mitigated or, depending on the circumstances, the agent exempted from penalty.

CAPÍTULO III AGENTES DO CRIME

Artigo 29º Agentes

Participation in the commission of a crime may take the form of authorship, instigation or complicity and there may be several participants in the same act.

Artigo 30º Autoria

1.	An author is one who executes the act, by himself or through another, whom he uses as an instrument.
2.	They are co-authors if, by tacit or express agreement, they take direct part in the execution or act in conjunction of efforts for the commission of the same crime.

Artigo 31º Instigação

A person who directly and intentionally determines another to commit a crime is punishable as an author, provided there is execution or commencement of execution of the crime.

Artigo 32º Cumplicidade

1.	A person who intentionally assists another materially or morally to commit a crime is punishable as an accomplice.
2.	The penalty corresponding to the type of unlawful act, extraordinarily mitigated, is applicable to the accomplice.

Artigo 33º

Culpa na comparticipação

Each participant is punished according to his culpability, independently of the punishment or degree of culpability of the others.

Artigo 34º

Ilicitude na comparticipação

1.	If the unlawfulness or degree of unlawfulness of the act depends on certain special qualities or relations of the agent, it suffices that those qualities or relations exist in any one of them, to make the respective penalty applicable to all participants, except if the intention of the incriminating norm is otherwise.
2.	Whenever, by effect of the rule provided for in the preceding paragraph, the application of a more severe penalty results for any of the participants, this may, considering the

circumstances of the case, be replaced by that which would apply if such rule did not intervene.

CAPÍTULO IV CONCURSOS E CRIMES CONTINUADOS

Artigo 35º Concurso de crimes

1.	The number of crimes is determined by the number of types of crimes actually committed, or by the number of times the same type is fulfilled by the conduct of the agent.
2.	For the purpose of the provisions of the following article, the case in which the agent, having committed a crime, commits another before having been convicted by a final judgment, is considered as a concurrence.

Artigo 36º

Punição em caso de concurso

1.	In case of concurrence of crimes, a single penalty is applied, whose minimum limit corresponds to the highest of the penalties concretely applied to the various crimes and the maximum limit to the material sum of the various partial penalties.
2.	The maximum limit of the framework of the concurrence may not exceed 600 days for a fine or 30 years for imprisonment, even in cases where the material sum of the partial penalties exceeds that legal limit.
3.	In determining the single penalty the court considers, together, the facts and the personality of the agent.

Artigo 37º Concurso de sanções

1.	If the penalties applied are some of fine and others of imprisonment, the different nature of these is maintained.
2.	Accessory penalties and security measures, even if provided for by only one of the applicable laws or in only one of the previous decisions, are maintained.

Artigo 38º

Pena de prisão com execução suspensa em cúmulo jurídico

A penalty of imprisonment with suspended execution may only be legally cumulated with other penalties of imprisonment when:
a)	They are also penalties of imprisonment suspended in their execution and the said cumulation does not prevent the continuation of the regime of suspension of the single penalty;
b)	In the case of cumulation with effective penalties of imprisonment, there exist circumstances that determine the revocation of the suspension of execution of the penalty, independently of the cumulation of penalties;
c)	The suspended penalties to be cumulated have different periods of suspension or, being equal, are in different phases of compliance and the court establishes a single period of suspension in accordance with the needs of prevention and the circumstances of the case.

Artigo 39º

Conhecimento superveniente do concurso

If, after a final judgment, but before the respective penalty is served, prescribed or extinguished, it becomes known that the agent was in one of the situations described in the preceding articles, the rules enshrined therein apply.

Artigo 40º Crime e outra infracção

If the same act simultaneously constitutes a crime and an administrative offence, the agent is punished as a crime, without prejudice to the application of the accessory sanctions provided for the other infractions.

Article 41 Continuing crime

1. Except in the case of crimes that protect eminently personal interests, the multiple commission of the same type of crime or of various types of crime that fundamentally protect the same legal interest constitutes a single continuing crime, executed in an essentially homogeneous manner and within the framework of solicitation by the same external situation that considerably diminishes the guilt of the agent.
2. The continuing crime is punishable with the penalty applicable to the most serious conduct that forms part of the continuation.

Article 42 Concurrence of norms

To a fact capable of being qualified as a crime, in whole or in part, by more than one legal provision, not being the situations described in the previous articles, only one incriminating norm is applied according to the following rules:
a) The special norm applies to the detriment of the general norm;
b) The subsidiary norm prevails over the principal norm;
c) The broader and more complex norm consumes that which provides for facts subsumable within its provision.

CHAPTER V CAUSES OF EXCLUSION

SECTION I

CAUSES OF EXCLUSION OF UNLAWFULNESS

Article 43 Exclusion of unlawfulness

1. The fact is not criminally punishable when its unlawfulness is excluded by the legal order considered in its totality.
2. In particular, a fact committed in the exercise of a right or in the performance of a duty, in legitimate defence, in a justifying state of necessity or with consent is not unlawful.

Article 44 Legitimate defence

The action of the agent necessary to repel an unlawful, imminent or current aggression against any legally protected interests of the agent or of a third party is considered legitimate defence.

Article 45 State of necessity

A fact committed as an adequate means to avert a current danger that threatens legally protected interests of the agent or of a third party is not unlawful, when the following requirements are met:
a) There is a significant superiority of the interest to be safeguarded in relation to the interest sacrificed; and
b) It is reasonable to impose on the injured party the sacrifice of his interest having regard to the nature or value of the interest in danger.

Article 46 Conflict of duties

1. The conduct of a person who, in case of conflict in the performance of legal duties or legitimate orders of authority, satisfies a duty or order of equal or superior value to that of the duty or order that he sacrifices is not unlawful.
2. The duty of hierarchical obedience ceases when it leads to the commission of a crime.

Article 47 Consent

1. In addition to the cases specially provided for by law, consent excludes the unlawfulness of the fact when it refers to freely available legal interests and the fact does not offend good morals.
2. Consent may be expressed by any means that reflects a serious, free and informed will of the

holder of the legally protected interest, and may be freely revoked until the execution of the fact.
3. Consent is only effective if given by a person over 16 years of age who possesses the necessary discernment to assess its meaning and scope at the time it is given.
4. If consent is not known to the agent, the agent is punishable with the penalty applicable to an attempt.
5. Actual consent is equivalent to presumed consent, which exists when the situation in which the agent acts reasonably allows it to be supposed that the holder of the legally protected interest would have effectively consented to the fact, had he known the circumstances in which it is committed.

SECTION II

CAUSES OF EXCLUSION OF GUILT

Article 48 Excess of legitimate defence

1. The means that, by their type or degree of use, are excessive for the defensive action of the agent may determine the extraordinary mitigation of the penalty that would apply to the crime.
2. The excess of means used in legitimate defence due to disturbance, fear or fright, not blameworthy, excludes the guilt of the agent.

Article 49

Exculpatory state of necessity

1. A person who commits an unlawful act adequate to avert a current danger, not otherwise removable, that threatens the life, physical integrity, honour or freedom of the agent or of a third party, acts without guilt when it is not reasonable to demand of him, according to the circumstances of the case, different behaviour.
2. If the danger threatens legal interests different from those referred to in the previous number, and the remaining presuppositions mentioned there are met, the penalty may be

extraordinarily mitigated or, exceptionally, the agent may be exempted from the penalty.

Article 50 Exculpatory undue obedience

A public official who complies with an order without knowing that it leads to the commission of a crime acts without guilt, this not being evident within the framework of the circumstances represented by him.

TITLE III

OF CIRCUMSTANCES

SOLE CHAPTER GENERAL RULES

Article 51 Determination of the measure of the penalty

1. The determination of the measure of the penalty, within the limits defined by law, is made according to the guilt of the agent and the requirements of prevention.
2. In the concrete determination of the penalty the court takes into account all the circumstances that, not forming part of the type of crime, speak in favour of the agent or against him.
3. In the judgment the grounds for the measure of the penalty are expressly stated.

Article 52 General aggravating circumstances

1.	All circumstances prior to, contemporaneous with or subsequent to the crime are considered general aggravating circumstances of the agent's liability which, not forming part of the legal type, reveal a greater degree of unlawfulness of the facts, of the conduct or of the agent's guilt, increasing the need for punishment.
2.	The following are capable of constituting general aggravating circumstances, among others:

a)	Execution of the crime with disloyalty, it being understood that this occurs in cases of betrayal, ambush, lying in wait, disguise
b)	The crime being committed against persons employing means, modes or forms that directly or indirectly aim to guarantee execution without the danger that could result from the possible defence of the victim;
c)	The crime being committed by means of fraud, deceit, abuse of power or authority or taking advantage of the circumstances of place, time
d)	The crime being committed by means of payment or receipt of a value or reward;
e)	The crime being motivated by racist reasons or any other discriminatory sentiment because of the victim's gender, ideology, religion or beliefs, ethnicity, nationality to which they belong, by reason of sex or sexual orientations, or illness or physical impairment from which they suffer;
f)	The agent having a special duty not to commit the crime, to prevent its commission or to contribute to its punishment or taking advantage, for the commission of the crime, of public authority that they hold or invoke;
g)	Not being a case of recidivism, the agent having committed one or more crimes of the same nature in the 3 years prior to the moment of commission of that for which they are being tried, regardless of the time of conviction;
h)	The crime being committed on the same occasion as another crime as a means of facilitating the commission of another or other crimes;
i)	Execution of the crime being facilitated by the fact that the agent enters or attempts to enter the victim's residence or uses poison, flooding, fire, explosion, shipwreck or boat breakdown or weapon
j)	The commission of the crime or the exploitation of its consequences being facilitated by the participation of two or more persons;

k)	Intentionally and inhumanly increasing the victim's suffering by causing them suffering unnecessary to the consummation or any other acts of spoliation, cruelty or destruction also unnecessary to the execution of the crime;
l)	The victim being or having been a spouse or being in a de facto situation identical thereto, or being an ascendant, descendant, sibling, adoptee or adopter of the agent;
m)	The victim being a particularly vulnerable person by reason of age, illness or physical or mental disability, whenever such circumstance does not form part of the legal type.

Article 53 Recidivism

1.	A person is punished as a recidivist who, alone or under any form of co-participation, commits an intentional crime that must be punished with effective imprisonment exceeding
6 months, after having been convicted by final judgment to a sentence of effective imprisonment exceeding 6 months for another intentional crime, if, according to the circumstances of the case, the agent is to be blamed for the previous conviction or convictions not having served as sufficient warning against crime.
2.	If more than four years have elapsed between the commission of one crime and the other, recidivism does not occur, the time during which the agent served a procedural measure, sentence or security measure depriving liberty not being counted in said period.
3.	In case of recidivism, the minimum limit of the penalty applicable to the crime is raised by one third and the maximum limit remains unchanged, the aggravation not being able to exceed the measure of the most serious penalty applied in previous convictions.

Article 54 Criminal habituality

1.	When the agent commits an intentional crime to which, concretely, a sentence of effective imprisonment exceeding 1 year must be applied, the following requirements occurring cumulatively:
a)	The agent having previously committed three or more intentional crimes to which a sentence of effective imprisonment has been applied;
b)	Less than three years having elapsed between each of the crimes and the following one;
c)	The joint assessment of the facts and the agent's personality revealing a marked or dangerous tendency towards crime;
the applicable penalty is that of the crime committed, the minimum and maximum limits being raised by one third.
2.	The provisions of this precept prevail over the specific rules for the punishment of recidivism.

Article 55 General mitigating circumstances

1.	General mitigating circumstances of the agent's liability are considered to be circumstances that precede, accompany or occur after the commission of the crime and that testify in favour of the agent.
2.	The following are capable of constituting general mitigating circumstances, among others:
a)	The grounds for exclusion referred to in the previous chapter, whenever the totality of the requirements provided for the ground for exclusion to produce effects is not verified;
b)	The agent acting as a consequence of facts causing violent emotion, obsession or other passional state of identical nature or reacting in immediate act to provocation;
c)	The agent presenting themselves voluntarily to the authorities before knowing of the existence of criminal proceedings against them;
d)	The agent spontaneously confessing the commission of the crime or contributing decisively to the ascertainment of the circumstances in which the criminal action occurred;

e)	The	existence	of	acts	demonstrating	the agent's sincere repentance;
f)	The low intensity of intent or negligence;
g)	Reconciliation between the victim and the agent.

Article 56

Circumstances of extraordinary mitigation

1.	In addition to the cases expressly provided for by law, the penalty provided for in the legal type of crime is extraordinarily mitigated whenever there exist circumstances prior to, contemporaneous with or subsequent to the crime that jointly or individually, diminish in a marked manner the unlawfulness of the conduct, the agent's guilt or the need for punishment:
2.	For the purposes of the provisions of the preceding number, the following circumstances are considered, among others:
a)	The agent having acted under the influence of serious threat or under the ascendancy of a person on whom they depend or to whom they owe obedience;
b)	The agent's conduct being determined by honourable motive, by strong solicitation or temptation of the victim themselves or by unjust provocation or undeserved offence;
c)	The agent repairing the damage caused or diminishing its effects, at any moment of the proceedings but before the trial hearing has begun;
d)	A long time having elapsed since the commission of the crime, the agent maintaining good conduct;
e)	The agent being a bearer of sensibly diminished imputability.

Article 57

Degrees of extraordinary mitigation
1.	Whenever there is occasion for extraordinary mitigation of the penalty, the following is observed with respect to the limits of the applicable penalty:
a)	Maximum limit of the prison sentence is reduced by one third;

b)	Minimum limit of the prison sentence is reduced to one fifth if it is equal to or greater than 3 years and to the legal minimum if it is less;
c)	Maximum limit of the fine is reduced by one third and the minimum limit reduced to the legal minimum;
d)	If the maximum limit of the prison sentence is not greater than 3 years it may be replaced by a fine, within the general limits.
2.	The extraordinarily mitigated penalty that has been fixed in concreto is capable of substitution, including suspension, under the general terms.

Article 58 Concurrence of circumstances

1.	The occurrence of one circumstance modifying the abstract framework of the legal type determines the application of the extraordinary mitigation regime provided for in the preceding article.
2.	In the case of two or more circumstances modifying the abstract framework of the legal type concurring, only one is considered under the terms of the preceding article, the remaining ones functioning as circumstances of a general character in the determination of the measure of the penalty.

TITLE IV

LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 59

Penalties and security measures

1. The application of the death penalty or of a custodial sentence or security measure of a perpetual nature or of unlimited or indefinite duration is not permitted.

2. The simultaneous application of a penalty and a security measure depriving liberty for the commission of the same act is not permitted.

Article 60

Limits of penalties and security measures

1. The concrete penalty can never exceed the measure of guilt.
2. The security measure is based on the dangerousness of the perpetrator of an act provided for as a crime and lasts until it is verified that the state of criminal dangerousness that gave rise to it has ceased, and may not have a duration exceeding the maximum limit of the penalty corresponding to the crime referred to.

Article 61

Purpose of penalties and security measures

The application of penalties and security measures aims at the protection of legal interests essential to life in society and the reintegration of the perpetrator into it.

Article 62

Choice of penalty and security measure

1. If custodial and non-custodial penalties are applicable to the crime in the alternative, the court gives preference to the latter whenever it adequately and sufficiently fulfils the purposes of punishment.
2. In choosing the type of security measure to be applied to the perpetrator whose dangerousness is shown to be procedurally established, consideration is given to the personality of the perpetrator and the mode of treatment appropriate to the case.

Article 63

Effects of penalties and security measures No penalty or security measure has, as a necessary effect, the loss of civil, professional or political rights.

Article 64

Execution of custodial penalties or measures

1. The perpetrator sentenced to an effective prison sentence or subject to an internment measure may benefit from the granting of conditional release or release on probation.
2. Unless otherwise provided, after five-sixths of the sentence has been served, the convicted person is mandatorily placed on conditional release.
3. The granting of conditional release requires the consent of the convicted person, except in the circumstances described in the preceding paragraph.
4. The prerequisites and conditions for the granting of conditional release are enshrined in specific legislation, as well as the rights and duties of prisoners and the prerequisites and conditions under which an effective prison sentence may be executed in an open regime.

Article 65

Concurrence of custodial penalties and measures

1. When the same perpetrator has been sentenced to an effective prison sentence and subjected to an internment measure, the latter is executed before the prison sentence and is deducted from it.
2. As soon as the internment measure must cease, the court places the perpetrator on conditional release if the time corresponding to half of the sentence has been served and the release proves compatible with the defence of the legal order and social peace.

CHAPTER II PRISON SENTENCE

Article 66 Duration of prison sentence

1. The prison sentence has a minimum duration of 30 days and a maximum of 25 years.

2. In cases specially provided for by law, the limit of the prison sentence is 30 years.
3. The maximum limit of the sentence referred to in the preceding paragraph can never be exceeded.

Article 67 Substitution of imprisonment by fine

1. A prison sentence applied in a measure not exceeding 1 year is replaced by an equal period of fine, up to the maximum legal limit, whenever the requirements of prevention of future crimes do not require the serving of imprisonment and, in view of the circumstances of the case, the court considers that it should not suspend the execution.
2. Unjustified non-payment of the substitute fine or of any instalment implies the immediate serving of the initially fixed prison sentence, which may be suspended by immediate payment of the entire fine or by the indication of assets as guarantee, always deducting the instalments that have been paid.
3. The court must give reasons for the decision not to effect the substitution whenever the sentence applied permits it.

Article 68

Suspension of execution of imprisonment

1. Whenever the prison sentence applied does not exceed 3 years, the court may suspend its execution for a period to be fixed between 1 and 5 years, counting from the final judgment of the decision.
2. The decision must contain the grounds that determine the suspension, namely, the personality of the perpetrator, the circumstances in which the crime was committed, his previous behaviour, his living conditions and, most especially, the predictability of his future conduct.
3. The court must give reasons for the decision not to effect the suspension whenever the sentence applied permits it.

Article 69

Suspension of imprisonment conditional on duties
1. The court may condition the suspension of execution of the prison sentence on the fulfilment of certain duties, not humiliating, intended to repair the harm of the crime.
2. The following duties, among others, may condition the suspension:
a) Reparation or guarantee of reparation of the damage caused by the crime within a specified period;
b) Public apology to the victim;
c) Performance of certain tasks connected with the crime committed;
d) Delivery of an amount to the State or charitable institution with significance in the reintegration of the convicted person.
3. The duties imposed may not in any case represent obligations for the convicted person whose fulfilment is not reasonably required of him
4. The duties imposed may be modified until the end of the suspension period whenever relevant supervening circumstances occur or of which the court only subsequently becomes aware
5. The provisions of paragraph 2 of the preceding article are correspondingly applicable.

Article 70 Rules of conduct

1. The court may impose on the convicted person the fulfilment, for the duration of the suspension, of rules of conduct intended to facilitate his reintegration into society, namely:
a) Not exercising certain professions;

b) Not frequenting certain environments or places;
c) Not residing in certain places or regions;
d) Not accompanying, lodging or receiving certain persons;
e) Not frequenting certain associations or not participating in certain meetings;

f) Not having in his possession objects capable of facilitating the commission of crimes;
g) Reporting periodically to the court, the social reintegration technician or non-police entities.
2. The court may also, having obtained the prior consent of the convicted person, order his subjection to medical treatment or cure in an appropriate institution.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 3 to 5 of the preceding article are correspondingly applicable.

Article 71

Suspension of imprisonment with supervision

1. When simple or conditional suspension of imprisonment is insufficient to guarantee the rehabilitation of the offender and their distancing from criminal activities, the court may decree suspension subjecting the convicted person to supervision by social reintegration services for the duration of the suspension period, obtaining whenever possible the agreement of the convicted person.
2. It is incumbent upon the social reintegration services, jointly with the Public Prosecutor and the sentencing judge, having heard the convicted person, to prepare the social readaptation plan which, once approved by the court, shall be carried out with the assistance of the said official or reintegration service.
3. The readaptation plan must include all duties to which the convicted person is subject, and the court may impose the duties and rules of conduct referred to in Articles 69 and 70 or other obligations relevant to the readaptation plan, namely:
a) Obtain treatment or admission to appropriate establishments, whenever circumstances so require
b) Respond to summonses from the magistrate responsible for enforcement and from the social reintegration officer
c) Receive visits from the social reintegration officer and inform them about their means of subsistence

d) Inform the social reintegration officer about changes of residence and employment, as well as about any absence from residence exceeding 8 days
e) Obtain prior authorization from the magistrate responsible for enforcement to travel abroad
4. The provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 68 are correspondingly applicable.

Article 72

Modification of the suspension regime

If, during the period of suspension of execution of the prison sentence, the convicted person does not comply with the imposed duties or is tried and convicted for another crime, the court, considering the circumstances, may alter the regime of suspension of execution of the prison sentence initially fixed, modify the duties or solemnly warn the convicted person, depending on the circumstances of the case.

Article 73 Revocation of suspension

1. If, during the period of suspension of execution of the prison sentence, the convicted person is tried and convicted for another crime or deliberately relapses in non-compliance with the imposed rules or duties and modification of the suspension regime is not possible or proves insufficient, the court revokes the suspension.
2. Suspension of execution of the prison sentence is always revoked if, during the respective period, the convicted person commits an intentional crime for which they are punished with an effective prison sentence.
3. Revocation of suspension does not give the convicted person the right to demand restitution of payments made during and because of the suspension.

Article 74 Extinction of the prison sentence

Non-revocation of the suspension of execution of the prison sentence determines the extinction of the sentence and its effects, once the suspension period has elapsed.

CHAPTER III FINE PENALTY

Article 75 Duration of the fine penalty

1. The fine penalty is fixed at a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 360 days, unless otherwise provided by law.
2. Each day of fine corresponds to an amount between half a dollar and 200 US dollars, which the court fixes according to the economic and financial situation of the convicted person and their personal obligations.
3. Whenever the circumstances of the case justify it, the court may authorize payment of the fine within a period of 1 year, or allow payment in instalments, provided that the last instalment does not exceed the limit of 2 years after the date on which the conviction becomes final.

Article 76

Imprisonment alternative to the fine penalty

The decision that directly applies a fine penalty fixes imprisonment as an alternative, for the time corresponding to the fine, reduced by two thirds.

Article 77

Reduction or exemption from the fine penalty

1. If the person convicted to a fine penalty does not comply with the penalty due to circumstances, subsequent to the conviction, that make its compliance impossible or difficult and are not attributable to them, the court may decree reduction or exemption from the penalty.
2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph are applicable to the fine penalty that replaces imprisonment.

CHAPTER IV

COMMUNITY SERVICE PENALTY

Article 78

Community service

1. The community service penalty consists of the gratuitous provision of work in a public body or to other entities that the court deems to be of community interest, provided the consent of the convicted person is obtained.
2. The duration of the work that the convicted person must provide is fixed by the court, replacing each day of imprisonment fixed in the sentence with one hour of work, never exceeding 240 hours.
3. The work may be provided during or outside normal service hours, continuously or not, without exceeding per day what is permitted under the overtime regime and always in such a way that the survival of the convicted person or their family members is not affected.
4. Unjustified non-compliance with the provision of community service entails compliance with the initially applied penalty, less the days of work already provided, in accordance with paragraph 2.

Article 79 Requirements

1. The community service penalty is applicable by the court in substitution of a prison sentence not exceeding 1 year or a fine penalty, whenever it concludes that by this means the purposes of punishment are adequately and sufficiently achieved and, in the case of imprisonment, there are reasons of criminal prevention that advise against suspension of execution or substitution by fine.
2. The application of community service always depends on the consent of the convicted person and, in the case of substitution for a fine, may be decreed in the sentence or in a subsequent order, provided an application is submitted by the convicted person before seizure is ordered

in enforcement proceedings instituted for non-payment of the fine.
3. The provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 67 are correspondingly applicable.

Article 80

Suspension, reduction or exemption from penalty

If the convicted person does not comply with the provision of work due to circumstances, subsequent to its decree, that make its compliance impossible or difficult, not being attributable to them, the regime provided for in Article 77 applies.

Article 81 Complementary legislation

The other conditions for application of the community service penalty and operation of the community service enforcement services are the subject of a special instrument.

CHAPTER V

ADMONITION PENALTY

Article 82 Admonition

If the agent is found guilty of committing a crime to which corresponds in the abstract a prison sentence not exceeding 3 years or a fine, the court may limit itself to admonishing them provided that, cumulatively:
a) The damage caused by the criminal conduct has been repaired;
b) It is a first-time offender;
c) Criminal prevention and rehabilitation of the offender are satisfied with the admonition.

Article 83

Execution of the admonition penalty

The admonition consists of a solemn and appropriate oral reprimand to the convicted person, executed by the court in a public hearing, after the decision to be applied becomes final.

CHAPTER VI ACCESSORY PENALTIES

Article 84 General principle

1. The law may make correspond to certain crimes the prohibition of exercise of certain rights or professions.
2. Accessory penalties are cumulative with each other and may only be applied simultaneously with a principal penalty, and their duration must be fixed according to the measure of guilt.

Artigo 85º

Temporary suspension from the exercise of public functions

1. The court that sentences someone who holds a public office to an effective prison sentence must decree the suspension of the exercise of that function for the period of serving the sentence, if the convicted person is not dismissed on disciplinary grounds.
2. The effects that, in accordance with the respective legislation, accompany the disciplinary sanction of suspension from the exercise of functions are applicable to the convicted person during the suspension period.
3. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs are correspondingly applicable to professions or activities whose exercise depends on a public title, authorization or approval by public authority.

Artigo 86º

Prohibition from the exercise of function
1. The holder of public office, public official or agent of the Administration, who, in the exercise of the activity

for which he was elected or appointed, is sentenced to a prison sentence exceeding 3 years may be prohibited from the exercise of those functions for a period of 2 to 5 years when any of the following circumstances occurs:
a) The act is committed with flagrant and serious abuse of function or with manifest and serious violation of the duties inherent to the function;
b) The agent reveals unworthiness or manifest incapacity for the exercise of the office;
c) The nature of the act implies the loss of the trust necessary for the exercise of the function.
2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph are correspondingly applicable to professions or activities whose exercise depends on a public title or on authorization or approval by public authority.
3. The time during which the convicted person is deprived of liberty as a consequence of a coercive measure, sentence or security measure does not count towards the prohibition period.
4. The accessory penalty provided for in this article does not apply when, for the same acts, the security measure provided for in Article 100 is applied.
5. The application of the provisions of this article requires the communication of the conviction from the court to the public authority on which the official depends.

Artigo 87º Expulsion

1. The foreign citizen convicted of committing a crime corresponding to a prison sentence exceeding 3 years may be expelled from the national territory if he has resided there for less than 15 years:
a) For a period of up to 2 years if resident for more than 10 years;
b) For a period of up to 5 years if resident for more than 5 and less than 10 years;
c) For a period of up to 10 years if resident for less than 5 years.
2. The expulsion referred to in the preceding paragraph applies when in the specific case it is required for reasons of

internal security, public health or to prevent the continuation of criminal activity.
3. The expulsion penalty is executed independently of the total or partial serving of the principal sentence.

Artigo 88º Prohibition from driving

1. Anyone who is punished may be subject to disqualification from driving motor vehicles for a period to be fixed between 3 months and 2 years:
a) For a crime provided for in Articles 207 to 209;
b) For a crime committed with the use of a motorized vehicle and whose execution was facilitated by it in a relevant manner; or
c) For a crime of disobedience committed by refusing to submit to the tests legally established for the detection of driving a motorized vehicle under the effect of alcohol, narcotics, psychotropic substances or products with analogous effects impairing physical, mental or psychological fitness.
2. The provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 86 are correspondingly applicable.

Artigo 89º

Revocation of weapon carrying license

1. In case of conviction for an intentional crime committed with the use of a weapon, the court may decree the revocation of the license to use and carry a weapon, considering the circumstances and the seriousness of the conduct, for a period of 2 to 8 years.
2. The provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 86 are correspondingly applicable.

CAPÍTULO VII DETERMINATION OF SENTENCE

Artigo 90º General principles

1. Whenever the law fixes a sentence, it refers to the crime in its consummated form.
2. The framework of the abstract sentence on which the specific measure of sentence is determined is obtained:
a) By applying to the abstract sentence corresponding to the consummated crime the aggravating circumstances modifying recidivism and criminal habituality, provided for respectively in Articles 53 and 54;
b) Having complied with the provisions of the preceding subparagraph or starting from the abstract sentence corresponding to the consummated crime if there are no modifying circumstances, the situations of extraordinary mitigation are considered if, in the case, they exist.

Artigo 91º Specific determination of sentence

1. Having found the abstract framework of the sentence under the terms of the preceding article, the court assesses all circumstances that, not forming part of the type nor having been valued under the terms of the provisions of the preceding article, aggravate or diminish the responsibility of the convicted person.
2. Based on the valuation of these latter circumstances, the court fixes the exact measure of the sentence that it considers necessary for the protection of legal interests essential to life in society and for the social reintegration of the agent, within the limits of the framework fixed in the type or the limits resulting from the application of the provisions of the preceding article.
3. The measure of the sentence applied to the convicted person may not, under any circumstances, exceed the measure of guilt.

Artigo 92º

Special case of fine sentence

In the case of a fine sentence, the provisions of this chapter are applicable to the determination of the duration of the fine, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 75 for the calculation of the amount corresponding to each day of fine.

CAPÍTULO VIII SECURITY MEASURES

SECÇÃO I

INTERNMENT MEASURE

Artigo 93º Prerequisites

When an act described in a legal type of crime is committed by a person not criminally liable under the terms of the provisions of Article 21, he may be ordered to be interned in an appropriate establishment, whenever by virtue of the psychic anomaly, the nature and seriousness of the act committed, the court has founded fear that he will commit other typical acts corresponding to crimes against persons or to crimes of common danger.

Artigo 94º Duration

1. If the act committed by the person not criminally liable is punishable with imprisonment up to 3 years, the internment may not last more than 1 year.
2. If the act committed by the person not criminally liable corresponds to a crime against persons or to a crime of common danger, punishable with a prison sentence equal to or exceeding 5 years, the internment has a minimum duration of 3 years, unless the release proves compatible with the defense of public order and social peace.
3. If the act committed by the person not criminally liable corresponds to a crime punishable with a sentence exceeding 8 years and the danger of new acts of the same kind is so serious as to advise against release, the internment may be extended for successive periods of 2 years until it is verified that the state of criminal dangerousness that gave rise to it has ceased.
4. The internment may not exceed the maximum limit of the sentence corresponding to the type of crime committed by the person not criminally liable.

Artigo 95º Cessation of the measure

1. The measure ceases when the state of criminal dangerousness that originated it ends or, if it continues, when the maximum limit of duration of the measure is reached, except in the circumstances referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the preceding article.
2. The internment measure is mandatorily subject to review every 12 months.
3. If the existence of justifying cause for the cessation of internment is invoked, the court assesses the matter at any time.

Artigo 96º

Substitution of the internment measure

1. The internment measure may be substituted by release on probation or by expulsion from the national territory when applied to foreigners.
2. In the case of expulsion from the national territory, the provisions of Article 87 are correspondingly applicable.

Article 97 Freedom on probation

1. If from the review referred to in Article 95 it results that there are reasons to expect that the purpose of the measure can be achieved in an open environment, the court places the internee on freedom on probation.
2. The period of freedom on probation is fixed between a minimum of 2 years and a maximum of 5 years, and may not exceed the maximum limit fixed in paragraph 4 of Article 94.
3. The decision of freedom on probation may impose on the internee rules of conduct, necessary for the prevention of dangerousness, in terms corresponding to those referred to in Article 70, as well as the duty to submit to appropriate outpatient treatments and cure regimes and to undergo examinations and observations in the places indicated to him.

4. The agent whose execution of internment has been suspended is placed under tutelary supervision of social reintegration services.
5. If there are no grounds leading to the revocation of freedom on probation, upon expiry of its duration, the internment measure is declared extinct.
6. If, upon expiry of the period of freedom on probation, proceedings or incidents are pending that may lead to its revocation, the measure is declared extinct when the proceedings or incidents end and there is no ground for revocation.

Article 98

Revocation of freedom on probation

1. Freedom on probation is revoked when:
a) The behaviour of the non-imputable person reveals that internment is indispensable; or
b) The non-imputable person is sentenced to a custodial sentence and the conditions for suspension of execution are not met, under the terms of paragraph 1 of Article 68.
2. Revocation determines re-internment, with the provisions of Articles 94 and 95 being correspondingly applicable.

Article 99

Suspension of execution of internment

1. The court may order the suspension of internment if it is reasonable to expect that with the suspension the purpose of the security measure will be achieved and the suspension proves compatible with the defence of public order and social peace.
2. To the suspension of internment, the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 97 are correspondingly applicable.
3. The suspension of execution of internment may not be decreed if the agent is simultaneously sentenced to a custodial sentence and the conditions for suspension of its execution are not met, under the terms of paragraph 1 of Article 68.

4. The duration and cessation of suspension of internment are determined under the terms of Articles 94 and 95, respectively.
5. To the revocation of the decision to suspend the internment measure, the provisions of Article 98 apply.

SECTION II

OTHER SECURITY MEASURES

Article 100

Measure of professional disqualification

1. When a non-imputable person by reason of mental abnormality commits an act provided for in a legal type of crime related to the professional activity he exercises and there is well-founded fear that, while maintaining that occupation, he will continue to commit identical acts, the court may prohibit him from exercising the respective activity for a period of 1 to 5 years, having regard to the circumstances of the case and the personality of the non-imputable person.
2. The running of the period of disqualification is suspended during the period in which the agent is deprived of liberty by virtue of a procedural coercive measure, penalty or security measure.

Article 101

Prohibition from driving and revocation of licence for use and carrying of weapons

1. The non-imputable person who commits any of the acts provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 88 may be subject to disqualification from driving motor vehicles for a period of 2 to 6 years, whenever his personality generates well-founded fear of committing new acts of the same kind.
2. If the act committed by the non-imputable person corresponds to a crime related to the use of a weapon, the court may decree the revocation of the licence for use and carrying of weapons for a period of 5 to 10 years, whenever his personality generates well-founded fear of committing new acts of the same kind.

3. The provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 86 are correspondingly applicable.

CHAPTER IX

OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

Article 102

Forfeiture of objects of crime

1. Objects that served or were intended to serve for the commission of a crime, or that were produced by it, are declared forfeited in favour of the State when by their nature or by the circumstances of the case they endanger the safety of persons or public order, or offer serious risks of being used for the commission of new crimes.
2. The rights of the victim and of third parties, who have not contributed to their use or production, or taken advantage of the object of which they are owners, are safeguarded.
3. The court fixes the destination of objects declared forfeited whenever the law does not do so, and may order their total or partial destruction or place them outside commerce.
4. The provisions of paragraph 1 take place even if no specific person can be punished for the act.

Article 103 Forfeiture of advantages

1. All things, rights or advantages acquired, directly or indirectly, as a consequence of the commission of a crime, are declared forfeited in favour of the State, without prejudice to the rights of the victim or of third parties in good faith.
2. If the things, rights or advantages cannot be appropriated in kind, the forfeiture is replaced by payment to the State of the respective value.

Article 104 Civil liability arising from crime

1. Compensation for losses and damages arising from a crime is mandatory and officially ascertained and awarded by the court whenever the damages have been ascertained and quantified, unless the injured party under the terms of criminal procedural law declares that he intends to bring the claim separately.
2. The conditions and calculation of compensation are governed by the rules of civil law.
3. The person responsible for compensation may effect a settlement thereof by giving notice to the court, under penalty of ineffectiveness of the act.

Article 105 Privilege of the injured party's credit

The credit arising from the injured party's right to compensation for losses and damages arising from crime benefits from preference over any other arising after the commission of the act, including costs and the amount relating to the fine.

TITLE V RIGHT TO LODGE A COMPLAINT

Article 106 Nature of crime

1. Crimes may be of a public or semi-public nature, for the purposes of exercising the right to lodge a complaint.
2. Public crimes are those whose criminal proceedings do not depend on a complaint.
3. Semi-public crimes are those whose proceedings can only be initiated after the right to lodge a complaint has been exercised.
4. The right to lodge a complaint consists in the manifestation of will by the holder thereof that he wishes criminal proceedings.

Article 107

Holder of the right to lodge a complaint

When criminal proceedings depend on a complaint, those entitled to lodge it are the holders of the right indicated in criminal procedural law.

Article 108

Time limit for exercising the right

The time limit for exercising the right to lodge a complaint is 6 months and is counted autonomously for each of the holders of the right to lodge a complaint.

Article 109

Waiver and withdrawal of complaint

The waiver, withdrawal or non-exercise of the right to lodge a complaint in relation to one of the participants in the crime benefits the others, in cases where they too cannot be prosecuted without a complaint.

TITLE VI

EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY

CHAPTER I

PRESCRIPTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Article 110 Limitation periods

1. Criminal proceedings are extinguished by limitation as soon as the following periods have elapsed since the commission of the crime:
a) 20 years, in the case of crimes punishable by imprisonment whose maximum limit exceeds 12 years;
b) 15 years, in the case of crimes punishable by imprisonment whose maximum limit exceeds 7 years but does not exceed 12 years;
c) 8 years, in the case of crimes punishable by imprisonment whose maximum limit exceeds 3 years but does not exceed 7 years;
d) 4 years, in all other cases.

2. Where the law provides for any crime, alternatively, imprisonment or a fine, only the former is considered for the purposes of this article.

Article 111 Calculation of the period

1. The limitation period for criminal proceedings runs from the day on which the act was completed or from the day of the last act of execution in the case of an uncompleted crime, continuing crime or habitual crime.
2. In the case of permanent crimes, the limitation period is calculated from the day on which the completion ceases.
3. In the case of complicity, the act of the principal offender is taken into account.

Article 112 Suspension of limitation

1. The limitation of criminal proceedings is suspended, in addition to cases specifically provided for by law, during the time in which:
a) The proceedings cannot legally commence or continue due to lack of legal authorisation or a judgment to be delivered by a non-criminal court, or by reason of the referral of a preliminary question to a non-criminal court;
b) The offender is serving, abroad, a sentence or custodial security measure;
c) Criminal proceedings are pending, from the moment the accused is notified of the charge.
2. The limitation period resumes from the day on which the cause of suspension ceases.
3. The cause of suspension may not, depending on the circumstances, exceed half of the period provided for in Article 110.

CHAPTER II LIMITATION OF SENTENCES AND SECURITY

MEASURES

Article 113

Limitation periods for sentences
1. Sentences are subject to limitation in the following periods:
a) 25 years if they exceed 12 years of imprisonment;
b) 20 years if they exceed 8 years but do not exceed 12 years of imprisonment;
c) 12 years if they exceed 4 years but do not exceed 8 years of imprisonment;
d) 8 years in other cases of imprisonment sentences;
e) 4 years in the case of fines.
2. The limitation period for sentences is calculated from the date on which the decision imposing it becomes final.

Article 114 Limitation of accessory sentences

The limitation of accessory sentences is subject to the regime of the principal sentence.

Article 115

Limitation periods for security measures

Security measures are subject to limitation in the following cases:
a) 15 years if custodial;
b) 5 years if non-custodial;
c) 2 years in cases of revocation of a firearms licence.

Article 116 Suspension of limitation

1. The limitation of sentences and security measures is suspended, in addition to cases specifically provided for by law, during the time in which:
a) By force of law, execution cannot begin or continue;
b) Following the escape of the convicted person and while he or she is not recaptured;
c) The convicted person is serving another sentence or custodial security measure;
d) The deferral of payment of the fine continues;

e) The convicted person is temporarily prevented from performing community service;
f) Execution is taking place.
2. The limitation period resumes from the day on which the cause of suspension ceases.
3. The provisions of paragraph 3 of Article 112 apply correspondingly.

CHAPTER III NON-LIMITATION

Article 117

Crimes of genocide, against peace and humanity and war crimes

Criminal proceedings and sentences imposed for crimes of genocide, against peace and humanity and war crimes are not subject to limitation.

CHAPTER IV

OTHER CAUSES OF EXTINCTION

Article 118 Other causes

In addition to cases specifically provided for by law, criminal liability is extinguished by the death of the agent, by amnesty and by pardon.

Article 119 Death of the agent

The death of the agent extinguishes criminal proceedings, as well as any criminal sanction that has been imposed on him or her.

Article 120 Amnesty

Amnesty extinguishes criminal proceedings and terminates the execution of the sanction not yet served in whole or in part, as well as its effects and accessory sentences to the extent possible.

Article 121 Amnesty and concurrence of crimes

Unless otherwise provided, amnesty is applicable to each of the crimes that constitute the concurrence.

Article 122 Pardon

Pardon extinguishes the sentence, in whole or in part, or replaces it with another provided for by law and more favourable to the convicted person.

BOOK II SPECIAL PART

TITLE I

CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND HUMANITY

CHAPTER I

CRIMES OF GENOCIDE AND AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 123 Genocide

1. Whoever, with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group, commits:
a) Homicide or serious physical or psychological injury to members of the group;
b) Acts that by any means prevent procreation or the birth of members of the group;
c) Rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilisation or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;
d) Forcible separation of members of the group to another group;
e) Acts that violently prevent the group from settling or remaining in a geographical area that

is recognised as theirs by tradition or history;
f) Subjection of the group to conditions of existence or to cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment likely to bring about its destruction, in whole or in part;
g) Widespread confiscation or seizure of property belonging to members of the group;
h) Prohibition of certain commercial, industrial or professional activities to members of the group;
i) Spreading of an epidemic likely to cause death or physical injury to members of the group;
j) Prohibition, omission or prevention by any means of the provision to members of the group of humanitarian assistance adequate to combat situations of epidemic or severe food shortage;
is punished by imprisonment for 15 to 30 years.
2. Whoever publicly and directly incites the commission of genocide is punished by imprisonment for 5 to 15 years.

Article 124

Crimes against humanity

Whoever, in the context of a widespread or systematic attack against any civilian population, commits acts resulting in:
a)	Homicide or serious physical or psychological harm;
b)	Extermination, understood as the subjection of all or part of the population to adverse living conditions, such as deprivation of access to food or medicine, capable of causing the death of one or more persons;
c)	Enslavement;
d)	Deportation or forcible transfer of a population, understood as the unlawful displacement of one or more persons to another State or location through their expulsion or other coercive act;

e)	Imprisonment or any other severe form of deprivation of physical liberty of a person, in violation of the norms or principles of international law;
f)	Torture, understood as the act consisting of inflicting severe pain or suffering, physical or psychological, on a person deprived of liberty or under the control of the agent;
g)	Rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilisation or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;
h)	Persecution, understood as the deprivation of the enjoyment of fundamental rights, in violation of international law, of a group or collectivity that can be identified on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender grounds or on the basis of other grounds universally recognised as unacceptable under international law;
i)	Enforced disappearance of persons, understood as the detention, imprisonment or abduction promoted by a State or political organisation, or with its authorisation, support or acquiescence, followed by a refusal to acknowledge such state of deprivation of liberty or to provide any information on the situation or location of those persons, with the purpose of denying them the protection of the law for a prolonged period of time;
j)	Apartheid, understood as any inhumane act committed in the context of an institutionalised regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over another or others, with the intention of maintaining that regime;
k)	Other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, serious injury or affecting mental or physical health;
is punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years.

CHAPTER II

WAR CRIMES

Article 125

War crimes against persons

1.	Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or non-international armed conflict, against a person protected by international humanitarian law, commits:
a)	Homicide;
b)	Torture or cruel, degrading or inhumane treatment including biological experiments;
c)	Serious physical harm or acts causing great suffering;
d)	Taking of hostages;
e)	Compelling to serve in enemy armed forces or proceeding to recruit or enlist children under 18 years of age in armed forces, military or paramilitary forces of a State, or in armed groups distinct from the armed forces, military or paramilitary forces of a State, or their use to participate in hostilities;
f)	Severe, prolonged and unjustified restrictions on the liberty of persons;
g)	Deportation or transfer, or unlawful deprivation of liberty;
h)	Unjustified removal or destruction of property of great value;
i)	Conviction and execution of sentence, without prior fair and impartial trial;
j)	Acts that outrage the dignity of the human person, in particular by means of humiliating and degrading treatment;
k)	Homicide or injuries inflicted on a combatant who has laid down arms or who, having no means to defend himself, has unconditionally surrendered or has in any way been placed out of combat;
l)	The acts described in paragraph g) of the preceding article;

m)	Subjecting persons who are under the control of a belligerent party to physical mutilations or to any type of medical or scientific experiments that are not motivated by medical, dental or hospital treatment, nor carried out in the interest of those persons, and which cause death or seriously endanger their health;
is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.
2.	The penalty is aggravated by one fifth in its limits when the acts referred to in the preceding paragraph are committed against members of a humanitarian institution.
3.	Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict:
a)	Transfers, directly or indirectly, as an occupying power, part of its own civilian population into the occupied territory or transfers all or part of the population of the occupied territory, within or outside that territory;
b)	Compels a prisoner of war or other protected person to serve in the armed forces of an enemy power;
c)	After the cessation of hostilities, delays, without justified reason, the repatriation of prisoners of war;
is punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years.

Article 126

War crimes by use of prohibited methods of warfare

Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or non-international armed conflict:
a)	Attacks the civilian population in general or civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;
b)	Attacks civilian objects, that is, objects that are not military objectives;
c)	Attacks,	by	any	means,	population centres, dwellings or buildings that are not

defended and that are not military objectives;
d)	Launches an indiscriminate attack affecting the civilian population or civilian objects, knowing that such attack causes loss of human life, injury to civilian persons or damage to civilian objects, which are excessive;
e)	Takes advantage of the presence of civilians or other protected persons to prevent certain points, areas or military forces from being the target of military operations;
f)	Deliberately causes starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare, depriving it of goods indispensable to its survival;
g)	Declares or threatens, in the capacity of an officer, that no quarter will be given;
h)	Kills or injures enemy combatants treacherously;
i)	Launches an attack, being able to know that it causes extensive, lasting and severe damage to the environment which is clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated;
j)	Commits perfidy, understood as the act of killing, injuring or capturing, which appeals, with intent to deceive, to the good faith of an adversary to make him believe that he has the right to receive, or the obligation to ensure the protection provided by the rules of international humanitarian law;
is punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years.

Artigo 127º

War crimes by use of prohibited means of warfare

1.	Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or a non-international armed conflict, employs weapons, projectiles, materials and methods of combat which, by their very nature, cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering or which have indiscriminate effects,

in violation of international law applicable to armed conflicts, is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.
2.	The preceding paragraph covers, in particular, the use of:
a)	Poison or poisoned weapons;
b)	Asphyxiating, toxic or similar gases or any analogous liquid, material or device;
c)	Bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body, such as bullets with a hard casing which does not entirely cover the core or has incisions;
d)	Anti-personnel mines;
e)	Chemical weapons;
f)	Weapons the primary effect of which is to injure by fragments not detectable by X-rays in the human body;
g)	Incendiary weapons;
h)	Laser weapons causing blindness.
3.	The weapons, instruments and products referred to in the preceding paragraph are those considered as such by international law.

Artigo 128º

War crimes against property protected by distinctive insignia or emblems

Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or a non-international armed conflict, attacks:
a)	Personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a peacekeeping or humanitarian assistance mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, provided that they are entitled to the protection given to civilians or civilian objects under international humanitarian law;
b)	Buildings, installations, material, units or vehicles, duly marked with the distinctive emblems of the Geneva Conventions

or	personnel	entitled	to	use	the	same emblems.
is punished with imprisonment from 10 to 20 years.

Artigo 129º

War crimes against property

Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or in the context of a non-international armed conflict:
a)	Steals, destroys or damages property on a large scale or of great value, without military necessity or in an unlawful and arbitrary manner;
b)	Attacks, destroys or damages buildings dedicated to religious worship, education, the arts, sciences or charitable purposes, cultural or historical monuments, archaeological sites, hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are gathered, provided that they are not military objectives;
c)	Pillages a town or locality, even when taken by assault;
is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Artigo 130º

War crimes against other rights

Whoever, in the context of an international armed conflict or in the context of a non-international armed conflict, declares abolished, suspended or inadmissible in a court of law, any rights and proceedings of nationals of the adverse party is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

CAPÍTULO III AGAINST PEACE AND FREEDOM

Artigo 131º Terrorist organisations

1.	A terrorist group, organisation or association is considered to be a grouping of two or more persons who, in order to achieve political, ideological, philosophical or religious purposes, act in concert, aiming to harm national integrity or independence, prevent, alter or subvert the functioning of national or international institutions, intimidate or coerce public authority, international organisations or certain persons, groups of persons or the general population, to perform an act, to refrain from performing it or to tolerate that it be performed, by committing serious crimes:
a)	Against the life, physical integrity or freedom of persons;
b)	Against the security of transport and communications, including telegraphic, telephonic, radio or television;
c)	Of intentional production of common danger, through fire, explosion, release of radioactive substances or toxic or asphyxiating gases, flood or avalanche, collapse of construction, contamination of food and water intended for human consumption or spread of disease, plague, harmful plant or animal;
d)	Involving the use of nuclear energy, firearms, explosive substances or devices, incendiary means of any nature, parcels or letter bombs.
e)	Acts that destroy or render inoperative or divert from their normal purposes, permanently or temporarily, in whole or in part, means or routes of communication, public service facilities or international facilities or facilities intended for the supply and satisfaction of the vital needs of the population.
f)	Research and development of biological or chemical weapons
2.	Whoever promotes or founds a terrorist group, organisation or association, joins, participates in or supports them, is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.

3.	Whoever leads or directs a terrorist group, organisation or association is punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years.
4.	When a terrorist group, organisation or association, or the persons referred to in paragraphs 2 or 3, possess any of the means indicated in subparagraph d) of paragraph 1, the penalty is increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits.
5.	Preparatory acts for the establishment of a terrorist group, organisation or association are punished with the penalty reduced by half in its minimum and maximum limits.
6.	The penalties referred to may be extraordinarily mitigated or punishment may not take place if the offender voluntarily abandons his activity, prevents or seriously endeavours to prevent the danger caused by it or the continuation of terrorist groups, organisations or associations, or communicates their existence to the authority so that it can prevent the commission of crimes.

Artigo 132º Terrorism

1.	Whoever commits any of the crimes provided for in subparagraphs a) to c) and e) of paragraph 1 of the preceding article, or any crime with the use of the means referred to in subparagraphs d) or f) of the same provision, with the intention referred to therein, is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years, or with the penalty corresponding to the crime committed, increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits, if the penalty is equal or higher.
2.	The penalty may be extraordinarily mitigated or punishment may not take place if the offender voluntarily abandons his activity, removes or considerably reduces the danger caused by it, prevents the result that the law seeks to avoid from occurring, or concretely assists in the collection of decisive evidence for the identification or capture of other responsible persons.

Artigo 133º Financing of terrorism

Whoever by any means, directly or indirectly and intentionally, provides, collects or holds funds or property of any kind, as well as products or rights capable of being converted into funds, attempts to do so, with the intention that they be used or knowing that they may be used, in whole or in part, in the planning, preparation or commission of the acts provided for in paragraph 1 of article 131º, or commits such acts with the intention referred to in paragraph 1 of article 132º, is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.

Artigo 134º Incitement to war

1.	Whoever, by any means, publicly and repeatedly, incites hatred against a race, a people or a nation, with the intention of provoking a war or preventing peaceful coexistence between different races, peoples or nations, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	Whoever entices or recruits Timorese or foreign citizens to, in the service of a foreign group or power, wage war against a State or to overthrow the legitimate Government of another State by violent means, is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Article 135 Racial or religious discrimination

1. Whoever founds, establishes an organisation or develops organised propaganda activities that incite or encourage racial or religious discrimination, hatred or violence, as well as whoever participates in or provides assistance, including financing, to the organisation or the activities referred to, is punished with a prison sentence of 4 to 12 years.
2. Whoever, at a public meeting, through writing intended for dissemination or through any means of social communication, disseminates ideas with the intention of inciting racial or religious discrimination or encouraging it, or provoking acts of violence against a person or group of

persons because of their race, colour, ethnic origin or religion, is punished with a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years.

CHAPTER IV COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 136

Responsibility of military commanders and other superiors

1. A military commander or person acting as such who, having knowledge that the forces under his effective command and control or under his effective responsibility and control are committing any of the crimes provided for in this title, does not adopt all necessary and adequate measures to prevent or suppress their commission or to bring it to the immediate attention of the competent authorities, is punished with the penalty corresponding to the crime or crimes that are actually committed.
2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph apply, with the necessary adaptations, to a superior with respect to the control of subordinates under his effective authority and control.

Article 137 Definitions

For the purposes of this Title, the following are considered:
a) "Armed conflict of an international character", one that:
i) Occurs between States, even without a formal declaration of war, even if the state of war is not recognised by one of them;
ii) Corresponds to a situation of total or partial occupation of the territory of a State, even if that occupation does not encounter any military resistance;
iii) Is subsumed in a situation in which peoples fight against colonial domination, foreign occupation and against segregation regimes, in the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination,

enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in the declaration concerning the principles of international law with respect to friendly relations and cooperation among States;
b) "Armed conflict of a non-international character", one that takes place in the territory of a State, is of a protracted nature and opposes governmental authorities and organised armed groups or these among themselves, with the exception of situations of internal disturbances and tensions, such as sporadic or isolated acts of violence or others of a similar nature;
c) "Protected persons":
i) In international armed conflicts, persons protected for the purposes of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and Additional Protocol I, namely the wounded, sick, shipwrecked, prisoners of war, medical or religious personnel and civilian population;
ii) In armed conflict of a non-international character, the wounded, the sick, the shipwrecked, as well as persons not taking active part in hostilities in the power of the enemy;
iii) In armed conflict of an international character and in armed conflict of a non-international character, members of the armed forces and combatants of the enemy party who have laid down their arms or have no other means of defence.

TITLE II

CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

CHAPTER I AGAINST LIFE

Article 138 Simple homicide

Whoever kills another person is punished with a prison sentence of 8 to 20 years.

Article 139 Aggravated homicide

If death is caused in circumstances that reveal special culpability or perversity, namely:
a) With the use of poison, torture, asphyxiation, fire, explosive or other insidious means or that results in the commission of a crime of common danger, or, further, with another act of cruelty to increase the suffering of the victim;

b) Through dissimulation or other means or recourse that makes defence by the victim difficult or impossible;
c) Out of greed, for the pleasure of killing, for excitement or to satisfy sexual instinct, by payment or reward or its promise, or for any other futile or base motive;
d) With the purpose of preparing, executing or concealing another crime, facilitating the escape or ensuring the impunity of the perpetrator of a crime;
e) Out of racial, religious or political hatred;
f) With premeditation, this being understood as coldness of mind, reflection on the means employed or postponement of the intention to kill for more than 24 hours;
g) If the victim is a spouse, descendant, ascendant, collateral, related family member up to the second degree, adoptee of the perpetrator or person who lives with him in analogous conditions where there is a hierarchical, economic or employment dependence;
h) If the victim is a particularly vulnerable person by reason of age, illness or physical or mental disability;
i) If the victim is a member of a sovereign body and constitutional political bodies, member of a body of local administration, magistrate,

defender, lawyer, court officer, civil servant or any other person entrusted with a public service, provided it is in the exercise of or because of the exercise of their functions;
j) If the victim is a witness, declarant, expert, injured party or offended party and the crime is committed with the purpose of preventing testimony, the denunciation of facts or the filing of a complaint or because of their intervention in the proceedings.
the perpetrator is punished with a prison sentence of 12 to 25 years.

Article 140 Negligent homicide

1. Whoever, through negligence, kills another person, is punished with a prison sentence of up to 4 years or a fine.
2. In cases where the perpetrator has acted with gross negligence, he is punished with a prison sentence of up to 5 years.

Artigo 141º* Interrupção da gravidez

1.	Whoever, by any means and without the consent of the pregnant woman, causes her to abort is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	Whoever, by any means and with the consent of the pregnant woman, causes her to abort is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
3.	The pregnant woman who gives consent to the abortion performed by a third party, or who, by her own act or that of another, causes herself to abort, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
4.	The provisions of the preceding paragraphs do not apply when the termination of pregnancy constitutes, in accordance with the state of medical knowledge and experience, and after all possible actions have been carried out to save the life of the pregnant woman and that of the fetus or embryo, the only means to remove danger of death to the pregnant woman, provided it is performed, upon medical certification, by a doctor or other health professional under his direction in a public health establishment or

officially recognized, and with the consent of the pregnant woman.
5.	The verification of the circumstances referred to in the preceding paragraph is certified in a medical certificate written and signed by a panel of three doctors, on a date prior to that of the termination, of which the doctor who performs or supervises the performance of the termination of pregnancy is not a part.
6.	Consent is given in writing in a document signed by the pregnant woman – after hearing, if possible, the spouse or the person who lives with her in conditions analogous to those of spouses – or by another person on her behalf, whenever possible with two days' notice in relation to the date of termination.
7.	In the case where the pregnant woman is a minor, consent is given by the legal representative.
8.	In the case where the pregnant woman who is of age or emancipated is or becomes psychically incapable, consent is given, respectively and successively, by the spouse or the person who lives with her in conditions analogous to those of spouses, by the legal representative, by an ascendant or descendant, or, in their absence, by any relatives of the collateral line.
9.	When it is not possible to obtain the medical certificate referred to in paragraph 5, and/or it is not possible to obtain consent under the terms of paragraphs 6 to 8, and the performance of the termination is urgent and cannot be postponed, the doctor decides in conscience in view of the situation, resorting, whenever possible, to the opinion of other doctors.
10.	The panel referred to in paragraph 5 is constituted by doctors possessing adequate knowledge for the assessment of the circumstances that justify the termination of pregnancy, including, whenever possible, a gynecologist/obstetrician.
11.	The doctors who issue the medical certificate and the doctors who perform or supervise the performance of the termination of pregnancy must provide all necessary clarifications to the pregnant woman and, if applicable, to the persons referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8, namely the method of termination to be used, the effects of the termination, the possible consequences for the physical and psychological health of the pregnant woman.

12.	Doctors and other health professionals are recognized the right to conscientious objection with respect to any acts relating to the termination of pregnancy.
13.	Doctors and other health professionals who invoke conscientious objection must guarantee immediate intervention in the necessary acts, as well as the immediate accompaniment of the pregnant woman, by another health professional.
14.	Conscientious objection is expressed and communicated, through a written and signed document, to the clinical head of the health establishment where the objector provides service.

Redacção introduzida pela lei 6/2009, de 15 de Julho A anterior redacção do artigo 141º era a seguinte:

Artigo 141º Interrupção da gravidez

1.	Whoever, by any means and without the consent of the pregnant woman, causes her to abort is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	Whoever, by any means and with the consent of the pregnant woman, causes her to abort is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
3.	The pregnant woman who gives consent to the abortion performed by a third party, or who, by her own act or that of another, causes herself to abort, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
4.	The provisions of the preceding paragraphs do not apply to cases in which the termination of pregnancy constitutes the only means to remove danger of death or of serious and irreversible injury to the body or to the physical or psychological health of the pregnant woman or of the fetus, provided it is performed, upon authorization and supervision of a medical board, by a doctor or health professional in a public health establishment and with the consent of the pregnant woman and or of the spouse.
5.	The provisions of paragraph 4 of this article are the subject of autonomous legislation.

Artigo 142º Infanticídio

The mother who kills her child during childbirth or shortly thereafter and still under its disturbing influence is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.

Artigo 143º Exposição ou abandono

1.	Whoever, intentionally, endangers the life of another person:
a)	By exposing them in a place that subjects them to a situation from which they alone cannot defend themselves; or
b)	By abandoning them without defense, by reason of age, physical disability or illness, whenever the agent has the duty to guard, watch over or assist them;
is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 6 years
2.	If from the act results:
a)	A serious offense to physical integrity, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years;
b)	Death, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.
3.	If the victim is the spouse, descendant, ascendant, collateral, affine up to the second degree, adopter or adoptee of the agent or person who lives with him in conditions analogous to those of spouses, the penalties referred to in the preceding paragraphs are increased by one third in their limits.

Artigo 144º Incitamento ou auxílio ao suicídio

1.	Whoever incites another person to commit suicide, or provides them with assistance for that purpose, if the suicide actually comes to be attempted or consummated, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the acts described in the preceding paragraph have as addressees any of the persons referred to in paragraph 3 of the preceding article or a minor under 17 years of age or a person whose capacity for valuation or determination is significantly diminished, the penalty is imprisonment up to 5 years.

3.	Whoever, in any form and repeatedly makes public propaganda of suicide, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

CAPÍTULO II

CONTRA A INTEGRIDADE FÍSICA

Artigo 145º

Ofensas à integridade física simples

1.	Whoever offends the body or health of another person is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 146º

Ofensas à integridade física graves

Whoever offends the body or health of another person with the purpose of:
a)	Depriving of an important organ or limb;
b)	Disfiguring seriously and permanently;
c)	Affecting the capacity to work, the intellectual capacities, or of procreation in a serious and lasting manner or permanently;
d)	Provoking permanent illness or incurable psychological anomaly; or
e)	Creating danger to life;
is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Artigo 147º Agravação

1.	Whoever, intending only to offend the body or health of another person:
a)	Causes the offenses provided for in artigo 146º is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years;
b)	Causes death by negligence, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 6 years.
2.	Whoever, intending to cause any of the offenses provided for in artigo 146º, by negligence comes to cause death is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years.

3.	If the crimes referred to in the two preceding articles have as victims any of the persons mentioned in paragraph i) of artigo 139º, because of or in the exercise of the functions enumerated, the penalty shall be increased by one third in its maximum and minimum limits, if more serious punishment is not due by virtue of another legal provision.

Artigo 148º

Ofensas à integridade física negligentes

1.	Whoever, through negligence, injures the body or health of another person, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2.	If the negligence is gross, the offender is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or with a fine.
3.	If the act results in serious bodily injuries, the offender is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.
4.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 149º

Intervenções e tratamentos médico-cirúrgicos

1.	Interventions and other treatments which, according to the state of medical knowledge and experience, are indicated and are carried out, in accordance with the leges artis, by a doctor or other person legally authorized to undertake them with the intention of preventing, diagnosing, combating or alleviating a disease, suffering, injury or bodily fatigue or a mental disturbance are not considered bodily injuries.
2.	If the violation of the leges artis results in danger to the body, health or life of the patient, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 150º

Ofensas por meio de substâncias venenosas
1.	Whoever injures the body or health of another by administering poisonous substances or substances harmful to

physical or mental health is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years.
2.	If the act results in any of the consequences provided for in Article 146º or the death of the victim, the offender is punished, respectively, with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years and from 4 to 12 years.

Artigo 151º

Ofensas corporais recíprocas

1.	When two persons mutually injure each other in body or health, neither acting in self-defense and none of the effects provided for in Article 146º occurring nor the death of any of the participants, they are punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 152º Participação em rixa

1.	Whoever intervenes or takes part in a brawl with two or more persons, from which death or serious bodily injury results, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine if those effects cannot be intentionally imputed to him.
2.	Participation in a brawl is not punishable when it is determined by a non-censurable motive, namely if it aims to react against an attack, defend another person or separate the combatants.

Artigo 153º Maus-tratos a incapaz

1.	Whoever has under his guard or care, or under the responsibility of his education, or, further, as a subordinate in work activity, an incapable person, particularly vulnerable by reason of illness, advanced age, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, and causes injuries to the body or health, or inflicts physical or psychological ill-treatment, or cruel treatment, is punished

with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.
2.	If the victim is a descendant, collateral, relative or affine up to the second degree, adoptee of the offender or person who cohabits with him in analogous conditions, the penalty referred to in the preceding number is increased by one third in its limits.

Artigo 154º Maus-tratos a cônjuge

Whoever inflicts on his spouse or on a person with whom he cohabits in a situation analogous to that of spouses physical or psychological ill-treatment or cruel treatment is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable under another legal provision.

Artigo 155º Maus-tratos a menor

1.	Whoever, having under his guard or care a minor under 17 years of age, is responsible for his education or has him as a subordinate in work activity, and:
a)	Causes injuries to the body or health, inflicts physical or psychological ill-treatment, or cruel treatment
b)	Subjects him to economic exploitation, to dangerous work or work capable of compromising his education or his physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development;
c)	Subjects him to any form of slavery or analogous practice;
d)	Uses, recruits or offers him for purposes of prostitution, production of pornographic material or pornographic shows; or
e)	Uses, recruits or offers him for the practice of illicit acts or activities, namely for the production and trafficking of narcotics as defined by international conventions;
is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.

2.	Whoever, in the same situation, uses the minor for begging, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.
3.	If the victim is a descendant, collateral, relative or affine up to the second degree, adoptee of the offender or person who cohabits with him in analogous conditions, the penalties referred to in the preceding numbers are increased by one third in their limits.

Artigo 156º Agravação pelo resultado

If, as a consequence of the ill-treatment described in Articles 153º to 155º, the effects referred to in Article 146º occur, the offender is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years and if death is caused the penalty is from 5 to 15 years of imprisonment.

CAPÍTULO III

CONTRA A LIBERDADE PESSOAL

SECÇÃO I AGRESSÕES PESSOAIS

Artigo 157º Ameaças

1.	Whoever, by any means, threatens another person with the commission of a crime in such a way as to cause him fear or unease or to prejudice his freedom of determination, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 158º Coacção

1.	Whoever, by means of violence or threat of significant harm, compels another person to an action or omission, or to endure an activity, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 159º Coacção Grave

If the coercion is carried out:
a)	By means of the threat of a crime punishable with imprisonment exceeding 3 years,
b)	By an official seriously abusing his functions,
c)	Against a particularly defenseless person, by reason of age, disability, illness or pregnancy
d)	Against any of the persons referred to in paragraph i) of Article 139º
the offender is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

Artigo 160º Sequestro

1.	Whoever, outside the cases provided for in criminal procedural law, detains, imprisons, keeps imprisoned or detained another person, or in any other way deprives him of liberty, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.
2.	The penalty of imprisonment is from 2 to 8 years if the deprivation of liberty:
a)	Lasts more than seventy-two hours;
b)	Is effected by means of injury to physical integrity, torture or any other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment;
c)	Causes, through the negligence of the offender, the death of the victim, or has as a result the suicide of the latter;
d)	Has as victim one who exercises public, religious or political authority.
e)	Is promoted, authorized or supported by an agent of public authority or member of a political organization.

Artigo 161º Rapto

1.	Whoever, by means of violence, threat or cunning, transfers from one place to another, another person with the intention of:
a)	Subjecting the victim to extortion;
b)	Committing a crime of aggression, exploitation or sexual abuse;
c)	Obtaining ransom or reward; or
d)	Compelling the public authority or a third party to perform an action or omission, or to endure an activity;
is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years.
2.	The applicable penalty is from 5 to 15 years of imprisonment if any of the circumstances provided for in number 2 of Article 160º is verified.

Article 162 Slavery

1.	Whoever, by any means, places another human being in a situation of slavery and makes use of them in that condition, is punished with a prison sentence of 8 to 20 years.
2.	The consent of the victim is irrelevant, if any of the means referred to in the following article have been used.
3.	For the purposes of applying the provisions of this article, a person is considered to be in a situation of slavery when in a state of submission, even if de facto, to powers corresponding to those of a right of ownership, or of any real right, or bound to the destination of a thing.

Article 163 Trafficking in persons

1.	Whoever recruits, alienates, transfers, acquires, transports, conveys, lodges or harbours persons, by resorting to threat, use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of authority or of a situation of vulnerability, or by means of the giving or acceptance of payments or benefits, to obtain the consent of a person having authority over another, in order to

achieve the purposes of exploitation, is punished with a prison sentence of 8 to 20 years.
2.	The penalty provided for in the preceding paragraph is incurred by whoever recruits, transports, conveys, lodges or harbours a minor under 17 years of age for purposes of exploitation even if it does not involve any of the means referred to in the preceding paragraph.
3.	For the purposes of applying the provisions of this article, exploitation must include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the extraction of organs.
4.	The consent of the victim is irrelevant, if any of the means referred to in paragraph 1 have been used.

Article 164 Aggravation

If the acts described in articles 162 and 163 are committed:
a)	As a way of facilitating the exploitation or sexual use of the victim, by the agent or by a third party;
b)	The victim being a minor under 17 years of age;
c)	The victim being in a foreign country or being moved there;
d)	Using the victim, against their will, in the commission of crimes; or
e)	The agent performing an activity that confers upon them public or religious authority before a group, region or the entirety of the country;
the agent is punished with imprisonment of 12 to 25 years.

Article 165 Trafficking in human organs

1.	Whoever obtains, alienates, transfers, acquires, transports or conveys tissues, organs, substances or parts of the human body of a third party, without consent or by resorting to threat, use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of authority or of a situation of vulnerability, or by means of the giving or

acceptance of payments or benefits, or assists in their obtaining, transaction, transport or storage, is punished with a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years.
2.	If from the commission of the acts referred to in the preceding paragraph any of the consequences provided for in article 146 or the death of the victim results, the agent is punished with a prison sentence of 4 to 12 years and 5 to 20 years, respectively.
3.	The consent of the victim is criminally irrelevant, if any of the means referred to in paragraph 1 has been used.

Article 166 Sale of persons

1.	Whoever, outside the situations provided for in article 163, by any act or other form of transaction, transfers a person or group of persons to another person or group of persons by means of payment of any amount or other consideration, reward or advantage, is punished with a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years;
2.	If the acts referred to in the preceding paragraph are committed:
a)	In relation to a minor under 17 years of age
b)	Abusing authority resulting from a family relationship, guardianship or curatorship, hierarchical, economic or work dependence;
c)	Taking advantage of the functions or position that, in any capacity, they exercise in a prison establishment, educational or correctional establishment, hospital, hospice, asylum, clinic or other health establishment or other establishment intended for assistance or treatment; or
d)	Upon an unconscious or incapable person, particularly vulnerable by reason of illness, physical or mental disability
the agent is punished with a prison sentence of 4 to 12 years.
3.	The consent of the person themselves or of a third party exercising any form of authority over the victim is criminally irrelevant.

Article 167

Torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment

1.	Whoever, having the function of prevention, investigation, decision, in relation to any type of offence, the execution of the respective sanctions or the protection, custody, surveillance or supervision of a detained or imprisoned person and tortures or treats in a cruel, degrading or inhuman manner, in order to:
a)	Obtain from them or from another person a confession, testimony, statement or information
b)	Punish them for an act committed or allegedly committed by them or by another,
c)	Intimidate them or to intimidate another person, is punished with a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years.
2.	The penalty provided for in the preceding paragraph is also incurred by whoever, on their own initiative, by order of a superior or in agreement with the competent authority to exercise the functions referred to in the preceding paragraph, assumes de facto the performance of those functions by committing any of the acts described therein.
3.	Torture, cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment is considered to be the act consisting of inflicting acute physical or psychological suffering, severe physical or psychological fatigue or the use of chemicals, drugs or other means, natural or artificial, with the intention of disturbing the capacity for decision or free expression of will of the victim.

Article 168 Aggravation

1.	Whoever, under the terms and conditions described in the preceding article:
a)	Produces serious bodily injury, under the terms provided for in article 146;
b)	Employs particularly serious means or methods of torture, namely beating, electroshock, mock

execution, hallucinogenic substances, sexual abuse or serious threat against family members;
c)	Commits such acts as a way of preventing or hindering the free exercise of political or associative rights constitutionally enshrined;
d)	Habitually commits the acts referred to therein; is punished with a prison sentence of 5 to 15 years.
2.	If from the acts referred to in this article or in the preceding article the suicide or death of the victim results, the agent is punished with a prison sentence of 5 to 20 years.

Article 169 Failure to report

1.	The hierarchical superior who, having knowledge of the commission, by a subordinate, of any of the acts described in articles 167 and 168, does not make a report within three days immediately following knowledge thereof, is punished with a prison sentence of 1 to 6 years.
2.	Anyone who, for professional reasons and officially is given knowledge of the commission of acts described in articles 167 and 168 and does not immediately communicate to the hierarchical superior or make the respective report, is punished with the penalty set out in the preceding paragraph extraordinarily mitigated.

Article 170

Freedom of assembly or demonstration

1.	Whoever interferes with an assembly or demonstration in a public place or open to the public, legally authorised, preventing or attempting to prevent its realisation is punished with a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	The police authority agent who prevents or attempts to prevent, outside the legal conditions, the exercise of the right of assembly or demonstration described in the preceding paragraph, is punished with a prison sentence of up to 3 years.

SECTION II SEXUAL ASSAULTS

Article 171 Sexual coercion

Whoever, by means of violence, serious threat, or after, for that purpose, having rendered them unconscious or placed them in the impossibility of resisting, compels another person to suffer or to commit, with them or with another, a sexual act of relevance is punished with a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years.

Article 172 Rape

Any person who, by the means referred to in the previous article, engages in vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse or oral intercourse with another person or compels them to endure the introduction of objects into the anus or vagina is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Article 173 Aggravation

If the sexual assaults referred to in articles 171 and 172 are committed:
a) Abusing authority resulting from a family relationship, guardianship or curatorship, hierarchical, economic or employment dependence;
b) Taking advantage of the functions or position that, in any capacity, is exercised in a prison establishment, educational or correctional establishment, hospital, hospice, asylum, clinic or other health establishment or other establishment intended for assistance or treatment;
c) Against an unconscious or incapable person, particularly vulnerable by reason of illness, physical or mental disability;
d) Having as victims minors under 17 years of age;
the offender is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, in the case of article 171, and with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years, in the case of article 172.

SECTION III

SEXUAL EXPLOITATION

Article 174 Sexual exploitation of third parties

1. Whoever, with intent to profit or making it a way of life, promotes, facilitates or in any way contributes to another person engaging in prostitution or committing other sexual acts is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2. The offender is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, if any of the following circumstances occur:
a) Exploitation of a situation of abandonment or economic need of the victim;
b) Exercise of violence, serious threat or coercion against the victim;
c) Movement of the victim to a country different from that in which they were born or in which they resided;
d) Retention of any identification document of the victim.

Article 175 Child prostitution

1. Whoever, even with the consent of the victim, commits acts of sexual exploitation referred to in the previous article in relation to a minor under 17 years of age, is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years in the case of number 1 and with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years in cases where any of the circumstances set out in number 2 of the previous article occur.
2. Whoever offers, obtains, seeks or delivers a minor under 17 years of age for purposes of child prostitution is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.

Article 176 Child pornography

1. Whoever uses, for predominantly sexual purposes, exposes or represents a minor under 17 years of age in the performance of any sexual activity, real or

simulated, or by any other means exhibits that sexual activity or the sexual organs of the minor, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2. The same penalty applies to whoever produces, distributes, disseminates, imports, exports, offers, sells or possesses any means of communication, instrument, document or record for the purposes referred to in the previous number or with the purpose of divulging such acts.

SECTION IV SEXUAL ABUSE

Article 177 Sexual abuse of a minor

1. Whoever commits vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse or oral intercourse with a minor under 14 years of age is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years.
2. Whoever commits any relevant sexual act with a minor under 14 years of age is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Article 178

Sexual acts with adolescents

Whoever, being an adult and outside the situations provided for in this section, commits any relevant sexual act with a minor between 14 and 16 years of age, abusing their inexperience, is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years.

Article 179

Sexual abuse of a person incapable of resistance

Whoever commits a relevant sexual act with an unconscious or incapable person, particularly vulnerable by reason of illness, physical or mental disability, taking advantage of their state of incapacity is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years.

Article 180 Sexual fraud

1. Whoever, fraudulently taking advantage of an error about their personal identity, has with another person vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse or oral intercourse or a relevant sexual act is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
2. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 181 Sexual exhibitionism

1. Whoever publicly importunes another person with the commission of acts of a sexual nature is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The same penalty is incurred by those who, in front of another person, commit vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse or oral intercourse, against the will of that person and even if in private.
3. Attempt is punishable.
4. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

SECTION V COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 182 Aggravation

1. The penalties provided for in section II to section IV of this chapter are aggravated by one third in their minimum and maximum limits, if:
a) The victim was less than 12 years of age at the time of commission of the facts;
b) The offender transmitted to the victim venereal disease, syphilitic disease or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome;
c) As a consequence of the facts the victim attempts or consummates suicide or death results;
d) The victim is a descendant, collateral, family member or relative by affinity up to the second degree, adoptee of the offender or person who lives with them in analogous conditions or there exists a hierarchical, economic or employment dependence.
2. In the case where several of the circumstances set out in the previous number concur, only one is relevant as

modifying the abstract framework of the legal type, with the remainder being valued in the determination of the concrete penalty.

CHAPTER V AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE

Article 183 Invasion of privacy

1. Any person who by any means, even lawful, obtains knowledge of facts relating to the intimacy of the private or sexual life of another person and, without consent, publicly divulges them without just cause, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 184 Violation of secrecy

1. Whoever, without consent, reveals another's secret of which they have obtained knowledge by reason of their status, office, employment, profession or art, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. If the secret relates to commercial, industrial, professional or artistic activity, of which the offender has obtained knowledge in the circumstances described previously, and causes harm to another person or to the State, the penalty is 2 years imprisonment or a fine.
3. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 185 Violation of domicile

1. Whoever, without consent, enters the dwelling of another person or, authorized to enter, remains there after being ordered to leave, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2. If the offender, to more easily commit the crime, takes advantage of the night, the fact that the dwelling is situated in a remote place, that there are 3 or more persons committing the act, uses a weapon, uses violence or threat of violence or

acts by means of climbing, breaking in or false key, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
3. If there are persons inside the dwelling when the offender commits the crime, the penalty provided for in the previous number aggravated by one third in its limits is applicable.
4. Attempt is punishable.
5. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 186

Entry into other places closed to the public

1. Whoever commits the acts described in numbers 1 and 2 of the previous article in relation to any other closed or restricted place not freely accessible to the public, is punished, respectively, with the penalties referred to in those numbers reduced by half in the maximum limits.
2. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 187º

Violation of correspondence or telecommunications

1.	Whoever, without consent or outside procedurally admissible cases, opens a package, letter or any other writing intended for another person, or takes knowledge of its content, or prevents it from being received by its addressee, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever, in the same circumstances, interferes with or takes knowledge of the content of telephone, telegraph or any other means of telecommunication communication.
3.	Whoever discloses the content of letters, packages, sealed writings, telephone calls or other communications referred to in the preceding numbers, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine, even if he had knowledge of that content lawfully.
4.	If the acts referred to in the preceding numbers are committed by an employee of postal, telegraph, telephone or telecommunications services, the penalties are increased by one third in their limits.

5.	Criminal proceedings depend on complaint.

TÍTULO III

CRIMES AGAINST LIFE IN DEMOCRACY

CAPÍTULO I

AGAINST PUBLIC TRANQUILITY

Artigo 188º Criminal association

1.	Whoever promotes or founds a group, organization or association whose purpose or activity is directed to the commission of crimes, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	A criminal group, organization or association is considered to be any grouping of two or more persons who, during a period of time and acting in concert, aim to commit or incite the commission of crimes, with the intention of disturbing public order or obtaining directly or indirectly a benefit or advantage.
3.	Whoever joins, supports or participates in any of the activities of criminal groups, organizations or associations, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
4.	Whoever leads or directs the groups, organizations or associations referred to in the preceding numbers is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years.
5.	The penalties referred to may be extraordinarily mitigated if the agent prevents or seriously endeavors to prevent the continuation of the groups, organizations or associations, or communicates their existence to the authority so that it can prevent the commission of crimes.

Artigo 189º Instigation to commit crime

1.	Whoever, publicly and by any means, incites the commission of a crime is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

2.	Whoever, privately or publicly, praises or rewards someone who has committed a crime in such a way as, with such conduct, to incite the commission of identical crimes is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
3.	If in the case of the preceding numbers the crime whose commission the agent had instigated comes to be committed, the penalty of imprisonment is from 2 to 5 years, if a more serious one does not correspond to him by virtue of another legal provision.

Artigo 190º Participation in riot

1.	Whoever takes part in a public riot, during which violence against persons or property is committed collectively, is punished with imprisonment of 1 year or a fine, if no more serious penalty is due to him for participation in the crime committed.
2.	If the agent provoked or directed the riot, he is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years.
3.	If the riot is armed, the penalties referred to in the preceding numbers are doubled in their limits.

Artigo 191º

Impediment of the exercise of political rights

Whoever prevents another, through violence or threat, from exercising his political rights, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Artigo 192º Traffic in influence

1.	Whoever, by himself or through an intermediary, with his consent or ratification, solicits or accepts, for himself or for a third party, a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage, or its promise, to abuse his influence, real or supposed, with any public entity, is punished:
a)	With imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, if a more serious penalty is not due to him by virtue of another legal provision, if the purpose is to obtain any favorable unlawful decision;

b)	With imprisonment up to 1 year or with a fine, if a more serious penalty is not due to him by virtue of another legal provision, if the purpose is to obtain any favorable lawful decision.
2.	Whoever, by himself or through an intermediary, with his consent or ratification, gives or promises a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage to the persons referred to in the preceding number for the purposes provided for in paragraph a) of the preceding number is punished with imprisonment up to 4 years or with a fine.

Artigo 193º Disobedience to order of dispersal

1.	Whoever does not obey a lawful order to withdraw from a gathering or public meeting, given by a competent authority, with warning that disobedience constitutes a crime, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	If the disobedient person is the promoter of the meeting or gathering, he is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

Artigo 194º

Abuse of public signals or uniform

1.	Whoever abusively uses an alarm or distress signal or call, or falsely makes it believed that assistance from others is necessary by virtue of disaster, danger or situation of collective necessity, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or with a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever unduly or abusively uses uniforms, dress, attire or insignia identifying activities, authorities or public or international institutions as a means of more easily committing any unlawful act.

Artigo 195º Usurpation of functions

1.	Whoever, without being authorized to do so, exercises functions or performs acts proper to an official, military command or public security force, arrogating to himself, expressly or tacitly, that quality, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever exercises a profession for which the law requires a title or fulfillment of certain conditions, arrogating to himself, expressly or tacitly, to possess it or fulfill them, when, in fact, he does not possess it or does not fulfill them.
3.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever continues in the exercise of public functions, after having been officially notified of dismissal or suspension of those functions.

CAPÍTULO II

AGAINST THE SECURITY OF THE STATE

Artigo 196º Treason to the Homeland

Whoever, by means of violence, threat of violence, usurpation or abuse of functions of sovereignty, prevents or attempts to prevent the exercise of national sovereignty in the territory or in part of the territory of Timor-Leste or endangers the integrity of the national territory, as a form of submission or surrender to foreign sovereignty, is punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years.

Artigo 197º

Service or collaboration with enemy armed forces

1.	The Timorese citizen who collaborates with a foreign country or groups or with their representatives, or who serves under the flag of a foreign country during war or armed action against Timor-Leste, is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.
2.	Preparatory acts relating to the facts described in the preceding number are punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years
3.	Whoever, being Timorese or resident in the national territory, performs acts adequate to help or facilitate

any armed action or war against Timor-Leste by a foreign country or group, is punished with imprisonment from 10 to 20 years.

Artigo 198º

Sabotage against national defense

Whoever, with the intention of harming or endangering national defense, destroys, damages or renders unusable, totally or partially:
a)	Works or materials proper to or assigned to the armed forces;
b)	Routes or means of communication or transport;
c)	Any other installations related to communications or transport; or
d)	Factories or warehouses;
is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Artigo 199º

Campaign against peace efforts

Anyone who, being Timorese or resident in national territory, in time of preparation or war, disseminates by any means, so as to make public, rumours or statements, their own or others', which they know to be, totally or partially, false, in order to prejudice the peace efforts of Timor-Leste or to assist the foreign enemy, is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Artigo 200º

Violation of State secret

1. Whoever, endangering the interest of the Timorese State relating to its external security or the conduct of its foreign policy, transmits, makes accessible to an unauthorised person or makes public any fact, document, plan, object, knowledge or any other information that should, by reason of that interest, remain secret in relation to a foreign country, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years

2. Whoever collaborates with a foreign government or group with the intention of committing the acts referred to in the preceding number or recruits or assists another person charged with committing them, is punished with the penalty provided for in the preceding number.
3. If the agent who commits the acts described in the preceding numbers exercises any political, public or military function which, by its nature, should inhibit them from committing such acts more strongly than the ordinary citizen, they are punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Artigo 201º Diplomatic infidelity

Anyone who, officially representing the Timorese State, with the intention of prejudicing national rights or interests:
a) Conducts State business with a foreign government or international organisation; or
b) Assumes commitments in the name of Timor-Leste without being duly authorised to do so;
is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Artigo 202º Alteration of the Rule of Law

1. Whoever, by means of violence, threat of violence or incitement to civil war, attempts to destroy, alter or subjugate the constitutionally established rule of law, is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.
2. If the act described above is committed by means of armed violence the penalty is from 5 to 20 years' imprisonment.
3. Public incitement or the distribution of weapons for the commission of the acts described above is, respectively, punished with the penalty corresponding to an attempt.

Artigo 203º

Attack against the highest representative of a sovereign body

1. Whoever attacks the life, physical integrity or freedom of the highest representative of a sovereign body or of whoever constitutionally replaces them or of whoever has been elected or appointed to the office, even before taking office, is punished with imprisonment from 8 to 20 years.
2. In case of consummation of a crime against life, physical integrity or freedom, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years.
3. The penalties provided for in the preceding numbers are correspondingly applicable whenever the acts described therein are committed against a foreign person who is in the situation referred to in number 1, ambassadors and holders of leading bodies of international organisations, when they are in Timor-Leste.

Artigo 204º

Coercion against constitutional bodies

1. Whoever, by violence or threat of violence, prevents or constrains the free exercise of the functions of a sovereign body is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2. If the acts described in the preceding number are committed against district or local government bodies the penalty is from 2 to 6 years' imprisonment.
3. If the acts referred to described in number 1 are committed against members of those bodies the penalties referred to in numbers 1 and 2 are reduced to half their limits.

Artigo 205º

Disturbance of the functioning of a constitutional body

Anyone who, by means of tumults, disorders or shouting, unlawfully disturbs the functioning of the bodies referred to in the preceding article or the exercise of functions by any of the persons who are part of them, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Artigo 206º

Outrage of national symbols

Whoever, publicly, by words, by gestures or dissemination of writings, or by any other means of communication with the public, outrages the flag or the national anthem, the arms or emblems of Timorese sovereignty or fails to show the respect due to them, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

CAPÍTULO III

AGAINST LIFE IN SOCIETY

SECÇÃO I

CRIMES OF COMMON DANGER

Artigo 207º Driving without a licence

Whoever uses a motorised vehicle without being qualified with the legally required licence, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

Artigo 208º

Driving under the influence of alcohol or psychotropic substances

1. Whoever, at least through negligence, drives a motorised vehicle with more than 1.2mg of alcohol per litre of blood, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2. The same penalty is incurred by whoever, at least through negligence, drives a motorised vehicle, not being in a condition to do so safely, by being under the influence of a narcotic, psychotropic substance or product with an analogous disturbing effect on physical, mental or psychological aptitude.

Artigo 209º Dangerous driving

1. Whoever drives any motorised vehicle on a public road and, by not being in a condition to do so safely or by grossly violating the rules of

road traffic, creates danger to the life or physical integrity of another is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2. Negligence in relation to the conduct or the danger is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

Artigo 210º

Attack against the safety of transport

1. Whoever commits any act capable of causing the lack or diminution of safety in a means of transport and, in this way, creates a danger to the life or physical integrity of another person, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2. The provisions of number 2 of the preceding article are correspondingly applicable.

Artigo 211º Prohibited weapons

1. Anyone who, outside legal prescriptions, manufactures, imports, transports, sells or transfers to another firearms, chemical weapons, biological weapons, nuclear weapons, ammunition for them, substances for their manufacture or operation or any other type of explosive, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. If the acts described in the preceding number have as their purpose use for warlike purposes the penalty is from 2 to 8 years' imprisonment.
3. The mere possession, use or carrying of a firearm without the agent being legally authorised, is punishable with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

Artigo 212º Drunkenness and intoxication

1. Whoever, at least through negligence, places themselves in a state of non-imputability derived from the ingestion or consumption of alcoholic drink or toxic substance and in that state commits an unlawful typical act is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine.

2. The penalty cannot exceed that provided for the unlawful typical act committed.
3. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 213º

Qualification for the exercise of certain activities

1. Whoever, without being legally qualified, sells, administers, prescribes or transfers in any way, habitually, to other persons, pharmaceutical products or others whose trade and prescription, administration or transfer, are reserved to health professionals or other duly licensed entities, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. If as a consequence of the preceding acts danger to the life of another person results the penalty is from 1 to 4 years' imprisonment.

Artigo 214º

Produtos adulterados ou deteriorados

1.	Whoever places for sale, administers or transfers in any form to another person food products, pharmaceuticals, or others which, being deteriorated, adulterated or contaminated, are likely to endanger life is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	If from the commission of the acts described in the preceding number results the death of the victim by reason of the consumption of such products, the penalty is from 3 to 12 years.

SECÇÃO II

CRIMES CONTRA O AMBIENTE

Artigo 215º Contra o ambiente

1.	Whoever, not observing legal or regulatory provisions protecting the environment, causes or carries out directly or indirectly emissions, discharges, radiations, extractions or excavations, ignitions, noises, vibrations, injections or deposits, in the atmosphere, in the soil,

in the subsoil or in terrestrial, maritime or underground waters, including in transboundary zones, or water abstraction that may seriously harm the balance of natural systems, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the agent intentionally releases, emits or introduces ionizing radiation or other substances into the air, land or maritime, continental, surface or underground waters, in a quantity that produces in one or more persons serious bodily injury requiring medical or surgical treatment or produces irreversible sequelae, he is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years and if death is caused the penalty is from 5 to 15 years of imprisonment.

Artigo 216º Agravação

1.	If the acts or activities provided for in the preceding article are committed by an industrial or commercial establishment and any of the following circumstances occurs:
a)	The industry or commercial activity operates clandestinely without the proper license or administrative authorization
b)	When express orders of the competent administrative authority for the correction or suspension of the activities referred to in the preceding article have been disobeyed
c)	When the safety rules or procedures provided for in legal or regulatory provisions have not been complied with.
d)	When, by any means, the inspection process of the competent administrative authority has been intentionally impeded or information about the environmental consequences of the industry or commercial activity has been omitted or falsified.
e)	When an irreversible or catastrophic state of environmental deterioration has been produced
the penalties provided for in the preceding number are aggravated by one third in their minimum and maximum limits.
2.	Criminally responsible, under the terms of the preceding number, are the individual holder, the legal representatives, or

those who act on behalf of the legal person holding the infringing industrial or commercial establishments, as well as the partners or members who authorize them to act, when it is irregularly constituted.

Artigo 217º Contra a flora ou fauna

1.	Whoever with serious harm to the environment cuts, burns, uproots, collects or carries out illegal trafficking of any species of flora or its seeds, classified as threatened or at risk of extinction, destroying or seriously altering its natural habitat, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	Incurs the penalty provided for in the preceding number, whoever introduces or facilitates the entry of non-native species of flora or fauna, in a way that harms the biological balance, violating the laws or provisions of a general nature, protecting species of flora or fauna.

Artigo 218º

Contra espécies ameaçadas ou em risco de extinção

1.	Whoever hunts or fishes threatened species or carries out any activity that prevents their development or hinders their reproduction or migration, violating laws or provisions of a general nature protecting species of wild fauna, as well as commercializes or traffics them, in whole or in part, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the acts referred to in the preceding number are committed:
a)	In terrestrial or maritime zones declared protected natural zones;
b)	Against species or subspecies classified as endangered;
the agent is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine.

Artigo 219º Pesca ilegal

1.	Whoever fishes in national maritime waters without the proper fishing license obtained from the competent administrative entity, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the agent is a legal person, criminally responsible, under the terms of the preceding number, are the legal representatives, or those who act on behalf of the legal person, as well as the partners or members who authorize them to act, when it is irregularly constituted.
3.	Not punishable under number one, is fishing practiced for domestic subsistence.

Artigo 220º Meios de pesca ilícitos

Whoever uses firearms, explosives, toxic substances or other instruments or similar arts of destructive efficacy for maritime fauna, for the capture of fish resources, in national terrestrial or maritime waters, is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine.

Artigo 221º Queimada proibida

1.	Whoever carries out burning outside the proper season or without administrative authorization, when necessary, from which results the destruction of forest, plantation or cultivation is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	If the burning is legally carried out but, through negligence, the agent causes the damage referred to in the preceding number, the penalty is imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

SECÇÃO III OUTROS CRIMES

Artigo 222º

Impedimento ou perturbação de cortejo, cerimónia ou culto

1.	Whoever prevents or disturbs the holding of a procession or funeral ceremony or the exercise of religious worship by means of violence or threat of violence or any other form of coercion, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 223º

Profanação de objecto ou lugar de culto ou veneração

1.	Whoever, in a manner to provoke alarm or disturb social peace, desecrates a place or object of worship or religious veneration, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by one who offends or insults another person because of their belief or religious function, in a manner adequate to provoke alarm or social disturbance.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 224º

Destruição, subtracção, ocultação ou profanação de cadáver

1.	Whoever, against or without the consent of the rightful person and outside the cases in which the law permits it, removes, destroys or conceals corpses or parts thereof, or ashes of a deceased person, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever desecrates corpses, parts of corpses or ashes of deceased persons, committing acts offensive to the respect due to the dead.
3.	The attempt is punishable.
4.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 225º

Não cumprimento de obrigação alimentar

1.	Whoever is obliged to provide maintenance, has the means to do so and fails to fulfill the obligation in a manner to endanger the satisfaction of the fundamental needs of the person entitled to maintenance, is punished with a penalty of

imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine, even if assistance provided by another removes the danger.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 226º Subtracção de menor

1.	Whoever removes or refuses to deliver a minor to the person to whom their custody has been entrusted or causes the minor to flee, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the acts are committed with violence or threat of violence, the penalty is imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 227 Failure to render assistance

1. Whoever, in a case of grave necessity, namely caused by disaster, accident, public calamity or situation of common danger, which endangers the life, physical integrity or liberty of another person, fails to render the necessary assistance to remove the danger, whether by personal action or by promoting rescue, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. If the situation referred to in the preceding number was created by the person who omits the due assistance, the omitter is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
3. The failure to render assistance is not punishable when there is grave risk to the life or physical integrity of the omitter or when, for another relevant reason, assistance is not required of him.
4. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 228 Refusal of medical assistance

A doctor or health professional who refuses the assistance of his profession in case of danger to life or grave danger to the physical integrity of another person, which cannot be removed in another way, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

CHAPTER IV ELECTORAL CRIMES

Article 229 Fraud in electoral registration

1. Whoever prevents another person, whom he knows has the right, from registering, causes facts which he knows are not true to be recorded, omits facts which he should record or by any other means falsifies the electoral registration, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. If the person is prevented from registering or convinced to register by means of violence or cunningly provoked deception, the applicable penalty is imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
3. Attempt is punishable.

Article 230 Obstruction of candidacy

Whoever, by any means, prevents another person, party or political force whom he knows has the right, from standing in an electoral act, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Article 231 Ineligible candidate

1. Whoever, knowing that he does not have electoral capacity to be elected, presents his candidacy, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. Attempt is punishable.

Article 232

Absence of electoral rolls

Whoever, being charged with the preparation or correction of electoral rolls, does not proceed with their execution or prevents the legal substitute from doing so in order to prevent the holding of an electoral act, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

Article 233 Illicit electoral propaganda

1. Whoever uses a legally prohibited means of propaganda or continues to carry out propaganda beyond the established deadline or in a prohibited place, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. Whoever prevents the exercise of the right to electoral propaganda or proceeds with its unlawful destruction, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

Article 234 Obstruction of freedom of choice

1. Whoever, by means of violence, threat of violence or by fraudulent artifice, compels another person not to vote or to vote in a certain direction or buys or sells votes, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The same penalty applies to whoever, requested to assist in voting a blind person or a person legally entitled to such assistance, disregards the voting direction communicated to him.
3. Attempt is punishable.

Article 235 Disturbance of electoral act

1. Whoever, by any means, disturbs the functioning of the polling station, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. The agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years if the disturbance results from:
a) Violence or threat of violence;
b) Tumult or population gathering near the polling station;
c) Intentional cutting of electrical power;
d) Absence of someone indispensable to the act if, for that reason, the holding of the act must be considered gravely affected in order to begin or continue.

3. The provisions of the preceding numbers apply correspondingly if the facts are committed during the counting of results after the voting has taken place.

Article 236

Obstruction of supervision of electoral act

1. Whoever, by any means, prevents the representative of any party or political force, legally constituted and standing in the electoral act, from exercising his supervisory powers, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. Attempt is punishable.

Article 237 Fraud in voting

1. Whoever votes without having the right to vote or does so more than once in relation to the same electoral act is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The same penalty is incurred by whoever intentionally permits the commission of the act described in the preceding number.
3. Attempt is punishable.

Article 238 Fraud in scrutiny

1. Whoever, by any means, vitiates the counting of votes in the act of counting or publication of electoral results, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. The same penalty is incurred by whoever, with fraudulent intent, substitutes, destroys, suppresses, violates, vitiates or falsifies voting or counting ballots, or documents relating to the election.

Article 239 Refusal of electoral office

Whoever is appointed to be part of the polling station tables and, unjustifiably, refuses to assume

or abandons those functions, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Article 240

Violation of secrecy of scrutiny

Whoever in an electoral act conducted by secret ballot, violates such secrecy, taking or giving knowledge of the voting direction of another person, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Article 241

Duty of neutrality and impartiality

Officials of the electoral administration or who collaborate with it who infringe the duties of neutrality and impartiality are punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

Article 242 Aggravation

If whoever commits any of the crimes provided for in this chapter performs public functions, namely in the Government, in the National Parliament, in the Armed Forces, as a judicial magistrate or of the Public Prosecution Service, in the various police forces or in other administrative bodies, the sanctions provided for in the type are raised to double their limits.

CHAPTER V

AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY

Article 243 Obstruction of public authority

1. Whoever, by means of violence or grave threat against an official or agent of military, militarized or police forces, opposes the performance of an act relating to the exercise of his functions or compels the performance of an act contrary to his duties is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

2. If the act referred to in the preceding number is effectively performed or prevented from being performed the penalty is from 2 to 8 years.

Article 244 Disobedience

1. Whoever fails or persists in failing to obey a legitimate order or mandate, regularly communicated and coming from a competent authority or official, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine, if:
a) A legal provision so determines; or
b) If warned that his conduct is susceptible to generating criminal liability and the authority or official makes the corresponding commination.
2. In cases where the legal provision qualifies the act as qualified disobedience the penalty is from 1 to 4 years of imprisonment.
3. Disobedience to concrete prohibitions or interdictions determined in a criminal sentence, as well as disobedience to accessory penalties or non-custodial security measures, is punishable with the penalty referred to in number 1.

Article 245 Removal of prisoners

1. Whoever, by illegal means, frees or, by any means, assists the escape of a person legally deprived of liberty, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. If the acts are committed with use of violence, using weapons or with the collaboration of more than two persons, the penalty is imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Article 246 Escape

1.	Whoever, being legally deprived of liberty, escapes, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.

2.	If the escape is achieved by any of the means described in number 2 of the preceding article, the penalty is from 2 to 6 years.

Article 247

Official's assistance in escape

1.	The official who assists in the commission of any of the acts provided for in the preceding articles is punished with the penalties prescribed therein aggravated by one third in their limits.
2.	If the official should have exercised custody or surveillance over the escapee and, even so, assisted in those acts, the prescribed penalties are aggravated by half in their limits.
3.	If the escape is due only to gross negligence of the official in charge of surveillance of the escapee, the penalty is imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

Article 248 Mutiny of prisoners

1.	Those who, being legally deprived of liberty, in concert and in joint effort with another person in the same circumstances, attack or threaten with violence whoever is in charge of their surveillance or custody, in order to achieve their escape or that of a third party, or to commit an act or refrain from its commission, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	If through the commission of the acts described in the preceding number the intentions of one's own or another's escape are achieved, the penalty is from 3 to 10 years.

Article 249

Misappropriation or destruction of objects under public authority

Whoever destroys, damages or renders unusable, totally or partially, or in any way, removes from the public authority to which it is assigned or subject, a document or other movable object, as well as a thing that has been attached,

seized or subject to a precautionary measure, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another provision.

Article 250

Breaking of marks, seals and notices

1.	Whoever opens, breaks or renders unusable, totally or partially, marks or seals legitimately affixed by a competent official to identify or keep inviolable any thing, or to certify that it has been attached, seized or subject to a precautionary measure, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	Whoever in any way intentionally prevents the addressee from becoming aware of a notice posted by a competent official is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

TITLE IV

CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY

CHAPTER I AGAINST OWNERSHIP

Article 251 Simple theft

1.	Whoever, with unlawful intention of appropriation for himself or for another, removes movable property belonging to another, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	The attempt is punishable.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 252 Aggravated theft

1.	The agent who commits the acts referred to in the preceding article is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years, if:

a)	The movable property belonging to another possesses high scientific, artistic or historical value, or is important for economic or technological development;
b)	The movable property belonging to another is a vehicle, transported in a vehicle or by a passenger of public transport, or is found at the dock or station for embarkation and disembarkation;
c)	The movable property belonging to another is assigned to religious worship or to the veneration of the memory of the dead and is found in a place intended for worship or in a cemetery;
d)	The agent takes advantage of the night to more easily commit the theft;
e)	The victim suffers considerable losses as a consequence of the appropriation;
f)	The agent enters a dwelling, public service facilities, commercial or industrial establishment with the intention of stealing;
g)	The agent uses false keys, climbing or breaking in carrying out his design;
h)	The agent takes advantage of the situation of special vulnerability of the victim of disaster, accident or public calamity;
i)	The agent takes advantage of the existence of a special relationship of trust with the victim or with the owner of the place where the removed thing is found;
j)	The agent makes the commission of thefts a way of life;
k)	The crime is committed by 3 or more persons, including the agent;
l)	The value of the removed thing is greater than 1,000 US dollars but less than or equal to 5,000 US dollars.
2.	If the value of the removed thing is greater than 5,000 US dollars, the imprisonment penalty shall be from 3 to 10 years.
3.	If more than one of the circumstances referred to in number one concur in the same conduct, only the one having the strongest aggravating effect is considered for the purpose of determining the abstract framework of the applicable legal type, with the remaining ones being valued as

circumstances of a general nature in determining the measure of the penalty.
4.	If the value of the stolen thing is less than 50 US dollars, the circumstances referred to in no. 1 only function as aggravating circumstances of a general nature.

Article 253 Robbery

1.	Whoever, with unlawful intention of appropriation for himself or for another person, removes or compels the delivery to him of movable property belonging to another by means of violence against a person, threat with imminent danger to life or physical integrity or by placing the person in the impossibility of resisting, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2.	If, simultaneously with the conduct of the agent, any of the circumstances described in number 1 of the preceding article occurs, the imprisonment penalty shall be from 4 to 12 years.
3.	If from the conduct of the agent results danger to the life of the victim or serious offenses to physical integrity are caused to him, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.
4.	If from the conduct of the agent death results, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years.

Article 254 Violence after removal

Whoever, caught in the act of theft, acts in the ways described in the preceding article with the purpose of retaining or preventing the restitution of the appropriated things, is punished with the penalties of the crime of robbery respectively.

Article 255 Theft of use of vehicle

1.	Whoever uses an automobile or other motorized vehicle, aircraft, boat or bicycle without authorization from the rightful person, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.

2.	The attempt is punishable.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 256

Simple breach of trust

1.	Whoever unlawfully appropriates movable property that has been delivered to him by a title not transferring ownership is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	The attempt is punishable.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 257

Aggravated breach of trust

1.	If the movable property has a value greater than 1,000 US dollars, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	The penalties provided for in the preceding number and in article 256 are increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits if the agent received the thing in deposit imposed by law, by reason of office, employment or profession, or in the capacity of guardian, curator or depositary.

Article 258 Simple damage

1.	Whoever, totally or partially, destroys, damages, disfigures or renders unusable property belonging to another is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	The attempt is punishable.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 259 Aggravated damage

Whoever, totally or partially, destroys, damages, disfigures or renders unusable a thing:
a)	Intended for public use or utility;

b)	With an important scientific, artistic or historical value or possessing great importance for technological or scientific development;
c)	Corresponding to a means of communication or transport of great social importance;
d)	Causing damage exceeding 1,000 US dollars;
e)	Belonging to another, assigned to religious worship or to the veneration of the memory of the dead and which is found in a place intended for worship or in a cemetery;
is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years or a fine.

Article 260 Damage with violence

If the acts described in articles 258 and 259 are committed with violence against a person, or threat with imminent danger to life or physical integrity, or by rendering the person unable to resist, the conduct is punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years.

Article 261 Usurpation of immovable property

1. Whoever, by means of violence or serious threat against another person, invades or occupies another's immovable property, with the intention of exercising a right of ownership, possession, use or easement not protected by law, judgment, contract or administrative act, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2. If the means employed constitutes a crime punishable with a penalty greater than that provided in the preceding paragraph, that shall be the applicable penalty.

Article 262 Alteration of boundary markers

1. Whoever, with the intention of appropriation, total or partial, of another's immovable property, for himself or for another person, removes or alters a boundary marker or any other sign intended to establish the limits of immovable property, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 263 Arson

1. Whoever, intending to cause fire in a house, building, establishment, means of transport, forest, plantation or any other property and, in this manner, create danger to life, physical integrity or to patrimonial assets with a value exceeding 5,000 US dollars, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2. If the acts described in the preceding paragraph relate to public property or property in which public services operate, the penalty is 2 to 10 years of imprisonment.
3. The offender is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine if the acts are committed negligently, unless a more severe penalty applies by virtue of another legal provision.
4. If only the danger referred to in paragraph 1 is created negligently, the penalty is 2 to 6 years of imprisonment.
5. In the cases provided for in paragraph 4, criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 264 Active repentance

If, after the commission of the crimes provided for in articles 251, 252, 256 to 261 and 263, paragraph 4, but before the commencement of the trial hearing, the offender performs acts aimed at the restitution or full or partial reparation of the damage caused, the penalty may be extraordinarily mitigated.

Article 265 Definitions

For the purposes of this Code, the following are considered:
a) "Breaking", the rupture, fracture or destruction, in whole or in part, of a device intended to close or prevent entry, externally or internally, to a house or enclosed place dependent on it;

b) "Scaling", the introduction into a house or enclosed place dependent on it, through a place not normally intended for entry or through any device intended to close or prevent entry or passage;
c) "False keys",
i) Those imitated, counterfeited or altered;
ii) True keys when, fortuitously or surreptitiously, they are outside the power of the person who has the right to use them; and
iii) Lockpicks or any instruments that may be used to open locks or other security devices.

CHAPTER II

AGAINST PATRIMONY IN GENERAL

Article 266 Simple fraud

1. Whoever, with the intention of obtaining for himself or for a third party unlawful enrichment, by means of error or deception about facts that he cunningly provoked, induces another to perform acts that cause him, or cause another person, patrimonial loss, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The attempt is punishable.
3. The provisions of article 264 are correspondingly applicable.
4. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 267 Aggravated fraud

1. Whoever, as a result of the conduct described in the preceding article:
a) Causes loss exceeding 2,000 US dollars;
b) Makes fraud a way of life;
c) Places the injured person in a difficult economic situation; is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.

2. The provisions of article 264 are correspondingly applicable.

Article 268 Computer fraud

1. Whoever, with the intention of obtaining for himself or for a third party unlawful enrichment, causes another person patrimonial loss, by interfering with the result of computer data processing or by means of incorrect structuring of a computer program, incorrect or incomplete use of data, unauthorized use of data or intervention in any other unauthorized manner in the processing, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The attempt is punishable.
3. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 269

Aggravated computer fraud

When as a result of the conduct described in the preceding article any of the circumstances described in paragraph 1 of article 267 occurs, the offender is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.

Article 270 Extortion

1. Whoever, with the intention of obtaining for himself or for a third party unlawful enrichment, compels another person, by means of violence or threat of significant harm, to a patrimonial disposition that entails, for him or for another, loss, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. If the circumstances provided for in article 252 occur, the conduct of the offender is punished with the penalties provided therein.
3. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 271 Simple receiving

1. Whoever, without having previously ascertained its lawful origin, acquires or receives, under any title, a thing which, by its nature or by the quality of the person who possesses it or offers it to him, or by the amount of the price or conditions of sale or offer, causes a reasonably diligent person to suspect that it comes from criminal conduct against the patrimony of another person, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or with a fine.
2. Proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 272 Aggravated receiving

1. Whoever, with the intention of obtaining, for himself or for another person, patrimonial advantage, to conceal a thing obtained by another through a crime against patrimony, receives it, pledges it, acquires it under any title, holds it, preserves it, transmits it or contributes to transmitting it, or in any other way secures, for himself or for a third party, its possession or the value or product directly resulting from it, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2. The offender is punished for the commission of the acts described in the preceding paragraph with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years, if:
a) He makes receiving a way of life or practices it habitually;
b) The goods, values or products have a value exceeding 2,000 US dollars;
c) If, at the time of receiving, the receiver knew that the crime was committed with any of the circumstances referred to in article 253,
paragraph 1.

Article 273 Assistance to the criminal

1. Whoever, after the commission of a crime against patrimony, helps the offender of the crime to take advantage of the thing thus obtained or of a benefit directly resulting from the appropriated thing, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2. Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Article 274 Harmful administration

1. Whoever is entrusted with disposing of or administering interests, services or patrimonial assets of another, even if a partner of the company or legal person to which those assets, interests or services belong, and by having intentionally infringed the rules of control and management or by having acted with serious violation of duties inherent to the function, causes economically significant patrimonial damage, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2. If the assets, interests or services referred to in the preceding paragraph belong to the State, a legal person of public utility, a cooperative or popular association, the penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 6 years is applicable to the offender.
3. The same penalties are applicable to whoever appropriates or allows the unlawful appropriation of things which they could only dispose of within the scope and for the purposes proper to one who administers another's patrimony.

Artigo 275º Administração negligente

1.	Whoever, being in the conditions described in paragraph 1 of the previous article, causes serious patrimonial damage by not acting with the diligence to which according to the circumstances they were obliged and of which they were capable, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
2.	Imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine is applied if the assets or interests relate to any of the situations described in paragraph 2 of the previous article.
3.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

Artigo 276º

Falência ou insolvência intencional

1.	Whoever, by any means, leads a company to bankruptcy or places themselves in a situation of insolvency, with

the intention of harming creditors, if bankruptcy or insolvency is declared, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2.	If the facts described in the previous paragraph relate to public companies or cooperatives, the penalty is increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits.

Artigo 277º

Falência ou insolvência negligente

1.	Whoever causes bankruptcy or insolvency through serious carelessness or imprudence, prodigality or manifestly excessive expenses, or through gross negligence in the exercise of their activity, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine, if bankruptcy or insolvency is declared.
2.	Criminal proceedings depend on a complaint.

TÍTULO V

DOS CRIMES CONTRA A REALIZAÇÃO DA JUSTIÇA

Artigo 278º

Falsidade de depoimento ou declaração

1.	Whoever gives testimony as a party, making false statements regarding facts about which they must testify, after having taken an oath and having been warned of the criminal consequences to which they are exposed by giving false testimony, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by the suspect or accused regarding statements about identity and criminal record.
3.	If, as a consequence of the conduct described in the previous paragraphs, someone is deprived of liberty, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Artigo 279º

Falsidade de testemunho, perícia, interpretação ou tradução

1.	Whoever, as a witness, expert, technician, translator or interpreter, before a court or official competent to receive as evidence, testimony, report, information or translation, gives testimony, presents a report, gives information or makes false translations, is punished with imprisonment up to 4 years or with a fine.
2.	The same penalty is incurred by whoever, without just cause, refuses to testify or to present a report, information or translation.
3.	If the fact referred to in paragraph 1 is committed after the agent has taken an oath and has been warned of the criminal consequences to which they are exposed, the penalty is imprisonment up to 5 years.
4.	If, as a consequence of the conduct described in the previous paragraphs, someone is deprived of liberty, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Artigo 280º Equiparação à desistência

The repentance and retraction of the agent who has committed any of the facts described in the previous article before the effects of the falsity have been taken into account in the decision or have caused harm to another person, are equivalent to desistance.

Artigo 281º Suborno

1.	Whoever convinces or attempts to convince another person, through a gift or promise of patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage, to commit any of the facts referred to in articles 278º or 279º, is punished with imprisonment up to 4 years, when such practice occurs.
2.	If the commission of the facts referred to in articles 278º and 279º does not materialize, the agent is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine

Artigo 282º

Denegação de justiça
1.	The official who, within the scope of a procedural inquiry, jurisdictional proceedings, for administrative offences or disciplinary matters, knowingly decides or does not decide, promotes or does not promote, investigates or does not investigate or performs an act in the exercise of their functions, against the law, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the fact described in the previous paragraph is committed with the intention of harming or benefiting someone, the official is punished with imprisonment up to 5 years.
3.	If from the conduct described in the previous paragraphs results the deprivation of liberty of a person, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
4.	If the previous conduct is committed with gross negligence, the penalties are reduced by half in their minimum and maximum limits.

Artigo 283º Coacção sobre magistrado

1.	Whoever, by means of violence, threat of significant harm or by any other means, acts in a way to prevent a judge or public prosecutor from freely exercising their functions, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2.	If the agent commits the facts taking advantage of being invested in a position of a political, public, military or police nature, the penalty is from 2 to 8 years of imprisonment.
3.	If, as a consequence of the conduct described in the previous paragraphs, the magistrate omits or performs an act in violation of express law resulting in harm to third parties, the penalty is from 3 to 10 years of imprisonment.

Artigo 284º

Obstrução à actividade jurisdicional

1.	Whoever, by any means, opposes, hinders or prevents the compliance or execution of a final judicial decision, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 5 years.

2.	If the agent who commits the facts described in the previous paragraphs exercises any political, public or military function which, by its nature, should inhibit them from committing such facts, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Artigo 285º Denúncia caluniosa

1.	Whoever, by any means, before an authority or publicly, with awareness of the falsity of the imputation, denounces or casts upon a certain person the suspicion of having committed a crime, with the intention that criminal proceedings be instituted against them, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2.	If the false imputation refers to an administrative offence or disciplinary matter, the penalty shall be extraordinarily mitigated.
3.	If the facts described in the previous paragraphs are intentionally promoted by any official charged with instituting the respective proceedings, the applicable penalties are increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits.

Artigo 286º Não participação

Whoever, having knowledge of the commission of a public crime and, being obliged to report it, does not do so, is punished with the penalty corresponding to the crime they concealed reduced by two thirds in its minimum and maximum limits.

Artigo 287º

Prevaricação de magistrado ou funcionário

1.	The judge, public prosecutor or official who at any stage of jurisdictional proceedings, with the intention of benefiting or harming another person, performs any act within the scope of the functional powers they hold or omits an act they should perform, knowingly and against the law, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

2.	If from the facts described in the previous paragraph results the deprivation of liberty of any person or if they cause a situation of illegal imprisonment or detention, the penalty is from 3 to 10 years of imprisonment.

Artigo 288º

Prevaricação de advogado ou defensor público
1.	The lawyer or public defender who intentionally harms a case entrusted to their representation is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2.	The lawyer or public defender who, in the same case, advocates or exercises the defense in relation to persons whose interests are in conflict, with the intention of acting for the benefit or harm of any of them, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

Article 289 Simulation of crime

1. Whoever, without imputing it to a specific person, reports a crime or causes suspicion of its commission to be created before the competent authority, knowing that it did not occur, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2. If the act concerns a contravention, administrative offence or disciplinary infraction, the agent is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.
3. If the acts described in the preceding numbers are committed by officials charged with instituting the respective proceedings, the applicable penalties are increased by one third in their limits.

Article 290 Personal favouring

1. Whoever, totally or partially, prevents, frustrates or evades evidentiary or preventive activity of a competent authority, with the intention or awareness of preventing another person who committed a crime from being subjected to a penalty or security measure, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The attempt is punishable.

3. If the favouring is committed by an official who intervenes or has competence to intervene in the proceedings or who is charged with executing a penalty or security measure or with ordering its execution, the penalty is 2 to 5 years of imprisonment.
4. The commission of the acts described in number 1 is not punishable when:
a) The agent with the act seeks at the same time to prevent a penalty or security measure from being applied or executed against himself;
b) The agent is the spouse, descendant, ascendant, adopter or adoptee, relative or affine up to the second degree of the person for whose benefit he acted or someone who lives with that person in a situation analogous to that of spouses.

Article 291

Violation of judicial secrecy

1. Whoever, in violation of a legal determination and without just cause, makes public the content of a criminal procedural act covered by judicial secrecy or in respect of which it has been decided to exclude publicity, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years.
2. If the violation is carried out by means of a media outlet, the penalty is 2 to 6 years of imprisonment.

TITLE VI

CRIMES COMMITTED IN THE EXERCISE OF PUBLIC FUNCTIONS

Article 292

Passive corruption for an unlawful act

1. The official who, by himself or through an intermediary person, with his consent or ratification, solicits or accepts, for himself or for a third party, without it being owed to him, a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage, or its promise, for any act or omission contrary to the duties of the office, even if prior to that solicitation or acceptance, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 15 years.

2. If the agent, before the commission of the act, voluntarily repudiates the offer or promise that he had accepted, or returns the advantage, or, in the case of a fungible thing, its value, he is exempted from penalty.
3. The penalty is specially mitigated if the agent concretely assists in the collection of decisive evidence for the identification or capture of other responsible parties.

Article 293 Passive corruption for a lawful act

1. The official who, by himself or through an intermediary person, with his consent or ratification, solicits or accepts, for himself or for a third party, without it being owed to him, a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage, or its promise, for any act or omission not contrary to the duties of the office, even if prior to that solicitation or acceptance, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.
2. The same penalty is incurred by the official who, by himself or through an intermediary person, with his consent or ratification, solicits or accepts, for himself or for a third party, without it being owed to him, a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage from a person who before him has had, has or will have any claim dependent on the exercise of his public functions.

Article 294 Active corruption

1. Whoever, by himself or through an intermediary person with his consent or ratification, gives or promises to an official, or to a third party with the knowledge of the official, a patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage that is not owed to the official, with the purpose indicated in article 292, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2. If the purpose of the conduct described in the preceding number is that indicated in article 293, the agent is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or with a fine.

Article 295 Embezzlement

1. The official who unlawfully appropriates for his own benefit or that of another person, money or movable property, public or private, that is delivered to him, is in his possession or is accessible to him by reason of his functions, is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.
2. If the official lends, pledges or, in any way, encumbers the assets or objects referred to in the preceding number, he is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.
3. If the assets or objects referred to in the preceding numbers exceed 5,000 US dollars, the penalties are, respectively, imprisonment from 4 to 12 years or from 2 to 5 years.
4. If the assets or objects referred to in number 1 are of a value less than 50 US dollars, the agent is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.

Article 296 Embezzlement of use

The official who makes use or permits another person to make use, for purposes other than those for which they are intended, of vehicles or other movable things of significant value, that are delivered to him, are in his possession or are accessible to him by reason of his functions, to obtain, for himself or for a third party, an unlawful benefit or cause harm to someone, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years, if those things are in his possession or are accessible to him by reason of his functions.

Article 297 Abuse of power

The official who abuses powers or violates duties inherent to his functions, with the intention of obtaining for himself or for a third party, an unlawful benefit or causing harm to

another person, is punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable by virtue of another legal provision.

Article 298

Abusive employment of public force
The official who, being competent to use, requisition or order the employment of public force, does so to prevent the execution of the law, of a regular warrant of justice or of a lawful order of a public authority, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years, if a more severe penalty is not applicable to him by another legal provision.

Article 299 Economic participation in business

1. The official who, by reason of the exercise of a public office, must intervene in a contract or other operation or activity, and takes advantage of that condition, to obtain for himself or for a third party, directly or through an intermediary person, a patrimonial advantage, or, in any other way, unlawful economic participation and thereby harms the public interests that it would be his duty to administer, supervise, defend or realize, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2. If from the preceding conduct result losses to the State exceeding 10,000 US dollars, the penalty of imprisonment is from 3 to 15 years.

Article 300 Refusal of cooperation

The official who, having been lawfully requested by the competent authority to provide due cooperation for the administration of justice or any other public service, and refuses to provide it or without justified reason does not provide it, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or with a fine.

Article 301 Aggravation

1. When the crimes referred to in this Title are committed by holders of political offices or by magistrates, the penalties prescribed are increased by one third in their maximum limit.
2. The non-penal and procedural effects relating to the situations referred to in the preceding number are established in special legislation.

Article 302 Concept of public official

1. For the purposes of criminal law, the term public official encompasses:
a) The civil servant;
b) The administrative agent;
c) Members of the armed forces and police;
d) Whoever, even provisionally or temporarily, whether remunerated or gratuitously, voluntarily or compulsorily, has been called to perform or participate in the performance of an activity comprised in the administrative or jurisdictional public function, or, in the same circumstances, performs functions in public utility bodies or participates in them.
e) The foreign public official who holds a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial office in a foreign country, already designated or appointed, or a person who exercises a public function for a foreign country, including in a public body or a public enterprise.
f) The official of a public international organization whom such organization has authorized to act on its behalf
2. For criminal purposes, the provisions of this title apply to whoever performs political, governmental or legislative functions.

TITLE VII

CRIMES OF FALSIFICATION

CHAPTER I FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENT

Article 303

Falsification of document or technical notation

1. Whoever, with intent to cause harm to another person or to the State, or to obtain for himself or for another person unlawful benefit:
a) Manufactures false document or technical notation, falsifies or alters a document or abuses the signature of another person to prepare a false document;
b) Causes to be falsely recorded in a document or technical notation a legally relevant fact;
c) Falsely certifies, based on professional, technical or scientific knowledge, about the physical or mental state or quality of a person, animals or things;
d) Uses any of the documents or technical notations referred to in the preceding paragraphs, manufactured or falsified or issued by another;
is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The disruptive action on technical or automatic devices by means of which the results of the notation are influenced is equivalent to falsification of technical notation.
3. The attempt is punishable.

Article 304 Aggravated falsification

1. If the facts referred to in number 1 of the preceding article relate to an authentic document or one with equal force, to a sealed will, to a postal order, to a bill of exchange, to a cheque, other commercial documents transferable by endorsement or to technical notation relating to the identification, in part or in whole, of motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, the agent is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. If the facts described in the preceding number or in number
1 of article 309 are committed by a public official in

the exercise of his functions, the penalty is 2 to 8 years of imprisonment.

Article 305 Falsification of public document

The public official who in the exercise of his functions, with intent to cause harm to another person or to the State, or to obtain for himself or for another person unlawful benefit:
a) Omits a fact that the document to which the law attributes public faith is intended to certify or authenticate; or
b) Inserts an act or document in a protocol, register or official book without complying with legal formalities;
is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

Article 306

Use of another's identification document

Whoever, with intent to cause harm to another person or to the State, uses an identification document of which another person is the holder, is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

CHAPTER II FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY

Article 307 Counterfeiting of currency

1. Whoever commits counterfeiting of currency or depreciates legitimate metallic currency, with intent to put it into circulation as genuine is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.
2. If the agent in addition to committing the facts described in the preceding number, actually puts the currency into circulation the penalty is aggravated by one third at the maximum limit.
3. Whoever, by agreement with the counterfeiter, exposes for sale, puts into circulation or by any other means disseminates the currency is punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years.

Article 308 Passing of false currency

Whoever, outside the cases referred to in the preceding article, acquires in order to put into circulation or actually puts into circulation, sells or by any means disseminates the counterfeited or depreciated currency, as if it were genuine, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

Article 309

Counterfeiting of sealed or stamped values

1. Whoever, in order to sell them, use them or by any other means put them into circulation as legitimate, commits counterfeiting or falsification of sealed or stamped values whose manufacture and supply belongs exclusively to the Timorese State, is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.
2. Whoever commits the facts described in relation to postage stamps or any other means of postal franking in use by the Post Office of Timor-Leste is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
3. The use of the falsified products referred to in the preceding numbers, knowing them to be falsified, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
4. The attempt is punishable.

Article 310

Counterfeiting of seals, stamps, marks or official stamps

1. Whoever, with intent to use them as authentic or intact, acquires, counterfeits or falsifies seals, stamps, marks or official stamps of any authority or public office is punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. Whoever uses the objects referred to in the preceding number knowing them to be falsified or without authorization from the rightful person, to cause harm to another person or to the State, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

3. If whoever uses the said objects is the counterfeiter himself the penalty of number 1 is increased by one third at the maximum limit.
4. The attempt to commit the facts described in number 2 is punishable.

Article 311 Weights and measures

1. Whoever, with intent to harm another person or the State falsifies or by any other means alters or uses after such acts have been committed, weights, measures, scales or other measuring instruments, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. The attempt is punishable.

Article 312 Seizure and forfeiture

The counterfeited, falsified or differentiated currency, and equivalent objects, as well as weights, measures or any and all instruments intended for the commission of the crimes provided for in this Title are seized and put out of use or destroyed.

TITLE VIII

CRIMES AGAINST THE ECONOMY

Artigo 313º Money laundering

1. Whoever, knowing that the goods or products originate from the commission of crimes, in any form of participation, of terrorism, of trafficking in arms or nuclear products, of trafficking or sale of persons, of pornography involving minors, of corruption, of fraud or extortion, of tax fraud, of trafficking in protected species and trafficking in human organs or tissues or of other serious crimes, whose minimum limit of the penalty is greater than 4 years of imprisonment:

a) Converts, transfers, assists or facilitates any operation of conversion or transfer of such goods or products, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, with the purpose of concealing or disguising their illicit origin or of helping a person implicated in the commission of any of those offences to evade the legal consequences of their acts; or
b) Conceals or disguises the true nature, origin, location, disposition, movement or properties of such goods or products or rights relating to them;
c) Acquires or receives such advantages in any capacity or uses or holds or preserves them,
is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 4 to 12 years of imprisonment.
2. The punishment of the acts provided for in paragraphs a) to c) of the preceding number takes place even if the facts that constitute the underlying crime were committed outside the national territory or even if the place of commission of the act or the identity of the perpetrators is unknown.
3. The knowledge, intention or purpose, required as constituent elements of the crime may be recognised from actual and concrete factual circumstances.
4. For the demonstration and proof of the illicit origin of the income, prior conviction of the agent for the commission of the underlying crime is not necessary.
5. The underlying offence includes crimes committed outside the national territory, when the acts are constituted as a crime in the state where they were committed and within the territory of Timor-Leste.
6. The crime of money laundering does not apply to persons who commit the underlying crime.
7. Attempted money laundering is punishable and may be subject to a reduction of penalty under the general terms.
8. The punishment provided for the commission of the typical illicit acts described in paragraphs a) to c) of number 1 must not exceed the maximum limit provided for the corresponding underlying offences.

Artigo 314º Tax fraud

1. Whoever, in order not to pay or to allow a third party not to pay, totally or partially, any tax, fee or other pecuniary tax obligation owed to the State, by:
a) Not declaring the facts subject to taxation or those necessary for its assessment;
b) Incorrectly declaring the facts on which the taxation is based; or
c) Preventing by any means or concealing the elements necessary for a correct inspection of the activity or facts subject to taxation.
is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.
2. If the amount owed and not paid is greater than 5,000 US dollars, the agent is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 8 years.

Artigo 315º

Illicit import and export of goods or merchandise

1. Whoever exports or imports, without a licence, goods or merchandise whose export or import, by legal determination, is dependent on a licence from any entity, or without passing through customs, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. If the acts are committed with negligence the penalty is imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Artigo 316º Smuggling

1. Whoever imports or exports goods or merchandise without conducting them through customs or other mandatory passage controls for entry or exit of goods or merchandise from the territory of Timor-Leste, is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 6 years or a fine.
2. If the value of the goods or merchandise is greater than
10,000 US dollars or if the agent commits the

acts described in the preceding number habitually, the penalty is imprisonment from 2 to 8 years or a fine.
3. If the conduct referred to in the preceding numbers concerns goods or merchandise subject to a licence or whose import or export is prohibited, the penalties referred to in the preceding numbers are aggravated by one third in their limits.

Artigo 317º Evasion

1. Whoever imports or exports goods or merchandise, evading totally or partially, the payment of customs duties or fees owed for the entry or exit of those is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 1 to 4 years or a fine.
2. If the value of the goods or merchandise is greater than
10,000 US dollars or if the agent commits the acts described in the preceding number habitually, the penalty is imprisonment from 2 to 6 years or a fine.

Artigo 318º Exemption from penalty

The agent of the commission of the acts described in the preceding articles may be exempted from penalty whenever they voluntarily pay the customs duties or fees that are assessed and the conduct is occasional.

Artigo 319º

Irregular administration of public funds

1. Whoever gives public funds an application different from that legally established, is punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine.
2. If the destination of the irregular application is not carried out for a public purpose, that being the legally established purpose, the penalty is imprisonment from 2 to 6 years.

Artigo 320º Disobedience to requisition of goods

1. Whoever does not comply with the requisition, ordered by the Government, of goods considered indispensable for the supply of economic activities or for public consumption, is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from 1 to 4 years or a fine.
2. Negligent conduct is punished with a penalty of imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Artigo 321º

Destruction of goods relevant to the economy

1. Whoever by any means, destroys, damages or renders unusable their own goods of relevant interest to the national economy or in any other way removes them from compliance with legal duties imposed by reason of the national economy is punished with a penalty of imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.
2. Negligent conduct is punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine.

Artigo 322º Illicit exploitation of gambling

1. Whoever, in any form, operates games of fortune or chance outside legally authorised places and without due legal authorisation, or ensures the luck through error, deceit or use of any equipment, is punished with a penalty of imprisonment up to 3 years or with a penalty of a fine.
2. Games of fortune or chance are those whose result is uncertain because it is based exclusively or fundamentally on luck.

Article 323 Disruption of public act

Whoever, with the intention of preventing or prejudicing the results of a judicial auction or against a public auction or tender, manages, by means of a gift, promise, violence or threat, to ensure that someone does not bid or does not compete or that, even while bidding and winning, they

do so under conditions of lack of freedom in the practice of those acts, is punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine.

Law 13/2008, of 13 October Legislative authorisation in criminal matters

The constitutional mechanism of legislative authorisation is provided for in article 96,
paragraph 1, subparagraph a) of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

The option for this mechanism, which the Constitution provides for, enables greater speed in the legislative process, with Parliament defining the broad lines of legislative policy that must inform the final instrument, referring to the Government the harmonisation of aspects of legal technique, an intervention subordinate to the directives emanating from the National Parliament. The separation of powers attributed to the various constitutional bodies is observed, with regard to the exercise of legislative power.

This law of legislative authorisation establishes the content and scope in terms that guarantee respect for the fundamental rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens, within the scope of Criminal Law. Moreover, the proposed solutions take into consideration the general principles of criminal law enshrined in international legal instruments, already ratified by Timor-Leste, as well as the social and cultural context of the country.

It should also be noted that the content of the legislative authorisation now granted is articulated with the Code of Criminal Procedure and other complementary legislation approved and in force in the meantime.

The approval has as a future consequence the abandonment of the subsidiary application in Timor-Leste of the Criminal Code of Indonesia, also requiring the revocation or harmonisation of legislative instruments subsequent to 20 May 2002, which contain provisions relating to the definition of crimes, penalties or security measures.

Thus, the National Parliament decrees, pursuant to articles 95, paragraph 1 and 96 of the Constitution of the Republic, to have the force of law, the following:

Article 1 Object

Authorisation is granted to the Government to approve the Criminal Code and revoke the legislation in force on this matter, namely with regard to the definition of crimes, penalties, security measures and their respective prerequisites.

This excerpt sits under: Cláudio Ximenes > BOOK II SPECIAL PART > TITLE VIII

Article 2 Meaning and scope

1. The Penal Code drafted under this legislative authorisation law shall observe the constitutional principles and norms and the norms contained in international instruments that, in this matter, bind the Timorese State.
2. The authorisation has the following meaning and scope:
a) Construction of a criminal legal system aimed at the protection of legal interests essential to life in Timorese society and the reintegration of offenders therein;
b) Enshrine the principle of legality and the prohibition of analogy with regard to the application of criminal law, although with the possibility of applying law subsequent to the commission of the crime whenever it proves more favourable in the specific case;
c) Stipulate that exceptional or temporary laws apply to acts committed during their validity even if judged after the period of validity;
d) Establish norms that define the place and time of commission of the crime;
e) Enshrine the principle of territoriality for the application of Timorese criminal law, individualising the restrictions to such principle and the cases of application to situations occurring outside Timorese territory;
f) Regulate the general prerequisites of crime, equating omission to action, unless the intention of the law is otherwise, whenever the legal type of crime comprises a certain result and the agent has the duty to prevent it;

g) Make objective imputation dependent on the existence of a causal nexus between the conduct and the typical result;
h) Objective imputation shall depend on the verification of intent or negligence, defining the types of intent (direct, necessary and eventual) and the modalities of negligence (conscious and unconscious);
i) Provide that criminal liability for crimes provided for in the Penal Code is non-transferable and has as its sole agents natural persons, admitting situations of liability for acting on behalf of another and that special legislation may enshrine the criminal liability of legal persons;
j) Enshrine the non-imputability of minors under 16 years of age and the requirements for non-imputability by reason of mental disorder;
k) Admit the possibility of aggravation of the penalty whenever the agent's liability, at least on grounds of negligence, must encompass a result not included in the type;
l) Enshrine mistake as to circumstances as excluding intent and mistake as to unlawfulness as relevant to exclude culpability;
m) As regards the forms of crime, establish as a principle the non-punishability of preparatory acts, and the rule of punishment of attempt in intentional crimes punishable with more than 3 years' imprisonment;
n) Define the concept of attempt, the measure of its punishment, cases of impossible attempt, the relevance of voluntary desistance and subsequent repentance both in individual actions and in cases of participation;
o) Establish the forms of authorship, instigation or complicity and define the liability of participants in culpability and unlawfulness;
p) Provide for and define the prerequisites of situations of concurrence of crimes, concurrence of sanctions, concurrence of crime with another offence and concurrence of norms;

q) Establish the rules for punishment of concurrence of crimes, even when subsequently discovered, admitting the possibility that the cumulation may reach 30 years' imprisonment and 600 days' fine;
r) Define continued crime and the rules for its punishment with the penalty applicable to the most serious conduct;
s) Enshrine the causes of exclusion of unlawfulness and culpability, systematically distinguishing one from the other and defining the respective prerequisites for application;
t) Introduce a title relating to circumstances which, not forming part of the legal type, assume relevance in determining the agent's criminal liability;
u) Proceed to the enumeration of aggravating circumstances of a general nature and to the enumeration of mitigating circumstances;
v) Provide for a general clause of extraordinary mitigation in addition to the special cases provided for in the law and delimit the respective consequences in determining the penal framework, through a model of degrees of mitigation;
w) As general modifying aggravating circumstances, enshrine recidivism and criminal habituality, providing for the respective prerequisites and consequences in the domain of penalty;
x) Construct a system of penalties and security measures whose difference is based on the capacity or not for culpability of the agent of the act; in the first case the concrete penalty may never exceed the measure of culpability and in the second they must be based on the agent's dangerousness;
y) Set out the determining principles in the choice of penalty and security measure as well as the effects thereof and the counting of time of deprivation of liberty before conviction;
z) With regard to the execution of penalties and measures involving deprivation of liberty, provide for the possibility of benefit of conditional release and the regime for probation, always with the consent of the person concerned and with the other requirements to be enshrined in complementary legislation that may provide for the conditions of

execution of the prison sentence, the rights and duties of prisoners and the existence of open regimes;
aa) Create a system of criminal sanctions for those imputable based on the following principal penalties: imprisonment, fine, community service and admonition;
bb) The penalty of imprisonment with a minimum duration of 30 days and maximum of 30 years, with the possibility of being suspended in its execution whenever it is not applied in a measure exceeding 3 years and the requirements of prevention of future crimes do not require its enforcement, and may or may not be conditioned on compliance with certain duties and/or subject to supervision by reintegration services during the period of suspension;
cc) Regulate the possibility of modification of the suspension regime initially applied and its revocation if during the period of suspension the convicted person commits an intentional crime for which he is convicted with a prison sentence or in cases of intentional non-compliance with the duties to which he is subject;
dd) Enshrine a regime of substitution of prison sentences applied in a measure not exceeding 12 months by fine or community service, according to the circumstances, with the duty of the court to justify non-substitution when, being able to, it does not use such measure;
ee) Not make alternative imprisonment correspond to the substitute fine and, in case of unjustified non-payment thereof, impose enforcement of the initially applied imprisonment;
ff) Stipulate that the fine penalty shall always be fixed in time, at a minimum of 10 days and maximum of 360 days, in principle, and determine that each day of fine corresponds to an amount to be fixed between half a dollar and 200 dollars, to be fixed according to the economic and financial situation of the convicted person;
gg) Whenever a fine penalty is directly applied, stipulate the duty to make alternative imprisonment correspond thereto for the corresponding time reduced to 2/3, as well as the possibility of payment of the fine in instalments, its reduction or exemption in cases of great

supervening difficulty or impossibility of compliance therewith;
hh) Provide for the possibility of the penalty of community service being able to substitute both imprisonment and fine in situations of minor and medium criminality and establish some of the conditions for its application and execution in coordination with reintegration services, as well as cases of exemption or reduction, leaving to complementary law the regulation of the other conditions of application and operation of this penalty;
ii) Enshrine the penalty of admonition for cases not punishable with abstract prison sentence exceeding 3 years provided that, cumulatively, reparation of the damage is verified, the agent is a first-time offender and the needs of prevention and rehabilitation are satisfied with admonition;
jj) Establish a system of accessory penalties, making certain crimes correspond to the prohibition of exercise of rights and professions, namely temporary suspension from public functions, prohibition of exercise of function, prohibition of driving, revocation of weapon carrying licence and expulsion of foreigners; such accessory penalties shall not operate automatically, depending on the prior application of a principal penalty and their duration variable with the measure of culpability;
kk) For those declared non-imputable by virtue of mental disorder, enshrine the possibility of application of security measures, of limited temporal duration, namely internment whenever reasons of dangerousness so advise and the obligation for the same to cease when the state that legitimised it ends, admitting that in the case of foreigners it may be replaced by expulsion;
ll) Also provide for the existence of measures of professional interdiction, licence revocation and prohibition of driving for those non-imputable by reason of mental disorder;
mm) Create an autonomous chapter relating to the matter of determination of the concrete penalty, both imprisonment and fine, setting out the general principles and the operations necessary for its choice and quantification;

nn) Stipulate that compensation for losses and damages arising from the commission of a crime, as to prerequisites and calculation, is governed by the norms of civil law but, unless otherwise declared by the injured party, shall be officially awarded by the court in the criminal proceedings and that the resulting credit is privileged;
oo) Determine the conditions for the loss of objects and advantages consequent upon a crime to be decreed by the court;
pp) Define for purposes of exercise of the right of complaint crimes as public or semi-public, identify the holders of that right, the time limit for its exercise and the conditions of waiver or withdrawal thereof;
qq) With regard to the extinction of criminal liability, fix the limitation periods for criminal proceedings taking into consideration the different frameworks of the type of crimes, the form of counting and the causes of suspension of limitation;
rr) Fix the limitation periods for penalties, security measures and accessory penalties, as well as situations of suspension thereof;
ss) Regulate the other cases of extinction of liability such as the death of the agent, amnesty, general pardon and pardon;
tt) Enshrine the imprescriptibility of criminal proceedings and penalties for the commission of war crimes, crimes against peace, humanity and freedom;
uu) Organise the special part of the Penal Code, Book Two, grouping the types of crimes according to the protected legal interests, creating Titles and Chapters as homogeneous as possible;
vv) In Title I, group the unlawful acts concerning crimes of Genocide and against Humanity, War crimes, including the prohibitive conducts of certain methods and means referenced in international law, war crimes against property and against goods protected by distinctive insignia or emblems or other rights and, still in this Title, the so-called crimes against Peace and Freedom, namely prohibiting incitement to war, acts of racial or religious discrimination, trafficking and slavery of persons and enshrining a legal type of crime that encompasses situations of terrorism;

ww) Still in Title I of the Special Part, the future Penal Code of Timor-Leste must take into account the international obligations assumed by the Country upon subscribing to and ratifying the Statute of the International Criminal Court;
xx) In Title II of the Special Part of the Code, eminently personal legal interests shall be protected, highlighting life, physical integrity, personal freedom, honour and protection of private life;
yy) Structure the protection of the legal interest of life through the imposition of differentiated penal frameworks according to the type of culpability of the agent (intent and negligence) and the qualifying circumstances of the greater or lesser degree of censurability, namely according to motives, the quality of the victim and the means and methods used to carry out the criminal design;
zz) Enshrine the protection of uterine life; provide for the privileging of infanticidal conduct by the parturient to restrictive cases occurring during childbirth, due to the disturbing influence thereof; criminalise incitement to suicide and situations of intentional abandonment or exposure of another that places their life in danger;
aaa) Define a set of incriminating norms that prohibit conduct violating the physical integrity of another person, graduating the abstract penal framework based on the degree of unlawfulness and the agent's culpability manifested in the seriousness of the injury, the type of culpability and the possibility or not of a certain result that exceeds the formulated criminal design still supporting imputation, at least on grounds of negligence, what doctrine calls aggravation by result;
bbb) Distinguish the incrimination of offences by means of poisonous substances, reciprocal offences and participation in affray with two or more persons;
ccc) Finally, still within the scope of bodily offences, implement two legal types of crime that specifically provide for the punishment of ill-treatment of minors or incapable persons and of spouses or those cohabiting in an analogous situation;

ddd) In the chapter on protection of personal freedom, criminalise conduct traditionally and at the level of comparative law integrating the types of crime of threats, coercion, kidnapping, abduction and other acts violating individual freedom and, specifically, create the type of unlawful act relating to the sale of persons and the omission of denunciation of situations capable of constituting the crimes in question;
eee) Enshrine a chapter relating to sexual criminality highlighting the legal interest of freedom in this domain as determinant of the conduct to be criminalised, protecting the youngest from acts for which they are not yet prepared to consciously decide in freedom, incriminate conduct revealing sexual exploitation and the most common forms of sexual abuse whether through fraud or by reason of age;
fff) In a very particular way, incriminate the practices of sexual prostitution, child pornography and any acts of a sexual nature with minors under twelve years of age;
ggg) Introduce the criminalisation of violation of secrecy, violation of domicile and other places and violation of correspondence and telecommunications;
hhh) Group in a single title a set of crimes that protect legal interests relating to public peace and tranquillity, State security, life in society, against public authority and within the scope of electoral activities;
iii) With regard to the domain of conduct capable of violating public peace and tranquillity, prevent the emergence of criminal associations, public attitudes of instigation to the commission of crimes, participation in public riots, behaviour that prevents the exercise of political rights by citizens, disobedience to the lawful order of dispersal, criminalise practices constituting influence peddling and punish the abuse of public signs or uniforms;

jjj) Within the scope of internal State security, provide for incriminating norms for conduct capable of putting it at risk in a more significant way, namely enshrining the legal type of crime of treason to the Homeland, collaboration with enemy armed forces of the Timorese State, sabotage against national defence and campaign against the effort for peace in Timor-Leste, attack against the Head of State or other actions against constitutional bodies or conduct that pursues as an end the alteration of the Rule of Law, diplomatic infidelity, violation of State secrecy and outrage to Timorese national symbols;
kkk) Criminalise fraudulent behaviour in electoral activities regardless of who the agent is and the phase of the electoral process, cases of obstruction of the exercise of candidacy or its unlawful exercise, situations of electoral propaganda in violation of the respective legal framework and actions that disturb the normal course of the electoral act;
lll) Life in modern societies develops in constant contact with conduct potentially generating dangers more or less close to materialisation and capable of violating interests whose integrity it is important to safeguard, such as the activity of driving motor vehicles, use and possession of weapons and certain activities with relevance in the domain of citizen and public health, and some types of crimes in this matter should be provided for;
mmm) In the same way, conduct capable of violating religious values established in Timorese society should be criminalised, failure to comply with maintenance obligations and others in the domain of custody of minors, cases of social solidarity arising from situations of calamity, disaster or mandatory for certain professional activities;
nnn) Criminally sanction conduct that is unsustainably harmful to the environment, namely fauna, flora, natural habitats and resources of the Timorese subsoil;
ooo) Criminally sanction conduct that violates the exercise of public authority,

namely by means of acts of disobedience, obstruction, destruction, resistance or usurpation of public offices;
ppp) With regard to the exercise of the action of execution of penalties or measures involving deprivation of liberty, criminalise conduct that translates into removal of prisoners, escape, assistance thereto by an official and mutiny of prisoners;
qqq) As a form of protection of patrimonial legal interests, enshrine two chapters grouping crimes against property in one and crimes against patrimony in general in another;
rrr) Construct a normative system protecting property based on the legal types of crime most common in various criminal legislations such as theft, robbery, breach of trust and damage, structuring these types into simple and aggravated, considering the circumstances of value combined with the nature of the thing appropriated, the means and forms of action, violence, threats or coercion or any others capable of significantly increasing culpability or unlawfulness;
sss) Distinguish, still with regard to property, the norms typifying theft of use of vehicles, cases of violence after subtraction, usurpation of immovable property and alteration of landmarks, maintaining the incrimination of involuntary damage and defining the types of prohibited burning and fire as types of crime specifically of special damage by reason of the means and of danger in view of the consequences normally associated therewith;
ttt) Protect patrimony in general not only with the most usual incriminations in this matter such as fraud, extortion, receiving and bankruptcy or insolvency but, above all, bearing in mind the needs arising from new technologies in commerce and the responsibilities to be required of those who, managing goods or assets of others, do not conduct themselves adequately in that profession of administration, we refer to the crimes of computer fraud and the forms of harmful and abusive administration;

uuu) In modern and democratic societies, justice and its exercise are interests justifying the intervention of criminal protection, and punishment should be enshrined for falsity of procedural acts, forms of obstruction of jurisdictional activity, its non-exercise as denial of justice and violation of the respective secrecy;
vvv) Include incriminations relating to acts of bribery, prevarication by magistrate or official and by lawyer or public defender, as well as other activities of personal favouritism in the domain of justice, without forgetting the classic incriminations of false denunciation, simulation of crime and non-reporting;
www) In addition to the references contained in the last two numbers, conduct should be criminalised that in the exercise of public functions translates into situations of corruption, embezzlement, abuse of power or public force or economic participation in business by those exercising public offices or functions;
xxx) In an autonomous title, prevent through adequate incriminating norms, conduct of falsification of documents, technical notations, currency and sealed or stamped values, weights and measures, marks, stamps and seals, diversifying the respective punishments according to the nature, probative or fiduciary value and public use or destination of the falsified objects and provide for the possibility of seizure and loss of objects intended for the commission of these crimes;
yyy) Still in the same domain of the economy, incrimination should be made of acts that constitute tax fraud or situations of smuggling and customs evasion with regard to customs or border matters, in addition to maintaining criminal punishment of disobedience to the requisition of goods ordered by the government and conduct capable of disturbing, harming or preventing the performance of certain public acts such as public tender or judicial auction.

Article 3

Coordination with the Code of Criminal Procedure

The entry into force of the Penal Code referred to in this legislative authorisation law must be coordinated with the Code of Criminal Procedure and other regulatory legislation on criminal matters that is in force, as required by the legal certainty and coherence of the respective Legal Order.

Article 4 Duration and scope

The legislative authorisation granted by this law has a duration of 180 days, counted from the date of its entry into force.

Article 5 Entry into force

This legal instrument enters into force on the day immediately following its publication.

Approved on 23 September 2008

The President of the National Parliament in office, Maria da Paixão de Jesus da Costa

Promulgated on 7 October 2008. Let it be published.

The President of the Republic, Dr. José Ramos Horta

Law 6/2009, of 15 July
(First amendment to the Penal Code approved by Decree-Law No. 19/2009, of 8 April)

Life, from the moment of conception of the human being, must be protected. Taking this principle as established, it cannot be ignored that there are situations that may justify the termination of pregnancy. However, the gravity of the goods in conflict here, that is, the good (life of the pregnant woman) and the good (life of the foetus or embryo), both with the same value, only legitimises termination in extreme situations: when the sacrifice of one life is the only and last resort to save another and there is no way to maintain both.
It is therefore important to establish that the termination of pregnancy, the final word on which must always rest with the mother, who will decide in conscience, should only be permitted when it is the only means to prevent the death of the pregnant woman.
Thus, the National Parliament decrees, pursuant to article 92, paragraph 1 of article 95 and article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic, to have force of law, the following:

Article 1 Amendment to the Penal Code

Article 141 of the Penal Code approved by article 1 of Decree-law No. 19/2009, of 8 April, annexed thereto, shall have the following wording:

"Article 141 (...)

1.	(...)
2.	(...)
3.	(...)
4.	The provisions of the preceding paragraphs do not apply when the termination of pregnancy constitutes, in accordance with the state of medical knowledge and experience, and after

all possible actions have been carried out to save the life of the pregnant woman and that of the foetus or embryo, the only means to remove danger of death to the pregnant woman, provided it is performed, upon medical certification, by a doctor or other health professional under his or her direction in a public or officially recognised health establishment, and with the consent of the pregnant woman.
5.	The verification of the circumstances referred to in the preceding paragraph is certified in a medical certificate written and signed by a panel of three doctors, on a date prior to the termination, of which the doctor who performs or supervises the performance of the termination of pregnancy is not a member.
6.	Consent is given in writing in a document signed by the pregnant woman – after hearing, if possible, the spouse or the person living with her in conditions analogous to those of spouses – or by another person on her behalf, whenever possible with two days' notice in relation to the date of termination.
7.	In the case where the pregnant woman is a minor, consent is given by the legal representative.
8.	In the case where the pregnant woman of full age or emancipated is or becomes psychically incapable, consent is given, respectively and successively, by the spouse or the person living with her in conditions analogous to those of spouses, by the legal representative, by an ascendant or descendant, or, in their absence, by any relatives in the collateral line.
9.	When it is not possible to obtain the medical certificate referred to in paragraph 5, and/or it is not possible to obtain consent under the terms of paragraphs 6 to 8, and the performance of the termination is urgent and cannot be postponed, the doctor decides in conscience in view of the situation, resorting, whenever possible, to the opinion of other doctors.
10.	The panel referred to in paragraph 5 is constituted by doctors possessing adequate knowledge for the assessment of the circumstances that justify the termination of pregnancy, of which, whenever possible, a gynaecologist/obstetrician is a member.
11.	The doctors who issue the medical certificate and the doctors who perform or supervise the performance of the

termination of pregnancy must provide all necessary clarifications to the pregnant woman and, if applicable, to the persons referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8, namely the method of termination to be used, the effects of the termination, the possible consequences for the physical and psychological health of the pregnant woman.
12.	Doctors and other health professionals are recognised as having the right to conscientious objection with respect to any acts relating to the termination of pregnancy.
13.	Doctors and other health professionals who invoke conscientious objection must guarantee immediate intervention in the necessary acts, as well as the immediate care of the pregnant woman, by another health professional.
14.	Conscientious objection is expressed and communicated, through a written and signed document, to the clinical head of the health establishment where the objector provides service.

This excerpt sits under: Cláudio Ximenes > LIVRO II PARTE ESPECIAL > TÍTULO VIII

Article 2 Entry into force

This law enters into force on the day following its publication. Approved on 26 May 2009. The President of the National Parliament, Fernando La Sama de Araújo

Promulgated on 3 July 2009. Publish it. The President of the Republic, Dr. José Ramos Horta

PENAL CODE

Approved by Decree-Law 19/2009, on 8 April, on the basis of the authorisation given by Law 13/2008, on 13 October, and amended by Law 6/2009, on 15 July

INDEX

Decree-Law 19/2009, on 8 April (Approves the Penal Code) PENAL CODE
BOOK I - GENERAL PART
TITLE I - APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW SOLE CHAPTER - GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Article 1 - Principle of legality Article 2 - Prohibition of analogy
Article 3 - Application of criminal law in time Article 4 - Exceptional or temporary law Article 5 - Moment at which the fact is committed Article 6 - Place where the fact is committed Article 7 - Principle of territoriality
Article 8 - Fact committed in non-national territory Article 9 - Limitation on the application of Timorese law Article 10 - Subsidiary application
TITLE II - CRIME
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PRESUPPOSITIONS
Article 11 - Action and omission Article 12 - Criminal liability
Article 13 - Liability for acting in the name of another person
Article 14 - Subjective imputation Article 15 - Types of intent
Article 16 - Types of negligence
Article 17 - Error concerning circumstances Article 18 - Error concerning unlawfulness Article 19 - Aggravation by result
Article 20 - Non-imputability due to age
Article 21 - Non-imputability due to psychic anomaly CHAPTER II - FORMS OF CRIME
Article 22 - Preparatory act Article 23 - Attempt
Article 24 - Punishability of attempt Article 25 - Non-punishable attempt Article 26 - Voluntary desistance Article 27 - In participation

Article 28 - Subsequent repentance CHAPTER III - AGENTS OF CRIME
Article 29 - Agent Article 30 - Authorship Article 31 - Instigation
Article 32 - Complicity
Article 33 - Fault in participation Article 34 - Unlawfulness in participation
CHAPTER IV - CONCURRENCE AND CONTINUING CRIME
Article 35 - Crime in concurrence Article 36 - Punishment in concurrence Article 37 - Sanction in concurrence
Article 38 - Suspended sentence in legal cumulation Article 39 - Concurrence with supervening knowledge Article 40 - Crime with other infraction
Article 41 - Continuing crime
Article 42 - Multiple norms in concurrence CHAPTER V - GROUNDS FOR EXCLUSION
SECTION I - GROUNDS THAT EXCLUDE UNLAWFULNESS
Article 43 - Exclusion of unlawfulness Article 44 - Legitimate defence
Article 45 - State of justifying necessity Article 46 - Conflict of duties
Article 47 - Consent
SECTION II - GROUNDS THAT EXCLUDE FAULT
Article 48 - Excess in legitimate defence
Article 49 - State of excusing necessity Article 50 - Excusing undue obedience TITLE III - CIRCUMSTANCES SOLE CHAPTER - GENERAL RULES
Article 51 - Measure of penalty
Article 52 - General aggravating circumstances Article 53 - Recidivism
Article 54 - Criminal habituality Article 55 - General attenuating circumstances
Article 56 - Circumstances for extraordinary attenuation Article 57 - Degree of extraordinary attenuation
Article 58 - Concurrence of circumstances TITLE IV - LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 59 - Penalties and security measures
Article 60 - Limit of penalties and security measures Article 61 - Purpose of penalties and security measures Article 62 - Choice of penalty and security measure
Article 63 - Effect of penalties and security measures Article 64 - Execution of penalty or measure that removes liberty
Article 65 - Concurrence of penalties and measures that remove liberty
CHAPTER II - IMPRISONMENT PENALTY
Article 66 - Duration of imprisonment penalty
Article 67 - Substitution of imprisonment with fine Article 68 - Suspension of execution of imprisonment Article 69 - Suspension of imprisonment with duties Article 70 - Rules of conduct
Article 71 - Suspension of imprisonment with supervision Article 72 - Modification of suspension regime Article 73 - Revocation of suspension
Article 74 - Extinction of imprisonment penalty CHAPTER III - FINE PENALTY
Article 75 - Duration of fine penalty
Article 76 - Alternative imprisonment for fine penalty Article 77 - Reduction or exemption of fine penalty CHAPTER IV - COMMUNITY SERVICE PENALTY
Article 78 - Community service Article 79 - Requirements
Article 80 - Suspension, reduction or exemption of penalty Article 81 - Complementary legislation
CHAPTER V - ADMONITION PENALTY
Article 82 - Admonition
Article 83 - Execution of admonition penalty CHAPTER VI - ACCESSORY PENALTIES
Article 84 - General principle
Article 85 - Temporary suspension from exercising public function
Article 86 - Prohibition from exercising function Article 87 - Expulsion
Article 88 - Prohibition from driving
Article 89 - Cancellation of licence to possess weapons

CHAPTER VII - DETERMINATION OF PENALTY
Article 90 - General principle
Article 91 - Concrete determination of penalty Article 92 - Special case of fine penalty CHAPTER VIII - SECURITY MEASURES SECTION I - INTERNMENT MEASURES
Article 93 - Presuppositions Article 94 - Duration
Article 95 - Cessation of measure
Article 96 - Substitution of internment measure Article 97 - Conditional release
Article 98 - Revocation of conditional release
Article 99 - Suspension of execution of internment SECTION II - OTHER SECURITY MEASURES
Article 100 - Professional interdiction measure
Article 101 - Prohibition from driving and cancellation of licence to use and possess weapons
CHAPTER IX - OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME
Article 102 - Loss of object of crime Article 103 - Loss of advantage
Article 104 - Civil liability for crime Article 105 - Privilege of injured party's credit TITLE V - RIGHT TO COMPLAINT
Article 106 - Nature of crime
Article 107 - Holder of right to complaint Article 108 - Time limit to exercise right
Article 109 - Renunciation and desistance from complaint
TITLE VI - EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY
CHAPTER I - PRESCRIPTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
Article 110 - Prescription period Article 111 - Counting of period
Article 112 - Suspension of prescription
CHAPTER II - PRESCRIPTION OF PENALTIES AND SECURITY MEASURES
Article 113 - Period concerning prescription of penalty Article 114 - Prescription of accessory penalty
Article 115 - Period for prescription of security measure Article 116 - Suspension of prescription

CHAPTER III - IMPRESCRIPTIBILITY
Article 117 - Crime of genocide, against peace and humanity and concerning war
CHAPTER IV - OTHER GROUNDS FOR EXTINCTION
Article 118 - Other grounds Article 119 - Death of agent Article 120 - Amnesty
Article 121 - Amnesty and crime in concurrence Article 122 - Pardon
BOOK II - SPECIAL PART
TITLE I - CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND HUMANITY CHAPTER I - CRIME OF GENOCIDE AND AGAINST HUMANITY
Article 123 - Genocide
Article 124 - Crime against humanity CHAPTER II - WAR CRIMES
Article 125 - War crime against persons
Article 126 - War crime with prohibited method Article 127 - War crime with prohibited means of combat
Article 128 - War crime against property protected by distinctive insignia or emblem
Article 129 - War crime against property Article 130 - War crime against other rights
CHAPTER III - AGAINST PEACE AND FREEDOM
Article 131 - Terrorist organisation Article 132 - Terrorism
Article 133 - Financing of terrorism Article 134 - Incitement to war
Article 135 - Racial or religious discrimination CHAPTER IV - COMMON PROVISIONS
Article 136 - Liability of military commander or other superior
Article 137 - Definitions
TITLE II - CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS CHAPTER I - AGAINST LIFE
Article 138 - Simple homicide Article 139 - Aggravated homicide Article 140 - Negligent homicide
Article 141 - Interruption of pregnancy Article 142 - Infanticide
Article 143 - Exposure or abandonment

Article 144 - Incitement or assistance to suicide CHAPTER II - AGAINST PHYSICAL INTEGRITY
Article 145 - Simple offence against physical integrity Article 146 - Serious offence against physical integrity Article 147 - Aggravation
Article 148 - Negligent offence against physical integrity Article 149 - Medical-surgical intervention and treatment Article 150 - Bodily offence with poisonous substance Article 151 - Reciprocal bodily offence
Article 152 - Participation in affray Article 153 - Ill-treatment of incapacitated person Article 154 - Ill-treatment of spouse Article 155 - Ill-treatment of minor Article 156 - Aggravation by result
CHAPTER III - CRIMES AGAINST PERSONAL FREEDOM
SECTION I - PERSONAL ASSAULT
Article 157 - Threat Article 158 - Coercion Article 159 - Serious coercion Article 160 - Kidnapping Article 161 - Abduction
Article 162 - Enslavement Article 163 - Trafficking in persons Article 164 - Aggravation
Article 165 - Trafficking in human organs Article 166 - Sale of persons
Article 167 - Torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment
Article 168 - Aggravation
Article 169 - Omission of denunciation
Article 170 – Freedom of assembly and demonstration SECTION II - SEXUAL ASSAULT
Article 171 - Sexual coercion Article 172 - Rape Article 173 - Aggravation
SECTION III - SEXUAL EXPLOITATION
Article 174 - Sexual exploitation of another person Article 175 - Child prostitution
Article 176 - Child pornography SECTION IV - SEXUAL ABUSE

Article 177 - Sexual abuse of minor Article 178 - Sexual act with adolescent
Article 179 - Sexual abuse of person unable to resist Article 180 - Sexual fraud
Article 181 - Sexual exhibitionism SECTION V - COMMON PROVISIONS
Article 182 - Aggravation
CHAPTER V - AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE
Article 183 - Disclosure
Article 184 - Violation of secrecy Article 185 - Violation of domicile
Article 186 - Entry into other place closed to the public
Article 187 - Violation of correspondence or telecommunication
TITLE III - CRIMES AGAINST LIFE IN DEMOCRACY
CHAPTER I - CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY
Article 188 - Criminal association Article 189 - Instigation to crime Article 190 - Participation in riot
Article 191 - Impediment to exercise of political right Article 192 - Trafficking in influence
Article 193 - Disobedience to order to disperse Article 194 - Abuse of public sign or uniform Article 195 - Usurpation of function
CHAPTER II - AGAINST STATE SECURITY
Article 196 - Treason against the homeland
Article 197 - Service or collaboration with enemy armed forces
Article 198 - Sabotage of national defence Article 199 - Campaign against peace effort Article 200 - Violation of State secrecy Article 201 - Diplomatic infidelity
Article 202 - Alteration of lawful State
Article 203 - Attack against maximum representative of sovereign organ
Article 204 - Coercion against constitutional organ Article 205 - Disturbance of functioning of constitutional organ

Article 206 - Outrage against national symbol
CHAPTER III - AGAINST LIFE IN SOCIETY SECTION I - CRIMES OF COMMON DANGER
Article 207 - Driving without licence
Article 208 - Driving under the influence of alcohol or psychotropic substance
Article 209 - Dangerous driving
Article 210 - Attack on transport safety Article 211 - Prohibited weapon
Article 212 - Inebriation and intoxication
Article 213 - Qualification to exercise certain activities Article 214 - Adulterated or deteriorated product SECTION II - CRIMES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT
Article 215 - Against the environment Article 216 - Aggravation
Article 217 - Against flora and fauna
Article 218 - Threatened or endangered species Article 219 - Illegal fishing
Article 220 - Means of illicit fishing Article 221 - Prohibited burning SECTION III - OTHER CRIMES
Article 222 - Impediment or disturbance of procession, ceremony or worship
Article 223 - Profanation of object or place of worship or veneration
Article 224 - Destruction, subtraction, concealment or profanation of corpse
Article 225 - Non-fulfilment of maintenance obligation Article 226 - Subtraction of minor
Article 227 - Omission of assistance Article 228 - Refusal of medical assistance
CHAPTER IV - ELECTORAL CRIMES
Article 229 - Fraud in census Article 230 - Obstruction of candidacy Article 231 - Ineligible candidate Article 232 - Defect in electoral register Article 233 - Illicit electoral propaganda
Article 234 - Obstruction of freedom to vote Article 235 - Disturbance of electoral act
Article 236 - Obstruction of supervision of electoral act Article 237 - Fraud in voting

Article 238 - Fraud in scrutiny Article 239 - Refusal of electoral office
Article 240 - Violation of secrecy in scrutiny Article 241 - Duty of neutrality or impartiality Article 242 - Aggravation
CHAPTER V - AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Article 243 - Obstruction of public authority Article 244 - Disobedience
Article 245 - Removal of prisoner Article 246 - Escape
Article 247 - Official's assistance to escape Article 248 - Prisoner's riot
Article 249 - Embezzlement or destruction of object in public power's hands
Article 250 - Breaking of mark, seal or edict TITLE IV - CRIMES AGAINST PATRIMONY CHAPTER I - AGAINST PROPERTY
Article 251 - Simple theft Article 252 - Aggravated theft Article 253 - Robbery
Article 254 - Violence following subtraction Article 255 - Theft of vehicle for use Article 256 - Abuse of trust
Article 257 - Aggravated abuse of trust Article 258 - Simple damage
Article 259 - Aggravated damage Article 260 - Damage with violence
Article 261 - Usurpation of immovable property Article 262 - Alteration of boundary mark Article 263 - Arson
Article 264 - Active repentance Article 265 - Definition
CHAPTER II - AGAINST PATRIMONY IN GENERAL
Article 266 - Simple fraud Article 267 - Aggravated fraud Article 268 - Computer fraud
Article 269 - Aggravated computer fraud Article 270 - Extortion
Article 271 - Simple receiving Article 272 - Aggravated receiving Article 273 - Assistance to criminal

Article 274 - Harmful administration Article 275 - Negligent administration
Article 276 - Intentional bankruptcy or insolvency Article 277 - Negligent bankruptcy or insolvency TITLE V - CRIMES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
Article 278 - Falsehood in testimony or declaration Article 279 - Falsehood in witness testimony, expert opinion, interpretation or translation
Article 280 - Equation to desistance Article 281 - Bribery
Article 282 - Denial of justice
Article 283 - Coercion of magistrate
Article 284 - Obstruction of jurisdictional activity Article 285 - Slanderous denunciation
Article 286 - Non-participation
Article 287 - Prevarication of magistrate or official Article 288 - Prevarication of lawyer or public defender
Article 289 - Simulation of crime Article 290 - Personal favouritism
Article 291 - Violation of secrecy of justice
TITLE VI - CRIMES IN THE EXERCISE OF PUBLIC FUNCTION
Article 292 - Passive corruption for illicit act Article 293 - Passive corruption for licit act Article 294 - Active corruption
Article 295 - Embezzlement
Article 296 - Embezzlement by use Article 297 - Abuse of power
Article 298 - Abuse with public force Article 299 - Economic participation Article 300 - Refusal to cooperate Article 301 - Aggravation
Article 302 - Concept of official TITLE VII - CRIMES OF FALSIFICATION
CHAPTER I - FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENT
Article 303 - Falsification of document or technical notation
Article 304 - Aggravated falsification
Article 305 - Falsification of public document

Article 306 - Use of another's identification document CHAPTER II - FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY
Article 307 - Counterfeiting of currency Article 308 - Passing of false currency
Article 309 - Counterfeiting of sealed or stamped value Article 310 - Counterfeiting of seal, die, mark or stamp Article 311 - Weight and measure
Article 312 - Seizure and loss
TITLE VIII - CRIMES AGAINST THE ECONOMY
Article 313 - Money laundering Article 314 - Tax fraud
Article 315 - Illicit importation and exportation of goods or merchandise
Article 316 - Smuggling Article 317 - Embezzlement Article 318 - Exemption from penalty
Article 319 - Irregular administration of public funds Article 320 - Disobedience to requisition of goods Article 321 - Destruction of property relevant to the economy Article 322 - Exploitation of illicit gambling
Article 323 - Disturbance of public act

Law 13/2008, on 13 October (Legislative authorisation in criminal matters)

Law 6/2009, on 15 July (Amends article 41 of the Penal Code)

Decree-Law 19/2009, on 8 April (Approves the Penal Code)

To establish a legal system, those politically responsible included the elaboration and approval of Timor-Leste's Penal Code in their legislative priorities, in order to guarantee the fundamental rights and freedoms that the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste enshrines. This legal instrument comes from work that a commission, with Timorese and international technicians, developed following governmental guidance and following the limits and content that are established in the law concerning legislative authorisation that the National Parliament has already approved. The normative solution that is adopted here respects the social and cultural reality of the Timorese community and also accepts suggestions that came from national and international organisations, contributions that came from various judicial operators who work in Timor-Leste, and also teachings that are drawn from comparative law. We must look at this Code that is now approved, not as a final point, but as a fundamental stage to establish the Timorese legal order, open to future improvements that, in the future, the evolution of international law, judicial practice and the teaching of law advise. Thus,

Following the legislative authorisation received from Law 13/2009, on 13 October, its article 1, no. 2, and following article 96 of the Constitution, the Government decrees, to have the force of law:

Article 1
Approval of the Penal Code

The Penal Code, which is attached and forms part of this Decree-Law, is now approved. Article 2 Repealing norm

1. The Indonesian Penal Code that came into being in the legal order under article 1 of Law 10/2003 is repealed. 2. Legal provisions that are written in scattered legislation are repealed when
a) They foresee and punish facts criminalised in the Penal Code that is now approved; b) They enshrine solutions contrary to solutions adopted in the general part of this Penal Code. Article 3 Entry into force

This diploma and this Penal Code begin to be in force on the day following their publication. Approved in the Council of Ministers on 18 March 2009 Prime Minister
(Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão)

Minister of Justice (Lúcia M. B. F. Lobato)

Promulgated on 30/03/2009 Publish it. President of the Republic (José Ramos Horta)

Annex

PENAL CODE

I. The restoration of the independence of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and the approval of its Constitution, in 2002, created the need for this country to adopt its own, modern legal order, which enshrines the fundamental rights that are included in constitutional precepts and reflects the country's social reality. We left the Indonesian Penal Code in force because a State must have its own criminal law, but that code is not adequate to the country's new reality and, often, presents legal solutions contrary to constitutional principles that have now come into being. Because the Timorese people have their own specificity and identity, their Penal Code must follow their own philosophy together with the principles and values that exist in modern societies, in order to respond to the demands that this country faces. A commission, with Timorese and international technicians, that Constitutional Government I established, elaborated a preliminary draft for a Penal Code; but, although the Law for Legislative Authorisation concerning criminal law was already approved, that preliminary draft did not receive promulgation until the legislature ended. When 2008 began, with another executive, a new bill for legislative authorisation to approve the Penal Code entered the National Parliament, work to revise this preliminary draft of the Penal Code proceeded again, and this diploma was amended and entered public discussion. Having received legislative authorisation, the Council of Ministers of Constitutional Government IV was able to approve this Penal Code. II. Book I of the Penal Code constitutes its general part, which gathers the criminal principles that are enshrined in the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and in the conventions, treaties and international agreements that the Timorese legal order accepts. Because this code is based on the rule of law and democracy, its general part enshrines principles concerning human dignity, respect for each citizen's freedom and the State's responsibility to intervene only in situations where there is unsustainable injury to legal interests fundamental to life in society, with its right to punish the agent and its social obligation to reintegrate that agent into society. In a State under the rule of law there must also exist the principle of legality, the principle of fault and the principle of humanity. The enshrinement of the principle of legality as one of the fundamental principles of Criminal Law, provided for in article 31 of the Constitution, determines that an action or omission can be considered as a crime and, as a crime, give rise to punishment only in situations that the law foresees. To follow this principle, analogy cannot be applied to qualify any conduct as a crime and the tribunal cannot use analogical interpretation to interpret norms of the Penal Code to qualify any fact as a crime, define a state of dangerousness or determine a penalty or security measure. The principle of non-retroactivity in criminal law, which prevents retroactive application of criminal law, except when it favours the accused, is also a corollary of the principle of legality. The principle of humanity, enshrined in articles 29 and 32 of the Constitution, shows the way not to apply the death penalty and also penalties or security measures with a perpetual character or with unlimited or indefinite duration. The principle of necessity, the principle of proportionality and the principle of adequacy also show the way for the normative options that this Code follows and serve as the basis to apply each penalty and security measure, and each penalty and security measure shall be applied to protect legal interests essential to life in society and reinsert the agent into society. The principle of fault, as a presupposition to apply penalty, determines that there can be no penalty without fault (nulla poena sine culpa), and becomes a limitation on the State's power, because, thus, the measure of penalty cannot be heavier than the measure of fault. The principle of fault also shows the way for the regime of error concerning unlawfulness, the way to enshrine non-imputability due to age and due to psychic anomaly, which removes the agent's criminal liability because they lack fault. Concerning the legal consequences of punishable fact, we see that penalty must be executed with a pedagogical and resocialising perspective, and this code has many non-institutional means to apply sanctioning measures. When there is an alternative to apply a penalty privative or non-privative of liberty, the tribunal must give reasoned preference to the penalty that does not remove liberty when that penalty adequately and sufficiently achieves the purpose of punishment and satisfies the need to make reprobation and prevention of crime (article 62).

Thus, preference shall be given to applying alternative penalties, especially in situations concerning petty and medium criminality, with strong relevance for fine penalty and community service penalty, which are enshrined as the best means to ensure the delinquent's social reinsertion. Fine penalty shall be fixed by day, so that, thus, it can be adapted to the agent's fault and economic condition, with variation in the value that is fixed for each day of fine according to the convict's economic and financial situation and their personal charges. To differentiate fine penalty as principal penalty from fine that substitutes imprisonment penalty, specific rules are also established here to regulate the conversion of fine to imprisonment in situations where the agent does not pay the fine. Concerning community service, as a non-institutional sanctioning measure, this Code wants only to clarify and systematise some fundamental aspects in its regime and leave its development and application in each case to autonomous law. Imprisonment penalty must be applied only when it is seen that other penalties are not adequate to achieve the objectives of prevention and reprobation. The minimum duration of imprisonment penalty is established here at 30 days and its maximum duration at 25 years, with the possibility to raise that maximum limit to 30 years in cases that the law specially foresees. As a consequence that comes from the delinquent's social reinsertion, suspension of execution of imprisonment penalty can be applied in cases where the measure of concrete penalty does not exceed 3 years and the need to make prevention in the future does not close the way to that suspension. Suspension of execution of imprisonment penalty can also be applied with the condition that the convict fulfil obligations or rules of certain conduct or with the obligation to enter service for reinsertion supervision. This Code establishes for those non-imputable due to psychic anomaly security measures, with limited temporal duration, namely, internment measure, when their dangerousness justifies it. Measures with perpetual character cannot be applied, and that measure must stop when the dangerousness that justifies that application has ended, and, for foreigners, expulsion from the country can be applied in place of that security measure. In defence of the values and legal interests that are fundamental to living in society, this Code distinguishes crimes that have a public nature, which the State must protect directly, from those that, because they are not so serious, the person who has the right to present a complaint must first exercise that right, as the criminal procedural law establishes. Thus crimes shall be considered as semi-public that, in the special part of the Penal Code, according to the description in their legal types, create the obligation to exercise complaint. Concerning the extinction of criminal liability and the effects of that extinction, the general part of this Code fixes time limits for the prescription of criminal proceedings, penalties, security measures and accessory penalties and also defines situations that cause suspension of that time limit. But it establishes imprescriptibility for criminal proceedings and penalty concerning war crimes, crimes against peace and crimes against humanity and freedom. Finally, it also regulates other situations that cause extinction of criminal liability, such as the agent's death, amnesty and pardon. III. We know that the special parts of Penal Codes are what create the greatest impact on public opinion, because it is in that part that the goods, interests and values that in each society and in each historical moment can receive the protection of criminal law and, because of that, can enter the category of criminal-legal interests are chosen. In this Penal Code of Timor-Leste the legislator included in the normative solution that they adopted options that the Constitution has already enshrined as the sentiment of Timorese society. The systematisation that is adopted in this part comes from this country's history and reflects the interests and values that established this young nation. That is why title I of this book protects, respectively, peace, humanity and freedom as primordial values of democratic societies, with the respect that must be given as values that the fundamental law holds in its hierarchy and also following international obligations that this Country has already assumed when it subscribed to and ratified the Statute of the International Criminal Court. Title II enshrines crimes against persons and protects especially legal interests that are eminently personal, such as physical integrity, personal freedom, sexual freedom and protection of private life. Article 145 of this Code enshrines voluntary interruption of pregnancy as a crime. In this chapter and concerning crimes against physical integrity, there is special relevance for the crimes of ill-treatment of minor and ill-treatment of spouse, fundamental typification to affirm the rule of law and protect human rights in Timorese society. Also emphasised here is the criminalisation of enslavement and trafficking in persons, which comes from the humanist conception that showed the way for the elaboration of this code. Title III gathers crimes against life in democracy, with emphasis on crimes against public tranquillity, State security and life in society, and also electoral crimes and against public authority. In this title and in crimes against life in society there is special emphasis on the provision for specific typical crimes against the environment with punishment for conduct that causes unsustainable harm to fauna, flora and natural habitat; this shows that society's concern about the preservation of natural resources and protection of the environment has now grown. Title IV of this book enshrines protection of patrimony. Here the normative system gathers the legal types of crimes that are common in many criminal legislations, such as theft, robbery, abuse of trust, damage. These types are defined as simple or aggravated, as circumstances such as the value and nature of the appropriated thing, the means and form of action, violence, or other circumstances that can increase the agent's fault or unlawfulness. Titles V and VI gather crimes against the administration of justice and those that the agent commits when already holding public function; here punishment is enshrined for falsehood in procedural acts, various obstructions of jurisdictional activity, refusal to carry out that activity as denial of justice, and also shows, together with others, acts that constitute bribery and prevarication of magistrate, official, lawyer or public defender. It also criminalises activity concerning personal favouritism in justice and classic incriminations such as slanderous denunciation, simulation of crime and omission of criminal participation. Concerning the exercise of public function, in general, conduct of officials that constitutes crimes of corruption, embezzlement, abuse of power or abuse of public force, or economic participation in business by persons who exercise public office or function is also criminalised. In this matter the Penal Code broadens the concept of public official to include in that concept other analogous situations such as officials of international organisations, foreign public officials who exercise activity in Timor-Leste or persons who receive appointment to perform, alone or with others, activity that falls within the scope of public administrative or jurisdictional function. In title VII crimes of falsifying documents, technical notation, currency and sealed or stamped value, weight and measure, mark, die and stamp are typified, with various punishments, according to the nature, probative or fiduciary value and public use or destination of each falsified object, with provision concerning seizure and loss of objects that are to be used to commit these crimes. Finally, in title VIII crimes against the economy are typified, with punishment for money laundering, as the doctrine that has recently emerged concerning criminalisation of anti-economic activity, tax fraud and smuggling and embezzlement in the customs or border area. criminal punishment is maintained for disobedience to requisition that the Government makes for goods, and also conduct that can disturb, harm or impede any public act, such as the holding of public competition or judicial auction. It is also emphasised that, within this diploma, a way is sought to achieve balance for each abstract criminal framework, according to the type and gravity of each crime, hierarchy in the legal interests that each norm protects and the maximum limit enshrined for imprisonment penalty.In the legislative options that arise within this Penal Code, different treatment is given to the more serious criminality, to those for which, as a general rule, the legal type of crime provides only for imprisonment. In minor and medium criminality, as a general rule, the provision of the norm gives the court the alternative to, according to each case, use a custodial sentence or a fine, with the criminal policy orientation to recognize the fine as an autonomous penalty, not as a complementary penalty to the principal penalty. With the approval of this Code, the Timorese State has one more legal instrument, modern and adequate, to offer a better quality public-penal service and respect for the fundamental rights of citizens, magistrates, public defenders, lawyers, justice officials and also other judicial actors, who use these diplomas in their daily work, receive the obligation to undertake continuous training, the national legal order and the rule-of-law and democratic State will be strengthened further. BOOK I GENERAL PART TITLE I
APPLICATION OF PENAL LAW

SOLE CHAPTER GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 1 Principle of legality

1. An act or omission cannot be considered a crime before the law that already existed when that act or omission occurred defines that act or omission as a crime and establishes the respective penalty. 2. Security measures may only be applied to states of dangerousness whose presuppositions have already been defined by prior law. Article 2 Prohibition of analogy

Analogy may not be used to qualify an act or omission as a crime, define a state of dangerousness or determine their legal consequences. Article 3
Application of penal law in time

1. A person may not be punished for a fact that the law defines as a crime at the moment when he or she committed that fact when a subsequent law states that that fact is no longer a crime. 2. In that case, if there is already a conviction decision, even if final, the execution and penal effects of that conviction must cease. 3. The law that existed when the crime occurred applies to prior conduct when, in the concrete case, that law favours the agent and, if there is already a decision with res judicata, it is still possible to derive some advantage from that law. Article 4
Exceptional or temporary law

Exceptional or temporary law continues to apply to facts committed during the time when that law existed even though the time relating to its duration has already passed or the circumstances that determined that law have already ended. Article 5
Moment at which the fact is committed

It must be considered that the agent committed the crime at the moment when the act or omission occurred, regardless of the moment at which the typical result of that act or omission appears. Article 6

Place where the fact is committed
It must be considered that the agent committed the fact in the place where the act or omission occurred, in whole or in part only, and also in the place where the typical result of that fact appears or should properly appear. Article 7 Principle of territoriality

Save for other provisions in international treaties or conventions and regardless of the agent's nationality, Timorese penal law applies to facts committed in the territory of Timor-Leste and inside ships or aircraft with Timorese registration or flag. Article 8
Facts committed in non-national territory

Save for other provisions in international treaties or conventions, Timorese penal law applies to facts committed in places that are not Timorese territory in the following situations:
a) When that fact constitutes a crime provided for in articles 196 to 206, 229 to 242 and 307 to 313; b) When that fact constitutes a crime provided for in articles 123 to 135, 165 to 169 and 175 to 178, provided the agent is found in Timor-Leste and he or she cannot be extradited or there is a decision stating that he or she cannot be surrendered; c) When the agent committed that fact against a Timorese, provided that agent habitually resides in Timor-Leste and he or she is found in Timor-Leste; d) When a Timorese committed that fact or that fact was committed by a foreigner against a Timorese, provided the agent can be found in Timor-Leste, the law in the place where that fact occurred punishes that fact and that fact constitutes a crime that admits

extradition and in that case there cannot be authorization for that extradition; e) When that fact constitutes a crime for which the Timorese State, according to an international convention or treaty, has an obligation to try. Article 9
Limitations on the application of Timorese law

1. Timorese penal law may only be applied to facts committed in non-national territory when the agent has not yet received a final judgment in the place where he or she committed that fact or, if he or she has already received one, he or she has appealed and has not served the sanction, in whole or in part only. 2. Nevertheless, as the previous number, Timorese penal law will still apply, the fact will still be tried according to the law of the country in which the agent committed the fact, when that law favours the agent in that case. 3. In the case provided for in the previous number, the applicable sanction will be converted to its correspondent in the Timorese penal system or, if there is no correspondence, to the one that Timorese penal law provides for that fact. 4. When the agent must receive judgment in Timor-Leste and he or she has already received judgment in the place where he or she committed the fact, the penalty that he or she has already served abroad must also be taken into account. 5. The regime provided for in no. 2 does not apply to the crimes identified in the previous article, paragraphs a) and b). Article 10 Subsidiary application

Save for other provisions, the norms of this Code also apply to facts that special law punishes. TITLE II CRIME

CHAPTER I GENERAL PRESUPPOSITIONS
Article 11

Act and omission
1. When a result also enters into the legal type of a crime, the criminal fact embraces the adequate act to produce that result and also the omission of the adequate act to avoid that result, save when the law has another intention. 2. The omission that produces some result will only be punished when the omitter himself or herself has a legal obligation to avoid that result. 3. In the case written in the previous number, that penalty may receive extraordinary mitigation. Article 12 Criminal responsibility

1. Criminal responsibility for the infractions written in this Code falls only on singular persons and cannot be transmitted to other persons. 2. Collective persons may only receive criminal responsibility for infractions provided for in this Code or in special law when and under the conditions that the law expressly consecrates. Article 13
Responsibility for acting in another's name

A person who acts as a holder in the organ of a collective person or de facto association or as another person's representative will be punished, even though he or she does not have and the person he or she represents does have the condition, quality or relationship that is provided for in the type of crime. Article 14 Subjective imputation

Only facts that the agent committed with intent or, in cases that the law specially provides for, with negligence may give rise to punishment.

Article 15 Types of intent

1. A person acts with intent when, knowing beforehand that a fact fulfills the type of a crime, he or she acts with the intention to realize that fact. 2. A person also acts with intent when he or she knows clearly that his or her conduct will produce as a necessary consequence that fact that fulfills the type of a crime. 3. When the agent knows that his or her conduct may produce that fact that fulfills the type of a crime, there is intent when the agent still acts and agrees with that conduct. Article 16 Types of negligence

1. A person acts with negligence when, due to not having the care that, according to the circumstances, he or she must use and he or she can use:
a) He or she knows that his or her conduct may produce that fact that fulfills the type of a crime but acts even though he or she does not agree with that conduct; or
b) He or she does not know that his or her conduct may realize that fact. 2. The types of negligence referred to in the previous number become gross negligence when some circumstances show that the agent acted with recklessness or temerity, due to not following the basic care that he or she must follow in that case. Article 17
Error regarding circumstances

1. Error regarding an element of fact or element of law that enters into the legal type of a crime and also error regarding the prohibition that, reasonably, the agent must

know in order to be able to take consciousness regarding unlawfulness excludes intent. 2. The regime provided for in the previous number also includes error regarding the existence of presuppositions to exclude unlawfulness or presuppositions to exclude guilt. 3. The provisions of the previous numbers do not prevent the punishability of negligent conduct when the law provides for it and its presuppositions also exist.

Article 18
Error regarding unlawfulness

1. Ignorance of the law does not exclude the unlawfulness of conduct that violates that law. 2. Error regarding the unlawfulness of the fact, when unavoidable, excludes guilt. 3. When error regarding unlawfulness is avoidable, the penalty may receive extraordinary mitigation. Article 19 Aggravation due to result

When the penalty applicable to a fact must be aggravated according to the result that that fact produces, that aggravation exists only when that result can be imputed to the agent, at least, due to his or her negligence. Article 20 Unimputability due to age

1. Persons who are not yet 16 years old have penal unimputability. 2. The provisions of this diploma will also apply to young people who are already 16 years old but are not yet 21 years old in situations that autonomous legislation does not regulate, regarding the application and execution of criminal sanctions. Article 21 Unimputability due to psychic anomaly

1. A person will be considered unimputable when, due to psychic anomaly, at the moment when he or she committed the fact he or she could not evaluate the unlawfulness of that fact or make a decision according to that evaluation. 2. A person may receive a declaration as unimputable when, due to psychic anomaly, at the moment when he or she committed the fact, his or her capacity to evaluate the unlawfulness of that fact or to make a decision according to that evaluation was sensibly diminished. 3. The agent's proven incapacity to receive influence from the penalty may constitute an indication of the situation provided for in the previous number. 4. The agent does not lose imputability when he or she himself or herself provoked the psychic anomaly in order to commit that fact. CHAPTER II FORMS OF CRIME

Article 22 Preparatory act

Preparatory acts may not receive punishment, save for other legal provisions. Article 23 Attempt

Attempt exists when the agent begins execution of the crime that he or she has already made the decision to do, and does, all or some only, of the acts that can objectively produce its result and that result does not appear due only to circumstances that have no relation to the agent's will. Article 24 Punishability of attempt

1. In intentional crimes that may give rise to imprisonment with a maximum limit higher than 3 years and in cases that the law determines, attempt may give rise to punishment. 2. Save for other provisions, attempt gives rise to the penalty that will be applied to the consummated crime, with extraordinary mitigation. Article 25 Non-punishable attempt

Attempt may not receive punishment when it can be seen clearly that the means that the agent used has no aptitude or the object that is essential for the consummation of the crime does not exist. Article 26 Voluntary desistance

The agent's attempt may not be punished when he or she voluntarily desists from continuing the execution of the crime, prevents the crime from being consummated or its result from appearing or makes every effort to prevent the consummation or that result. Article 27
In participation

When there is participation, the agent's attempt does not give rise to punishment when he or she voluntarily prevents the crime from being consummated or the result of that crime from appearing, or makes every effort to prevent the consummation or that result, even though the other participants still execute or already consummate that fact. Article 28 Subsequent repentance

In crimes in which there is no violence or serious threat against persons, the penalty will receive extraordinary mitigation or, according to the circumstances, the agent will receive exemption from the penalty, when the damage has already been repaired, the thing has already been restituted or the situation

has already been legalized before there is participation or the competent authority receives a denunciation or complaint. CHAPTER III AGENTS OF CRIME

Article 29 Agent

Participation in committing a crime may be as authorship, instigation or complicity and many persons may participate together in one fact only

Article 30 Authorship

1. A person who executes the fact himself or herself or uses another person to execute that fact will be considered an author. 2. A person who, according to a tacit or express agreement, takes direct part in the execution or acts together with another person, putting together his or her effort with theirs, to commit one crime only will be considered a co-author

Article 31 Instigation

A person who convinces, directly and intentionally, another person to commit a crime will be punished as an author, provided that crime is already executed or its execution has already begun. Article 32 Complicity

1. A person who, intentionally, gives material or moral help to another person to commit some crime will be punished as an accomplice. 2. The penalty that is applied to the type of unlawful act will be applied to the accomplice, with extraordinary mitigation. Article 33

Guilt in participation
Each participant will be punished according to his or her guilt, regardless of the punishment of the other participants or the extent to which the other participants have guilt. Article 34 Unlawfulness in participation

1. When the unlawfulness of the fact or the degree of that unlawfulness depends on some special quality or relationship of the agent, it is enough that a co-participant has that quality or relationship in order to give rise to applying the respective penalty to all co-participants, save when the incriminating norm has another intention. 2. When, due to the rule that the previous number provides for, a more serious penalty must be applied to some co-participant, considering the circumstances that characterize that case, another penalty may be put in the place of that penalty which, if that rule did not exist, would be applied to him or her. CHAPTER IV CONCURRENCE AND CONTINUED CRIME

Article 35 Crimes in concurrence

1. To know how many crimes the agent committed, it is necessary to count how many types of crime he or she has already committed or how many times his or her conduct fulfills the type of one crime only. 2. For the provisions of the following article, the situation in which the agent, having committed one crime, commits another crime again before receiving a conviction with a final decision in judgment will be considered as concurrence. Article 36 Punishment in concurrence

1. When several crimes enter into concurrence, only one penalty must be applied, whose minimum limit is the highest concrete penalty among all the concrete penalties applied to each crime and whose maximum limit is the material sum of all the partial penalties
2. In concurrence, the maximum limit of the framework may not exceed 600 days for the fine penalty or 30 years for the imprisonment penalty, even though in situations where the material sum of the partial penalties exceeds that legal limit. 3. To determine the single penalty, the court must consider, together, the facts and the agent's personality. Article 37 Sanctions in concurrence

1. When some applied penalties are fines and some are imprisonment, the nature of each penalty will still remain as such. 2. Accessory penalties and security measures, even though only one of the applicable laws or only one of the previous decisions provides for them, will still be maintained. Article 38
Suspended penalty in legal cumulation

1. Imprisonment with suspended execution may only enter into cumulation with other imprisonment penalties when:
a) All those penalties are imprisonment with suspended execution and that cumulation does not prevent the execution of the single penalty from still being suspended; b) If that cumulation is done with effective imprisonment, there are circumstances that give rise to having already revoked the suspension of the execution of that imprisonment, even though that cumulation does not exist; c) The periods for suspension of the suspended penalties to be cumulated are not the same, or, if those periods are the same, the compliance of each enters into different phases, and the court establishes only one period for suspension, according to the necessity of prevention and the circumstances that characterize that case

Article 39
Concurrence with supervening knowledge

When a decision has already obtained res judicata but, before that penalty receives compliance, prescription or extinction, there is knowledge that the agent enters into some situation that the previous articles describe, the rules that are written in them will be applied. Article 40
Crime with other infractions

When one fact constitutes a crime and a contra-ordenação at the same time, the agent will be punished for the crime, but the accessory sanction provided for the other infractions will also be applied. Article 41 Continued crime

1. A person who does several times the same type of crime or does different types of crime that fundamentally protect only one legal good, with essentially homogeneous conduct and in only one external situation that considerably diminishes his or her guilt, commits only one continued crime,
save for crimes that protect eminently personal goods. 2. The penalty that will be applied to the conduct that is more serious than the others that enter into that continuation will be applied to the continued crime. Article 42
Several norms in concurrence

For facts that several legal provisions qualify, in whole or in part only, as a crime and do not enter into the situations that the previous articles describe, only one incriminating norm will be applied according to the following rules:
a) The special norm will be applied with prejudice to the general norm;

b) Preference will be given to the subsidiary norm over the principal norm; c) The norm that is broader and more complex consumes the norm that provides for facts subsumable in its provision. CHAPTER V CAUSES OF EXCLUSION

SECTION I
CAUSES THAT EXCLUDE UNLAWFULNESS

Article 43 Exclusion of unlawfulness

1. A fact may not give rise to punishment as a crime when the legal order considered as a totality has removed its unlawfulness. 2. Namely, the fact that a person committed when exercising his or her right, in legitimate defense, in a state of justifying necessity or with consent regarding a freely available legal interest is not unlawful. Article 44 Legitimate defense

The agent's action necessary to prevent an illegitimate, imminent or already executing but not yet finished aggression against the legal interests that the legal order protects of the agent or another person will be considered as legitimate defense. Article 45
State of justifying necessity

The fact that the agent committed as a means to prevent a current danger that threatens the legally protected interests of that agent or another person is not unlawful, when the following requirements exist:

a) The interest to be protected has sensible superiority when it is compared with the sacrificed interest; and
b) It is reasonable to sacrifice the injured party's interest when one sees the nature or value of the interest that is facing danger beforehand. Article 46 Conflict of duties

1. The agent's conduct is not unlawful when, when there is a conflict to comply with several legal duties or legitimate orders of authority, he or she complies with the duty or order with a value equal to or greater than the duty or order that he or she sacrifices. 2. The duty of hierarchical obedience ends when it gives rise to a crime. Article 47 Consent

1. Together with the cases that the law specially provides for, consent excludes the unlawfulness of the fact when it regards a freely available legal interest and that fact does not offend good customs. 2. Consent may be shown by any means that expresses the serious, free and enlightened will of the holder of the legally protected interest, and may be revoked according to that holder's wish until the execution of the fact. 3. Consent has efficacy only when it comes from a person who is older than 16 years and has the necessary discernment to assess the meaning and scope of that consent at the moment when he or she gives that consent. 4. When the agent does not know that that consent exists, he or she will be punished with the penalty that applies to attempt.

5. Presumed consent will be equated to effective consent, which exists when the situation in which the agent acts gives rise to thinking reasonably that, if the holder of the legally protected interest knew the circumstances in which the agent committed that fact, he or she would already give consent effectively to that fact. SECTION II
CAUSES THAT EXCLUDE GUILT

Article 48
Excess in legitimate defense

1. Means that, due to their species and degree in their utilization, become excessive for the agent's action to defend himself or herself may give rise to extraordinary mitigation in the penalty that will be applied to the crime. 2. Excess in the means used in legitimate defense due to non-censurable perturbation, fear or panic excludes the agent's guilt. Article 49
State of exculpating necessity

1. A person who committed an unlawful fact adequate to prevent a current danger that threatens the life, physical integrity, honor or liberty of the agent or another person acts without guilt, when there is no other way to remove that danger and, according to the circumstances that characterize that case, it is not reasonable to request other conduct from the agent. 2. When the danger that threatens legal interests that the previous article does not fear and the other presuppositions that are written in it all appear, the penalty may receive extraordinary mitigation or, exceptionally, the agent may receive exemption from the penalty. Article 50 Exculpating undue obedience

An official who complies with an order acts without guilt when he or she does not know that that order makes him or her commit some crime and the circumstances that he or she sees beforehand do not show clearly that his or her conduct is a crime. TITLE III CIRCUMSTANCES

SOLE CHAPTER GENERAL RULES

Article 51 Measure of penalty

1. To determine the measure of the penalty, according to the limits that the law defines, one must see the agent's guilt and the necessity to do prevention. 2. To determine the concrete penalty, the court sees all the circumstances that do not enter into the type of crime and favour or disfavour the agent. 3. In the sentence, the grounds for the measure of the penalty will be expressly referred to. Article 52 General aggravating circumstances

1. Prior, contemporaneous or subsequent circumstances that do not enter into the legal type and show that the unlawfulness of the fact, the agent's conduct or the agent's guilt is stronger and increase the necessity of the penalty will be considered as general circumstances that aggravate the agent's responsibility. 2. The following may constitute general aggravating circumstances, together with others:
a) The agent executes the crime with disloyalty, which exists when the agent uses treason, ambush, waiting, disguise; b) The agent commits the crime against a person by means, mode or form that, directly or indirectly,

guarantees that he or she will not face danger that may come from the defense that the victim may present; c) The agent does the crime with fraud, deceit, excess of power or authority or takes advantage of circumstances regarding place, time to do that crime; d) The agent receives payment, value or some reward to commit that crime; e) The agent does that crime due to racist motivation or discriminatory sentiment regarding the victim's gender, ideology, religion, ethnicity, nationality, sex or sexual orientation, illness or physical diminishment; f) The agent has a special obligation not to commit that crime, to prevent that crime or to participate in giving punishment for that crime or uses the public authority that he or she has or says that he or she has to do that crime; g) In cases where there is no recidivism, the agent does one or more crimes with the same nature within the previous 3 years starting from the moment when he or she committed the crime for which he or she is facing the current judgment, independent of the moment when he or she received conviction; h) The agent does that crime on the occasion when he or she does another crime to more easily commit one or several crimes; i) The agent committed that crime with facility due to entering or attempting to enter the victim's residence, using poison, flood, fire, explosion, shipwreck or damage to a boat or weapon; j) The participation of two or more persons gives facility to commit that crime or take advantage of the consequences of that crime; k) The agent intentionally and inhumanly increases the victim's suffering, by producing suffering that is not necessary to consummate that crime or other acts regarding spoliation, cruelty or destruction that are not necessary to do the crime; l) The victim is the agent's spouse or person who lives with the agent as wife with husband at that time or before, or his or her ascendant, descendant, sibling, adoptee or adopter; m) The victim is a very vulnerable person due to his or her age, illness or physical or psychic deficiency, when that circumstance does not enter into the legal type. Article 53 Recidivism

1. A person who, having received a conviction with a final sentence in judgment to effective imprisonment higher than 6 months, he or she alone or together with another person, in any way, committed an intentional crime for which gives rise to effective imprisonment exceeding 6 months, will be punished as a recidivist, when, according to the circumstances that characterize that case, the agent must receive censure because the conviction or convictions that have already fallen on him or her were not enough to prevent him or her from doing another crime. 2. There is no recidivism when, from the moment when the agent committed one crime until the moment when he or she committed another crime and not counting for that period the time in which he or she is serving a procedural measure, penalty or security measure that removes liberty, 4 years have already passed. 3. When there is recidivism, the minimum limit of the applicable penalty will rise by one third, but its maximum limit does not change and that aggravation may not be higher than the highest penalty that has already been applied in the previous convictions. Article 54 Criminal habituality

1. When the agent committed an intentional crime that, concretely, gives rise to effective imprisonment higher than 1 year in the following circumstances cumulatively:
a) The agent has already committed before three or more intentional crimes that gave rise to effective imprisonment;

b) From each of those crimes until the following crime, three years have not yet passed; c) The evaluation of the facts and of the agent's personality together shows that the agent has a tendency to do crimes; the penalty regarding the crime committed will be applied with its minimum and maximum limits having risen by one third. 2. This provision prevails over the rule of punishment due to recidivism itself. Article 55 General mitigating circumstances

1. Circumstances that appear before the agent does the crime, appear together with the crime or have passed the crime and then appear and favour the agent will be considered general mitigating circumstances for the agent's responsibility. 2. The following circumstances may become general mitigating circumstances, together with others:
a) The causes of exclusion that are written in the previous chapter when the requirements provided for the causes of exclusion to produce some effect do not exist; b) The agent committed the fact because some fact produced violent emotion, obsession or passionate state with a nature similar to these or reacts immediately to provocation; c) The agent presents himself or herself to the authority before he or she knows that there is a criminal proceeding against him or her; d) The agent confesses the crime that he or she did himself or herself or gives a decisive contribution to knowing the circumstances that characterize that criminal action; e) There are acts that show that the agent already repents; f) The agent's intent or negligence is diminished; g) The victim and agent are already reconciled. Article 56
Circumstances of extraordinary mitigation

1. Together with the cases that the law expressly provides for, the penalty provided for in the legal type will be extraordinarily mitigated when there are circumstances that appear before the agent does the crime, appear together with the crime or have passed the crime and then appear and, together or alone only, markedly diminish the unlawfulness of the conduct, the agent's guilt or the necessity of the penalty. 2. For the effects of the previous number, the following circumstances will be considered, together with others:
a) The agent acted due to serious threat or due to receiving influence from a person on whom he or she depends or whom he or she must obey; b) The agent acted due to honorable motive, because the victim himself or herself requested or tempted him or her or due to unjust provocation or offense that he or she did not deserve; c) The agent repairs the prejudice that he or she produced or reduces the effects of that prejudice, at any moment but before the judgment begins; d) The crime occurred a long time ago and the agent has had good conduct continuously; e) The agent has sensibly diminished imputability. Article 57
Degree of extraordinary mitigation

1. When there is extraordinary mitigation of the penalty, the following rules will be applied to the limits of the applicable penalty:
a) The maximum limit of the imprisonment penalty will fall by one third; b) The minimum limit of the imprisonment penalty will fall by one fifth when it is equal to or higher than 3 years and falls to the legal minimum when it is shorter than 3 years; c) The maximum limit of the fine penalty will fall by one third and its minimum limit will fall to the legal minimum; d) When the maximum limit of the imprisonment penalty is not higher than 3 years, a fine penalty may be put in the place of the imprisonment penalty, within the general limits. 2. The concrete penalty that results from extraordinary mitigation may receive substitution, together with suspension, according to the general rules.

Article 58 Concurrence of circumstances

1. When some circumstance that modifies the abstract framework of the legal type appears, the regime of extraordinary mitigation that is written in the previous article will be applied. 2. When two or more circumstances that modify the abstract framework of the legal type appear together, only one will be considered according to the provisions of the previous article, the others will be considered as general mitigating circumstances to determine the measure of the penalty. TITLE IV
LEGAL CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 59
Penalties and security measures
1.The death penalty or penalties or security measures that deprive liberty with a perpetual character or unlimited or indefinite duration shall not be applied. 2. For a single act, a penalty together with a security measure that deprives liberty shall not be applied. Article 60
Limits of penalties and security measures

1. The concrete penalty shall not be more severe than the severity of the guilt. 2. Security measures based on the dangerousness of the agent who committed the act provided for as a crime shall last until it is seen that the criminal dangerousness that gave rise to that measure has ceased and its duration shall not be longer than the maximum limit of the penalty applicable to the said crime. Article 61
Purpose of penalties and security measures36

36 (61) Purpose (s) - objective

Penalties and security measures shall be applied to protect legal interests essential to life in society and to achieve the agent's reintegration into society. Article 62
Choice of penalty and security measure

1. When either a penalty depriving liberty or a penalty not depriving liberty may be applied to a crime, the court shall choose the latter when that penalty is better and sufficient to achieve the purpose of the penalty. 2. To choose a security measure to apply to an agent whose dangerousness has already been shown in the proceedings, the agent's personality and what treatment is best for that situation must be considered. Article 63
Effects of penalties and security measures

A penalty or security measure shall not, as a necessary effect, extinguish civil, professional or political rights. Article 64
Execution of penalties or measures depriving liberty

1. An agent who receives a sentence with effective imprisonment or is subject to an internment measure may obtain conditional release or release on probation. 2. Save for other provisions, conditional release must be granted to a convict who has already served two-fifths of the penalty. 3. The convict's consent must be obtained to grant conditional release to him or her, except in the situation provided for in the previous number. 4. Only the law shall establish the prerequisites and conditions for granting conditional release and also the rights and obligations of the released persons and the prerequisites and conditions for executing effective imprisonment in an open regime. Article 65

Concurrence of penalties and measures depriving liberty
1. When an agent receives a sentence of effective imprisonment and is subject to an internment measure, that measure must be executed first and discounted from the imprisonment. 2. If the internment measure ends, the court shall place the agent on conditional release when he or she has already served the time corresponding to part of the penalty and his or her release appears compatible37 with the defense of the legal order and social peace. CHAPTER II IMPRISONMENT

Article 66
Duration of imprisonment

1. Imprisonment must last at least 30 days and shall not exceed 25 years. 2. In cases that the law specifically provides for, imprisonment may last up to 30 years. 3. The maximum limit of the penalty referred to in the previous number shall not be exceeded. Article 67
Substitution of imprisonment with a fine

1. In place of an applied imprisonment not exceeding 1 year, a fine may be imposed for the same period, up to the maximum legal limit, when the need to prevent future crime does not require the serving of imprisonment and, according to the circumstances surrounding that case, the court sees that the execution should not be suspended. 2. When the convict does not pay the substitute fine or any installment thereof, he or she must still serve the imprisonment that was first fixed, but the convict may still pay the fine in full or provide property to guarantee

37 (65) - Compatible; this goes well with (something else); which does not prejudice (something else). Compatible with the defense of social peace = does not prejudice the defense of social peace

that payment to halt that serving, discounting the installments already paid. 3. The court must give reasons for its decision not to make the substitution when the applied penalty gives rise to that substitution. Article 68
Suspension of execution of imprisonment

1. The court may suspend the execution of an applied imprisonment not exceeding 3 years, for 1 year to 5 years, beginning from the transit in rem judicatam of the decision. 2. The reasons for the suspension must be included in the decision, namely, the agent's personality, the circumstances surrounding the commission of the crime, his or her previous conduct, conditions concerning his or her life and, especially, the predictability concerning his or her future conduct. 3. The court must give reasons for its decision not to suspend the execution when the applied penalty gives rise to that suspension. Article 69
Suspension of imprisonment with duties

1. To suspend the execution of imprisonment the court, as a condition, may order the convict to fulfill certain duties, not humiliating, to repair the harm of the crime. 2. The following duties may be conditions for the suspension:
a) The convict repairs or provides a guarantee to repair the damage caused by the crime, within a determined period; b) The convict presents an apology to the victim in public; c) The convict performs some task related to the crime committed; d) The convict delivers money to the State or to a charitable institution with significance for the convict's reinsertion. 3. An obligation that orders him or her to do something that cannot reasonably38 be asked of him or her to do shall not be applied to the convict. 4. Until the period for the suspension ends, the obligation being applied to the convict may be changed when some supervening relevant circumstance arises or has passed that the court only now learns of some relevant circumstance. 5. The provision of the previous article,
no. 2, also applies here. Article 70 Rules of conduct

1. The court may order the convict to comply, during the suspension period, with rules of conduct that facilitate his or her integration into society, namely:
a) Not exercising certain professions; b) Not frequenting certain environments or places; c) Not residing in certain places or regions; d) Not associating with certain persons, not letting certain persons stay in his or her home or not receiving certain persons; e) Not frequenting certain associations or participating in certain meetings; f) Not possessing objects that may facilitate his or her committing a crime; g) Presenting himself or herself to the court, social reinsertion technicians or non-police entities periodically. 2. Having obtained the convict's consent, the court may also order him or her to undergo medical treatment or cure in an adequate institution. 3. The provisions of the previous article,
nos. 3 to 5, also apply here. Article 71
Suspension of imprisonment with supervision

1. When simple or conditional suspension of imprisonment is not sufficient to guarantee the delinquent's recovery and to dissuade him or her from criminal activity, the court may apply the suspension together with supervision by the social reinsertion service for the convict during the suspension period, having obtained the convict's agreement, when possible. 2. The social reinsertion service together with the Public Prosecutor and the judge who gave the sentence shall, having heard the convict, elaborate a plan for social reinsertion, which, having obtained approval from the court, shall be fulfilled with the assistance of an official or the reinsertion service. 3. All obligations applied to the convict must be included in the readaptation plan; the court may order the convict to comply with the obligations and rules of conduct that are written in articles 69 and 70 or other obligations that are of interest to the readaptation plan, namely:
a) Obtaining treatment or internment in an adequate establishment, when circumstances require; b) Complying with the summons of the magistrate responsible for execution or social reinsertion technicians; c) Receiving visits from social reinsertion technicians and providing information to those technicians concerning his or her means of living; d) Informing the social reinsertion technicians about changes to his or her residence or employment, and also about absences from his or her residence when longer than 8 days; e) Obtaining prior authorization from the magistrate responsible for execution before going abroad. 4. The provision of article 68,
no. 2, also applies here. Article 72
Modification of the suspension regime

When during the time that the execution of imprisonment is suspended the convict does not fulfill the obligations being applied to him or her or receives judgment and sentence for another crime, the court, considering the circumstances in which, may alter the regime that was fixed for the suspension of the execution of imprisonment, modify the obligations or give a solemn warning to the convict, according to the circumstances of each case. Article 73 Revocation of suspension

1. When during the time that the execution of imprisonment is suspended the convict receives judgment and sentence for another crime or intentionally relapses into non-compliance with the rules or obligations being applied to him or her, and it is seen that modification of the suspension regime cannot be made or that modification is not sufficient, the court shall revoke the suspension. 2. The suspension of the execution of imprisonment must indeed be revoked when, during the respective period, the convict commits an intentional crime for which he or she receives a sentence of effective imprisonment. 3. The revocation of the suspension does not give the convict the right to receive back the installments that he or she has already made during the suspension and because of the suspension. Article 74
Extinction of imprisonment
When the suspension of the execution of imprisonment is not revoked, after the respective period has passed, that penalty and its effects shall be extinguished

CHAPTER III FINE PENALTY

Article 75
Duration of fine penalty

1. A fine penalty shall be fixed with its minimum at 10 days and its maximum at 360 days, save for other provisions. 2. One day of fine corresponds to an amount, which the court fixes according to the convict's economic and financial situation and his or her personal burdens, between one United States dollar to 200 United States dollars. 3. When the circumstances surrounding the case justify, the court may authorize payment of the fine within a period of 1 year, or allow payment by installments39, but the last installment must be paid within 2 years beginning from the day that the sentence transits in rem judicatam. Article 76
Alternative imprisonment for fine penalty

The decision that applies a fine penalty directly shall also fix alternative imprisonment, for the time that corresponds to that fine, reduced by two-thirds. Article 77
Reduction or exemption of fine penalty

1. When a convict with a fine penalty does not fulfill that penalty because of circumstances that arose after the sentence and make impossible or difficult the fulfillment of the fine, but are not imputable to him or her, the court may decree reduction or exemption from that penalty. 2. The provision of the previous number also applies to a fine penalty that substitutes imprisonment. CHAPTER IV
COMMUNITY SERVICE PENALTY

Article 78 Community service

1. A community service penalty is one in which the convict must perform unpaid service for a public body or other entity that the court considers to be in the public interest, namely having obtained the convict's consent. 2. The court fixes the time for the convict to perform that service and, for that, shall convert the imprisonment fixed in the sentence at one day per one hour of service, but shall not exceed 240 hours. 3. The work may be done within normal service hours or not, continuously or not, but on each day shall not be longer than the time established in the regime for extraordinary hours and shall not prejudice the survival40 of the convict or the convict's family. 4. Unjustified non-compliance in performing community service gives rise to serving the penalty that was first applied, discounting the days on which that work was already done, according to the provision of no. 2. Article 79 Requirements

1. The court may apply a community service penalty in place of imprisonment not longer than 1 year or a fine penalty when it sees that by that means the purpose of punishment can be realized adequately and sufficiently and, concerning imprisonment, reasons concerning criminal prevention show that it is better not to suspend the execution or substitute with a fine. 2. The convict's consent must be obtained to apply community service, which, concerning a substitute fine, may be decreed in the sentence or in a subsequent order, namely the convict presents a request before there is an order for seizure in the execution proceedings for not paying the fine. 3. The provision of article 67,
no. 3, shall apply here. Article 80
Suspension, reduction or exemption of penalty

When the convict does not fulfill the work, because of circumstances that arose after its application and make impossible or difficult that fulfillment and cannot be imputed to him or her, the regime provided for in article 77 shall apply. Article 81 Complementary legislation

40 (78) Survival (s) – minimum material condition needed to live. A special diploma shall regulate the other conditions for applying the community service penalty and the functioning of the service to execute the work. CHAPTER V ADMONISHMENT PENALTY

Article 82 Admonishment

When considering the agent guilty of committing a crime that gives rise to an abstract imprisonment not exceeding 3 years or a fine, the court may give only an admonishment to him or her, when, cumulatively:
a) The damage of the criminal conduct has already been repaired; b) The agent is a primary delinquent; c) The admonishment is sufficient to achieve criminal prevention and to recover the delinquent. Article 83
Execution of admonishment penalty

The court shall make the admonishment, with a solemn and adequate oral reprimand to the convict, at a public hearing, when the decision that applies that penalty has already transited in rem judicatam. CHAPTER VI ACCESSORY PENALTY

Article 84 General principle

1. The law may establish for certain crimes prohibition from exercising certain rights or professions. 2. An accessory penalty shall be cumulated with other accessory penalties, must be applied together with the principal penalty and its duration must be fixed according to the severity of the guilt. Article 85
Temporary suspension from exercising public function

1. When sentencing a person who exercises a public office with effective imprisonment the court must decree suspension of the exercise of that function during the period that he or she serves the penalty, when the convict does not receive disciplinary dismissal
2. The effects that, according to the respective law, accompany the disciplinary sanction of suspension from exercising the function shall be applied to the convict, during the suspension period. 3. The provisions of the previous numbers shall apply to professions or activities that require a public title, authorization or approval from a public authority to exercise. Article 86 Prohibition from exercising functions

1. A holder of public office, public official or agent of the Administration who, when exercising the activity for which he or she obtained election or appointment to hold, receives a sentence of imprisonment exceeding 3 years may receive prohibition from exercising those functions, for 2 years to 5 years, when the following circumstances arise:
a) The agent committed the act with flagrant and serious abuse of his or her function or with manifest and serious violation of the duty that he or she must fulfill in that function; b) The agent shows manifest unworthiness or incapacity to exercise that office; c) The nature of the act destroys the trust that must exist to exercise that function. 2. The provision of the previous number also applies to professions or activities that a person must have a public title, authorization or approval from a public authority to exercise. 3. The time in which the accused is deprived of his or her liberty because of a coercive measure, penalty or security measure does not count as the period of prohibition. 4. The accessory penalty provided for in this article shall not be applied when, because of those very acts, the security measure provided for in article 100 is already being applied. 5. When applying the provisions of this article, the court's sentence must be notified to the public authority on which the official depends. Article 87 Expulsion

1. A foreign citizen who receives a sentence for committing a crime that gives rise to imprisonment exceeding 3 years and has not yet resided in Timor-Leste for 15 years may receive expulsion from the national territory:
a) For a period up to 2 years, when he or she has already resided here for more than 10 years; b) For a period up to 5 years, when he or she has already resided here for more than 5 years but has not yet reached 10 years; c) For a period up to 10 years, when he or she has not yet resided here for 5 years. 2. The expulsion referred to in the previous number shall be applied when in the concrete case it is indeed necessary for internal security, public health or to prevent criminal activity from continuing. 3. The expulsion penalty shall be executed without regard to the total or partial serving of the principal penalty. Article 88 Prohibition from driving

1. Disqualification from driving a motor vehicle for 3 months to 2 years may be applied to a person who receives a sentence:
a) For a crime provided for in articles 207 to 209; b) For a crime committed with a motorized vehicle and executed with facility indeed because of using a motorized vehicle; c) For a crime of disobedience for refusing to take the test that the law establishes to determine whether a person is driving a motorized vehicle under the disturbing effect on his or her physical, mental
or psychological aptitude of alcohol, psychotropic substances or products with analogous effect. 2. The provision of article 86,
no. 3, shall also apply here. Article 89
Cancellation of license to possess weapons

1. When there is a sentence for an intentional crime committed with a weapon, considering the circumstances and the seriousness of the conduct, the court may decree cancellation41 of the license to use and possess weapons, for 2 years to 8 years. 2. The provision of article 86,
no. 3, shall also apply here. CHAPTER VII
DETERMINATION OF PENALTIES

Article 90 General principle

1. When the law fixes a penalty, that penalty refers to that crime in its consummated form. 2. To obtain the abstract penalty framework from which the concrete penalty shall be determined:
a) The modifying circumstances of recidivism and criminal habituality provided for in articles 53 and 54, respectively, shall be applied to the abstract penalty of the consummated crime; b) Following the provision of the previous paragraph or starting from the abstract penalty of the consummated crime, when there are modifying circumstances, the situation that gives rise to extraordinary mitigation shall be considered, when it exists. Article 91
Concrete determination of penalty

1. Having obtained the abstract penalty framework according to the previous article, the court shall assess all circumstances that do not enter into the legal type and do not enter into the valuation as provisions of the previous article but aggravate or diminish the convict's responsibility. 2. Based on the valuation of those latter circumstances, the court shall fix the exact measure of penalty that it considers necessary to protect legal interests essential to life in

41 (89) Cancellation (s) - Annulment

society and for the agent's social reintegration, within the framework that is fixed within the limits of the type or within the limits that result from the provisions of the previous article. 3. The severity of the penalty applied to the convict may never exceed the severity of the guilt. Article 92
Special case of fine penalty

To apply a fine penalty the provisions of this chapter shall be applied to determine the time concerning the duration of the fine, without prejudice to the provision of article 75,
no. 2, to calculate the amount that corresponds to the fine for each day. CHAPTER VIII SECURITY MEASURES

SECTION I INTERNMENT MEASURE

Article 93 Prerequisites

When a person not imputable according to the provisions of article 21 commits an act described in the legal type of a crime, the court may order his or her admission to an adequate establishment, when, because of his or her psychic anomaly and the nature and seriousness of the committed act, there is a basis to fear that he or she may commit another typical act corresponding to a crime against persons or a crime of common danger. Article 94 Duration

1. When the act that the imputable person committed gives rise to imprisonment up to 3 years, the internment shall not be longer than 1 year. 2. When the imputable person committed an act that corresponds to a crime against persons or a crime of common danger punishable with imprisonment of 5 years or more, the internment shall not be shorter than 3 years, except when it is seen that release does not prejudice the defense of public order and social peace. 3. When the imputable person committed a crime punishable with a penalty (imprisonment) exceeding 8 years and it is better not to release him or her because otherwise he or she may again commit a similar crime, the internment may be extended by a further period of 2 years, successively42, until it is seen that the state of dangerousness that gave rise to that prolongation has ceased. 4. The internment shall not be longer than the maximum limit of the penalty applicable to the crime that the accused committed. Article 95 Cessation of measure

1. The internment measure ends when the criminal dangerousness that gave rise to that measure ceases or, if that dangerousness continues, when the maximum duration of that measure has already been reached, except in the circumstances written in the previous article,
nos. 3 and 4. 2. The internment measure shall be reviewed every year. 3. When there is an invocation that there is a justifying cause for the internment to end, the court, at a certain moment, shall consider that question. Article 96
Substitution of internment measure

1. Release on probation or, concerning a foreigner, expulsion from the national territory may be placed in place of the internment measure. 2. The provisions of article 87 shall apply to expulsion from the national territory. Article 97 Release on probation

1. When in the review referred to in article 95 it is seen that there is reason to believe that the purpose of the measure can be achieved in an open environment, the court shall place the internee on release on probation. 2. The period of release on probation shall be fixed at a minimum of 2 years to a maximum of 5 years, but shall not exceed the maximum limit fixed in article 94,
no. 4. 3. The decision concerning release on probation may order the internee to follow, during the suspension period, rules of conduct, necessary to prevent dangerousness, as written in article 70, to follow treatment and an appropriate43 outpatient cure regime and to present himself or herself for examination and observation at the place indicated to him or her. 4. The agent whose execution of his or her internment has been suspended shall be placed under the surveillance of the social reinsertion service. 5. When there is no reason to revoke the release on probation, after the period of release on probation has ended, the internment measure shall be declared extinct. 6. When at the moment that the period of release on probation ends a proceeding or incident that may give rise to the revocation of the measure is ongoing, after that proceeding or incident ends and there is no revocation, the measure may be declared extinct. Article 98
Revocation of release on probation

1. Release on probation shall be revoked when:
a) The imputable person's conduct shows that it is indeed necessary to apply internment; b) The non-imputable person receives a sentence with a penalty that deprives liberty and there are no prerequisites to suspend the execution of that penalty, according to article 68,
no. 1. 2. Revocation gives rise to re-internment, and the provisions of articles 94 and 96 shall also apply here. Article 99
Suspension of execution of internment

1. The court may order suspension of internment when, according to reason, it can be expected that with that suspension the purpose of the security measure can be achieved and that suspension is compatible with the defense of public order and social peace. 43 (97) Appropriate (adj) – Good for a situation. 2. Article 97,
nos. 3 and 4, shall also apply to the suspension of internment. 3. The execution of internment shall not be suspended when the agent receives a sentence with a penalty that deprives liberty and there are no requirements to suspend the execution of that penalty as in article 68,
no. 1. 4. The duration and cessation of internment shall be determined according to articles 94 and 95, respectively44. 5. The provisions of article 98 shall also apply to the decision that suspends the internment measure. SECTION II
OTHER SECURITY MEASURES

Article 100
Professional interdiction measure

1. When a non-imputable person because of psychic anomaly commits some act provided for in the legal type of a crime related to the professional activity that he or she exercises and there is fear that, during the time that he or she exercises that occupation he or she may commit an act similar to that one, the court, considering the circumstances surrounding that case and the non-imputable person's personality, may prohibit him or her from exercising that activity for 1 year to 5 years. 2. The period shall be suspended during the time that the agent does not have liberty because of a procedural coercive measure, penalty or security measure. Article 101
Prohibition from driving and cancellation of license to use and possess weapons

1. A non-imputable person who commits some act provided for in article 88,
no. 1, may receive disqualification from driving a motor vehicle for 2 years to 6 years, when his or her personality

44 (99) Respectively (adv) – each to each; according to the order shown. The duration and cessation of internment shall be determined according to articles 94 and 95, respectively = The duration of internment according to article 94 and its cessation shall be determined according to article 95. causes fear that he or she may again commit an act similar to that one. 2. When the act that the non-imputable person committed is in relation to the use of weapons, the court may decree cancellation of the license to use and possess weapons for 5 years to 10 years, when his or her personality causes fear that he or she may again commit an act similar to that one. 3. The provision of article 86,
no. 3, shall also apply here. CHAPTER IX
OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF CRIME

Article 102 Loss of object of crime

1. The object that was used or to be used to commit a crime, or came from a crime, shall be declared lost to the State, when, according to its nature or the circumstances surrounding the case, it causes danger to the safety of persons or to public order, or may be used again to commit a new crime. 2. The victim and third parties who did not contribute to using or producing those objects or deriving advantage from those objects that are their property shall still guarantee their rights. 3. The court shall give a destination to those objects that have already been declared lost, when the law does not say anything, such as ordering the destruction of those objects or making them no longer enter into commerce. 4. The provision of no. 1 shall still apply, even if a person does not receive a penalty for that act. Article 103 Loss of advantage

1. Things, rights or advantages obtained, directly or indirectly, from the commission of a crime shall be declared lost to the State, without prejudice to the rights of the victim or third parties in good faith. 2. When those things, rights or advantages themselves cannot come into the hands of the State, the value of those things, rights or advantages shall be paid to the State. Article 104 Civil liability for crime

1. The court ex officio must ascertain and fix compensation for loss and damage that came from the crime when it is already known that there is damage and what the value of that damage is, except when the injured party declares, according to criminal procedural law, that he or she wants to make the request separately. 2. The norms of civil law regulate the prerequisites and calculation of compensation. 3. The person responsible for compensation may make a transaction concerning that compensation, but must notify the court of that transaction, otherwise that act has no efficacy. Article 105
Privilege of injured party's credit

Credit that arises from the injured party's right to compensation for loss and damage that came from the crime has preference over other credits that arose after the commission of the act, including45 costs and the amount46 concerning the fine. TITLE V RIGHT TO COMPLAINT

Article 106 Nature of crime

1. Concerning the right to make a complaint, crimes may be of a public or semi-public nature. 2. Public crimes are those that do not require a complaint to give rise to criminal proceedings. 3. Semi-public crimes are those that require a complaint to give rise to criminal proceedings. 4. A holder exercises his or her right to complaint when he or she shows that he or she wants criminal proceedings. 45 (105) Including (v) – Counted in all of this; also counted in this; all entered in this; also entered in this. 46 (105) Amount (s) – A sum of money. Article 107
Holder of right to complaint

When a complaint is required to conduct criminal proceedings, the persons that criminal procedural law indicates as holders of the right to complaint have standing to present that complaint. Article 108 Period to exercise right

The right to complaint must be exercised within 6 months and that period counts separately for each holder of that right. Article 109
Renunciation and desistance from complaint

The renunciation, desistance or non-exercise of the right to complaint concerning one participant in the crime benefits the other participants in cases where they also cannot receive criminal prosecution before there is a complaint. TITLE VI EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY

CHAPTER I
PRESCRIPTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Article 110 Prescription period

1. Criminal proceedings are extinguished, because of prescription, when, beginning from the moment that the agent committed the crime, the following periods have already passed:
a) 20 years, when concerning a crime punishable with imprisonment with a maximum limit exceeding 12 years; b) 15 years, when concerning a crime punishable with imprisonment with a maximum limit exceeding 7 years but not reaching 12 years; c) 8 years, when concerning a crime punishable with imprisonment with a maximum limit exceeding 3 years but not exceeding 7 years; d) 4 years, in other cases. 2. When the law establishes as an alternative47 for a crime imprisonment or a fine penalty, the former shall be considered for the provisions of this article. Article 111 Counting of period

1. The period for prescription of criminal proceedings begins at the moment that the agent consummated the act or, concerning a non-consummated crime, continued crime or habitual crime, on the day that he or she committed the last act of execution. 2. In permanent crimes the period for prescription begins at the moment that the consummation ends. 3. Concerning complicity only the author's act shall be considered. Article 112 Suspension of prescription

1. Prescription of criminal proceedings is suspended in the cases that the law provides for and also during the time that:
a) According to law, criminal proceedings cannot begin or continue because legal authorization or a sentence that a non-criminal court shall give does not yet exist or because of the devolution of a prejudicial question to a non-criminal judge; b) The delinquent serves abroad a penalty or security measure that deprives liberty; c) Criminal proceedings are already ongoing, beginning from the moment that the accused receives notification concerning the accusation. 2. The proceedings run again at the moment that the cause for suspension ends. 47 (112) Alternative (s) – possibility to choose one thing from two things. Establishes, as an alternative, imprisonment or fine penalty = gives the possibility to choose imprisonment or fine penalty. 3. The cause for suspension shall not be longer than half of the period provided for in article 110, according to each situation. CHAPTER II
PRESCRIPTION OF PENALTIES AND SECURITY MEASURES

Article 113
Period concerning prescription of penalty

1. Penalties shall be prescribed in the following periods:
a) 25 years when exceeding 12 years imprisonment; b) 20 years when exceeding 8 years imprisonment but not exceeding 12 years; c) 12 years when exceeding 4 years imprisonment but not exceeding 8 years; d) 8 years when not imprisonment penalties that the previous paragraphs provide for; e) 4 years when that penalty is a fine penalty. 2. The period concerning prescription of penalty begins at the moment that the decision that applies that penalty obtains transit in rem judicatam. Article 114
Prescription of accessory penalty

Prescription of accessory penalty48 follows the regime of the principal penalty. Article 115
Period for prescription of security measure

Security measures are prescribed in the following periods:
a) 15 years when depriving liberty; b) 5 years when not depriving liberty; c) 2 years when concerning cancellation of license to use and possess weapons. 48 (114) Accessory penalty – Penalty that is applied together with the principal penalty to some criminal, such as prohibition from driving a car or possessing weapons. Article 116 Suspension of prescription

1. Prescription of penalties and security measures is suspended in the cases that the law provides for and during the time that:
a) According to law, execution cannot begin or continue; b) Following the convict's evasion49 and during the time that he or she has not yet been caught again; c) The convict is serving a penalty or security measure that deprives liberty; d) The period to pay the fine is running; e) The convict cannot provide community service temporarily; f) Execution is already ongoing. 2. Prescription runs again on the day that the cause for suspension ends. 3. The provisions of article 112 also apply here.

49 (116) Evasion (s) - EscapeCHAPTER III IMPRESCRIPTIBILITY

Article 117
Crimes of genocide, against peace and humanity and relating to war

Criminal proceedings and penalties for crimes of genocide, against peace and humanity and war crimes do not prescribe. CHAPTER IV
OTHER CAUSES OF EXTINCTION

Article 118 Other causes

Criminal responsibility is extinguished in cases provided by law and by the death of the agent, by amnesty and by pardon. 49 (116) Evasion (s) – By evasion a person flees from prison or the place where he or she is detained. Article 119 Death of the agent

The death of the agent extinguishes criminal proceedings and also the criminal sanction already applied. Article 120 Amnesty

Amnesty extinguishes criminal proceedings and stops the execution of sanctions not yet fully or partially complied with, and also the effects of such sanctions and accessory penalties as may be. Article 121
Amnesty and crimes in concurrence

Unless otherwise provided, amnesty applies to each crime included in the concurrence. Article 122 Pardon

Pardon extinguishes the penalty, totally or partially, or substitutes another penalty provided in law and more favourable to the convicted person in place of that penalty. BOOK II SPECIAL PART

TITLE I
CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND HUMANITY

CHAPTER I
CRIMES OF GENOCIDE AND AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 123 Genocide

1. A person who, with intent to destroy, totally or partially, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group, commits:
a) Homicide or serious offence against the physical or psychological integrity of that group; b) Acts which, in any way, prevent the members of that group from procreating50 or living; c) Rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced sterilization or other sexual violence of similar gravity; d) Violent separation of members of that group from that group to another group; e) Acts which, by violence, prevent that group from residing or continuing to reside in a geographical space which, according to tradition or history, is considered as belonging to that group; f) Subjection of that group to living conditions or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment, which may one day lead to its total or partial destruction; g) Widespread confiscation or seizure of property belonging to members of that group; h) Prohibition of members of that group from exercising commercial, industrial or professional activities; i) Spreading51 of epidemics which may cause the death of members of that group or offence to their physical integrity; j) Prohibition, omission or impediment, by any means, of members of that group from receiving adequate humanitarian assistance to combat epidemics or serious food shortages,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. 2. A person who, publicly and directly, incites others to commit genocide shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. 50 (123) By procreation a person has children or generations. 51 (123) Diffusion (s) – By diffusion a person spreads something (in all directions) thereby making that thing live or reach other people or other places. To diffuse = To spread or transmit to others or to other places

Article 124
Crimes against humanity

A person who, in the context of a widespread or systematic attack against any civilian population, commits acts which give rise to:
a) Homicide or serious offence against physical or psychological integrity; b) Extermination, which exists when someone subjects a population totally or partially to adverse living conditions, such as preventing that population from obtaining food or medicine, which may cause the death of one or many persons; c) Enslavement; d) Deportation or forced transfer of a population, which exists when someone makes an unlawful displacement of one or many persons to another State or place by expulsion or other coercive acts; e) Imprisonment or other serious means which deprive a person of liberty, contrary to norms or principles of international law; f) Torture, which exists when someone does something to cause serious physical or psychological pain or suffering to a person who has already lost his or her liberty or has already come under the agent's control; g) Rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization or other sexual violence of similar gravity; h) Persecution, which exists when there is deprivation of the enjoyment of fundamental rights, contrary to international law, of a group or collectivity which can be identified, by reason of political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender or other motives universally recognized as unacceptable under international law; i) Forced disappearance of persons, which exists when there is detention, imprisonment or kidnapping52

52 (124) Kidnapping (s) – By kidnapping a person seizes and holds another person and does not let him or her leave the place where the agent is holding him or her, against that person's will. which the State or political organization carries out or gives authorization, support or agreement to carry out, and, consequently, refuses to recognize that such deprivation of liberty exists or to provide information about that situation or about those persons so that they cannot obtain the protection of the law for a long time; j) Apartheid, which exists when someone commits inhuman acts in the context of an institutionalized regime in which one racial group exercises systematic oppression and domination over one or more other groups, with the intent to maintain53 that regime; k) Other inhuman acts of similar character to those above with intent to cause serious suffering or serious injury or to affect mental or physical health,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. CHAPTER II WAR CRIMES

Article 125 War crimes against persons

1. A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or an armed conflict of non-international character, commits against persons protected by international humanitarian law:
a) Homicide; b) Torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments; c) Serious offence against physical integrity or acts which cause serious suffering; d) Taking of hostages54; e) Compelling to serve in the enemy armed forces or the recruitment or enlistment of

53 (1249 maintain (v) – to make something or someone continue; to hold something or someone. Police maintain security = Police keep security in place. maintain apartheid = make apartheid continue to exist. 54 (125) Taking of hostages – Holding a person as a guarantee to demand something from someone. children under 18 years of age in the armed forces, military forces or paramilitary forces of a State, or in armed groups which are not the armed forces, military forces or paramilitary forces of a State, or using them to participate in hostilities55; f) Serious, prolonged and unjustified limitation of a person's liberty; g) Deportation or transfer or unlawful deprivation of liberty; h) Unjustified subtraction or destruction of patrimonial property of great value; i) Conviction and execution of sentence, when there has not yet been a fair or impartial trial; j) Acts which offend a person's dignity, especially by humiliating and degrading treatment; k) Homicide or wounding of a combatant who has already laid down his or her arms or who, having no more means to defend himself or herself, has already surrendered unconditionally or has in any way already been removed from combat; l) Acts described in the previous article, paragraph g); m) Subjecting persons who have already come into the hands of one belligerent party to physical mutilation or medical or scientific experiments of any type, which are not for medical, dental or hospital treatment and are not done in their interest, and which cause death or serious danger to a person's health; shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. 2. The penalty shall be aggravated by one fifth in its minimum and maximum limits when the agent commits the acts referred to in the previous number against a member of a humanitarian institution. 3. A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character:
a) Transfers, directly or indirectly, as an occupying power, part of its own civilian population to the occupied territory or transfers the population of the occupied territory, all or part

55 (125) Hostilities (s) - War

only, within that territory or out of that territory; b) Compels prisoners of war or other persons receiving protection to serve in the enemy power's armed forces; c) After the war has ended, delays the repatriation of prisoners of war, without justified motive,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. Article 126
War crimes by prohibited methods

A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or in an armed conflict of non-international character:
a) Attacks the civilian population in general or civilians who do not directly participate in hostilities; b) Attacks civilian property which is not a military objective; c) Attacks, by any means, population centres, dwellings or buildings which are not being defended and are not military objectives; d) Makes an indiscriminate attack which affects the civilian population or property of civilian character, knowing that the attack will cause loss of life, injury to civilians or damage to property of civilian character, which is excessive; e) Takes advantage of the presence of civilians or other protected persons to prevent certain points, zones or military forces from becoming the target of military operations; f) Deliberately causes starvation of the civilian population as a method of warfare, thereby removing from them property which they need to live; g) Declares or threatens, in his or her capacity as an officer, that no shelter will be given; h) Kills or injures by treachery enemy combatants; i) Makes an attack, even knowing that the attack will cause serious, lasting and grave damage to the environment and, therefore, it can be clearly seen

that the attack is excessive when compared with the concrete and direct overall military advantage foreseen; j) Commits perfidy, understood as acts of killing, injuring or capturing, in which, with intent to deceive, the adversary's good faith is used to make him or her believe that he or she has the right to receive or has the obligation to ensure protection which the rules of international humanitarian law provide; shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. Article 127
War crimes by prohibited means of warfare

1. A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or an armed conflict of non-international character, uses weapons, projectiles, materials and methods of combat which, according to their nature, cause unnecessary injury or unnecessary suffering or produce indiscriminate effects, contrary to international law applicable to armed conflicts, shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. 2. The previous number covers, in particular, the use of the following means:
a) Poison or poisoned weapons; b) Asphyxiating, toxic or similar gases, or any liquids, materials or analogous devices; c) Bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body, such as bullets which have a hard casing which does not completely cover the core or which has incisions; d) Anti-personnel mines; e) Chemical weapons; f) Weapons whose principal effect is to injure by fragments which cannot be located in the human body by X-rays; g) Incendiary weapons; h) Laser56 weapons which cause blindness. 56 (127) Laser (s) – (laser) A device which produces a visible light radiation, or with close frequencies, coherent, monochromatic and very strong

3. The weapons, instruments and products referred to in the previous number are those which international law considers as such. Article 128
War crimes against property protected by distinctive insignia or emblem

A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or an armed conflict of non-international character, attacks:
a) Personnel, installations, materials, units or vehicles participating in a mission to maintain peace or provide humanitarian assistance, under the United Nations Charter, when they have the right to protection which international law gives to persons or civilian property; b) Buildings, installations, materials, units or vehicles, which are marked with the distinctive emblem of the Geneva Conventions or personnel authorized to use such emblems,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 10 to 20 years. Article 129
War crimes against property

A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or an armed conflict of non-international character:
a) Subtracts, destroys or damages patrimonial property on a large scale or of great value, without military necessity or in an unlawful or arbitrary manner; b) Attacks, destroys or damages buildings dedicated to religious worship, education, art, science or charity, cultural or historical monuments, archaeological sites, hospitals and places where sick and wounded persons are gathered, when they are not military objectives; c) Pillages57 any city or locality, even if taken by assault,

57 (129) Pillage (v) – To plunder; to steal, seize or carry away another person's possessions by violence. shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 130
War crimes against other rights

A person who, in the context of an armed conflict of international character or an armed conflict of non-international character, declares abolished, suspended or inadmissible in court the rights or proceedings of nationals of the enemy party shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. CHAPTER III AGAINST PEACE AND FREEDOM

Article 131 Terrorist organization

1. A group, organization or association of two or more persons shall be considered terrorist when, in order to achieve political, ideological, philosophical or confessional ends, they act in concert, with intent to prejudice national integrity or independence, prevent, alter or subvert the functioning of national or international institutions, intimidate or compel public authorities, international organizations or any person, group or population in general to do something, not do something or tolerate something, by serious crimes:
a) Against the life, physical integrity or liberty of persons; b) Against the safety of transport and communications, including telegraphic, telephonic, radio or television communications; c) Which deliberately cause common danger, by fire, explosion, release of radioactive substances or toxic or asphyxiating gases, flood or avalanche, collapse of construction, contamination of food and drinking water or spreading of disease, harmful plants or animals; d) In which nuclear energy, firearms, explosive substances or devices, incendiary means

of any nature, letter or parcel bombs will be used; e) Acts which destroy or impede means or ways of communication, installations of public services or international installations or installations for supply and satisfaction of the population's vital needs, or divert them from their normal purpose; f) Research and development of biological or chemical weapons. 2. A person who promotes or founds a terrorist group, organization or association, joins, participates in or supports such group, organization or association shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. 3. A person who leads or directs a terrorist group, organization or association shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. 4. When the terrorist group, organization or association or the persons referred to in numbers 2 and 3 possess the means shown in
no. 1, paragraph d), the minimum and maximum limits of the penalty shall be aggravated by one third. 5. Preparatory acts to constitute a terrorist group, organization or association shall give rise to a penalty with its minimum and maximum limits reduced by half. 6. The penalties referred to may receive extraordinary attenuation or not give rise to punishment when the agent voluntarily abandons his or her activity, prevents or makes great efforts to prevent the danger which that activity causes or the terrorist group, organization or association from continuing or informs the authorities that the group, organization or association exists, thereby enabling those authorities to prevent them from committing crimes. Article 132 Terrorism

1. A person who commits the crimes provided in the previous article,
no. 1, paragraphs a) to c) and e), or any crime by the means referred to in number one's paragraphs d) or f), with the intent referred to therein, shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years or the penalty corresponding to the crime committed

with its minimum and maximum limits aggravated by one third, when that penalty is equal or heavier. 2. The penalty may receive special attenuation or not give rise to punishment when the agent voluntarily abandons his or her activity, removes or considerably reduces the danger which that activity causes, prevents the result which the law seeks to avoid from occurring or concretely helps to obtain decisive evidence to identify or capture other responsible persons. Article 133 Financing of terrorism

A person who, by any means, directly or indirectly and intentionally, provides, collects or holds funds or any property and also products or rights which can be converted into funds, seeks to obtain such property, funds, products or rights, with intent to use or knowing that they may be used, totally or partially, to plan, prepare or commit the acts provided in article 131,
no. 1, or to commit such acts with the intent referred to in article 132,
no. 1, shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. Article 134 Incitement to war

1. A person who, by any means, publicly and repeatedly, incites58 hatred against any race, people or nation, with intent to provoke war or to impede peaceful coexistence between diverse59 races, peoples or nations, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. A person who entices60 or recruits Timorese or foreign citizens to, by service performed for a foreign group or power, make war against a State or overthrow

58 (134) Incite (v) – To give courage; to incite (someone) to do something; to give stimulus; to entice. Incite hatred against a race = to stir up hatred against a race. 59 (134) Diverse (adj) – Different; various; which is not the same; which is not only one; which has different aspects; which is not only one kind. 60 (134) Entice (v) – To incite (someone) to do something; to give courage or stimulus. another state's legitimate government by violent means shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 135 Racial or religious discrimination

1. A person who founds, constitutes an organization or develops organized propaganda to incite or encourage racial or religious discrimination, hatred or violence, and also a person who participates in or gives assistance, including financing, to such organizations or activities shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. 2. A person who, in a public meeting, by writing for dissemination or by any means of social communication, disseminates ideas with intent to incite racial or religious discrimination or to encourage or provoke violent acts against any person or group because of his or her race, colour, ethnic origin or religion, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. CHAPTER IV COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 136
Responsibility of military commander or other superior

1. A military commander or one who acts as military commander who, having known that forces under his or her command and effective control or under his or her responsibility and effective control are committing or are about to commit any crime provided in this title, does not adopt necessary and adequate measures to prevent or repress such practice or to immediately inform the competent authorities shall be punished with the penalty corresponding to that crime or to the crime which will be committed. 2. The provisions of the previous number shall also apply, with necessary adaptations, to a superior regarding control of subordinates who are under his or her authority and effective control. Article 137

Definitions
For the purposes of this title, the following shall be considered:
a) "Armed conflict of international character" one which:
i) Occurs between states, even without a formal declaration of war, even if one of those States does not recognize that state of war; ii) Corresponds to total or partial occupation of a State's territory, even if that occupation does not meet military resistance; iii) Corresponds to a situation in which peoples fight against colonial domination, foreign occupation and regimes which practice segregation, when the people exercise their right to self-determination enshrined in the United Nations Charter and in the declaration on principles of international law concerning friendly relations and cooperation between States; b) "Armed conflict of non-international character" one which occurs in a State's territory, is of prolonged character and pits governmental authorities against organized groups or organized groups against each other, with the exception of situations in which there are disturbances and in which there are internal tensions, such as sporadic or isolated acts of violence or others of similar character; c) "Protected person":
i) In international armed conflict, persons protected for the purposes of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and Additional Protocol I, namely wounded, sick, shipwrecked, prisoners of war, sanitary or religious personnel and the civilian population; ii) In armed conflict of non-international character, wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, and also persons who do not take active part in hostilities but have come into the enemy's hands; iii) In armed conflict of international character and in armed conflict of national character, members of the armed forces and combatants of the enemy party who have already laid down their arms or have no other means of defence. TITLE II CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS

CHAPTER I AGAINST LIFE

Article 138 Simple homicide

A person who kills another person shall be punished with imprisonment from 8 to 20 years. Article 139 Aggravated homicide

An agent who kills another person in circumstances which show special censurability or perversity, in particular, because:
a) He or she uses poison, torture, asphyxiation, fire, explosives or other insidious means or means which constitute the commission of a crime of common danger, or other cruel acts, to increase the victim's suffering; b) He or she uses dissimulation or other means or resources to make it difficult for the victim to defend himself or herself or make it impossible for the victim to defend himself or herself; c) He or she kills because of greed61, because he or she likes to kill people, because he or she wants to obtain sexual excitement or satisfaction, because of payment or reward or promise of payment or reward or because of futile or base motive; d) He or she kills to prepare, execute or conceal another crime, facilitate escape or ensure impunity for the agent of a crime; e) He or she kills because of racial, religious or political hatred; 61 (139) Greed – Strong and insatiable desire; greedy (adj); covetous (for something)

f) He or she kills with premeditation, which exists when he or she uses coldness62 of mind, reflection on the means used or maintains his or her intent to kill for 24 hours; g) When the victim is the agent's spouse, descendant, ascendant, collateral or affine up to the second degree, adoptee or person who lives with him or her in a relationship in which there is hierarchical, economic or labour dependence; h) The victim is extremely vulnerable because of his or her age, illness or physical or mental deficiency; i) The victim is a member of a sovereign body or constitutional political body, member of an administrative body, magistrate, defender, lawyer, officer of justice, official or other person who holds public service, namely while he or she is holding his or her function or because of the function which he or she holds; j) The victim is a witness, declarant, expert, injured party or offended person and the agent commits the crime to prevent testimony, denunciation of facts or complaint or because of his or her intervention in proceedings,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. Article 140 Negligent homicide

1. A person who, by negligence, kills another person shall be punished with imprisonment up to 4 years or a fine. 2. In cases where the agent acts with gross63 negligence he or she shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years. Article 141* Interruption of pregnancy

62 (139) Coldness of mind – cold heart
63 (140) Gross (adj) – Gross (adj) – Heavy; serious. Gross negligence = serious negligence; serious lack of care. A person acts with gross negligence when he or she lacks excessive care when doing that thing. 1. A person who causes a pregnant woman to abort, by any means and without that woman's consent, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. A person who causes a pregnant woman to abort, by any means and with that woman's consent, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years. 3. A pregnant woman who gives consent to another person to perform an abortion, or, herself or through another person, causes an abortion to herself shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years. 4. The provisions of the previous number do not apply when, according to existing medical knowledge and experience and having done everything possible to save the life of the pregnant woman and the fetus or embryo, interruption of pregnancy is the only way to remove the threat of death from the pregnant woman, namely with medical certification and performed by a doctor or other health professional, under the direction of a doctor, in a public health establishment or officially recognized, and with the pregnant woman's consent. 5. Before performing the interruption a panel of three doctors must certify the circumstances referred to in the previous number, in a written and signed medical certificate; in that panel there shall be one doctor who performs or supervises the performance of the interruption of pregnancy. 6. The consent of the pregnant woman shall be given by herself in a written and signed document, having heard, when possible, her spouse or the person who lives with her other than her husband, or another person, according to that woman's request, who gives it, and, when possible, shall be given two days before performing that interruption. 7. When the pregnant woman is a minor, her legal representative shall give consent. 8. When the pregnant woman is an adult or emancipated person who is psychologically incapable or who suffers from psychological incapacity, her spouse or the person who lives with her other than her husband, or her legal representative, ascendant or descendant, or, if there is none, any collateral relative, respectively and successively, shall give that consent. 9. When it is not possible to obtain the medical certificate referred to in no. 5 and/or it is not possible to obtain consent as written in
nos. 6 to 8, and the interruption must be performed quickly and cannot be delayed any longer, the doctor, looking at each situation, shall

decide, also using, when possible, the opinion of other doctors. 10. In the panel referred to in no. 5 there shall be a doctor who has adequate knowledge to evaluate the circumstances which justify the interruption of pregnancy, and, when possible, a gynecologist/obstetrician. 11. The doctors who issue the medical certificate and the doctors who perform or supervise the performance of the interruption of pregnancy must give necessary clarifications to the pregnant woman and, when applicable, to the persons referred to in nos. 7 and 8, in particular about the method to be used in the interruption, the effects of that interruption itself and its consequences for the pregnant woman's physical and psychological health. 12. Doctors and other health professionals have the right to present conscientious objection to any act relating to interruption of pregnancy. 13. Doctors and other health professionals who invoke conscientious objection must guarantee the immediate intervention of other health professionals in the acts which must be performed and also immediate accompaniment of the pregnant woman. 14. Conscientious objection must be shown expressly and must be notified to the clinical head of the health establishment in which the objector works. * Law 6/2009, of 15 July, introduced this wording. The previous wording of Article 141 is as follows:
Article 141 Interruption of pregnancy
1. A person who causes a pregnant woman to abort, by any means and without that woman's consent, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. A person who causes a pregnant woman to abort, by any means and with that woman's consent, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years. 3. A pregnant woman who gives consent to another person to perform an abortion, or, herself or through another person, causes an abortion to herself shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years. 4. The provisions of the previous numbers do not apply in cases where interruption of pregnancy constitutes the only means to avoid danger of death to the pregnant woman or to the fetus or serious and irreversible injury to his or her body or to his or her physical or psychological health, namely performed by a doctor or health professional, in a health establishment, with the authorization and supervision of a medical board and with the consent of the pregnant woman or her spouse. 5. Specific legislation shall regulate the provisions of no. 4

Article 142 Infanticide

A mother who kills her child during childbirth or immediately after childbirth and when she is still under the disturbing influence of childbirth shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. Article 143 Exposure or abandonment
1. One who intentionally causes danger to another person's life:
a) By placing that person in a place where he or she must face a situation in which he or she cannot defend himself or herself alone; or
b) By abandoning that person when he or she cannot defend himself or herself because of his or her age, physical deficiency or illness, and the agent has an obligation to look after, wait for or give assistance to that person,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 6 years. 2. When that fact:
a) Causes serious offence to the victim's physical integrity, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years; b) Causes the victim's death, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. 3. When that victim is the agent's spouse, descendant, ascendant, collateral, affine up to the second degree, adopter or adoptee, or person who lives with him or her as husband and wife, the minimum and maximum limits of the penalty shown in the previous numbers shall rise by one third. Article 144 Incitement or assistance to suicide

1. One who incites another person to kill himself or herself or gives assistance to another person to kill himself or herself, that suicide occurring either in attempted or consummated form, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the agent commits the facts described in the previous number against any person shown in the previous article, number 3, or against a minor under 17 years of age or against a person who has sensibly diminished capacity to make valuations or determinations, the penalty shall rise to imprisonment up to 5 years. 3. A person who, in any way and repeatedly, makes public propaganda for suicide shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. CHAPTER II
AGAINST PHYSICAL INTEGRITY
Article 145
Simple offence against physical integrity

1. One who offends another person's body or health shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 146
Serious offence against physical integrity

One who offends another person's body or health with intent to:
a) Make that person lose any organ or member; b) Seriously and permanently disfigure that person; c) Seriously and permanently or definitively affect that person's capacity to work, his or her intellectual capacity or his or her capacity to have children; d) Cause permanent illness or incurable psychological anomaly; or

e) Cause danger to his or her life,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. Article 147 Aggravation

1. One who, wanting only to offend another person's body or health:
a) Shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years, when he or she causes the offence provided in article 146; b) Shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 6 years, when he or she causes that person's death by negligence. 2. One who, wanting only to cause the offence provided in article 146, but causes death by negligence, shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. 3. When the agent commits the crimes referred to in the two previous articles against any person covered by article 139, paragraph i), because that victim holds the function written therein or when that victim is holding that function, the penalty shall be aggravated by one third in its minimum and maximum limits, when another legal provision does not provide a heavier penalty. Article 148
Negligent offence against physical integrity

1. One who offends another person's body or health by negligence shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. 2. If that negligence is gross, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 3. When that fact causes serious bodily offence the agent shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 4.To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required.
Article 149
Medical-surgical intervention and treatment

1. Intervention and treatment which, according to the experience and knowledge already obtained in medicine, is indicated and carried out by a doctor or person with legal authorisation, as "leges artis", to prevent, diagnose, control or reduce illness, injury, lesion or bodily fatigue or mental disturbance shall not be considered as bodily offence. 2. Where, due to violation of "leges artis", danger arises to the patient's body, health or life, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 150
Bodily offence with poisonous substance

1. Whoever offends another person's body or health by administering to them a poisonous or harmful substance to physical or mental health shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 5 years. 2. Where the act produces any consequence provided for in article 146 or causes the victim's death, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years or from 4 to 12 years, respectively. Article 151
Reciprocal bodily offence

1. Where two persons mutually offend each other's body or health but they do not commit the act in self-defence and there is no circumstance provided for in article 146 and none of the participants dies, they shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 152 Participation in affray

1. Whoever intervenes or participates with two or more persons in an affray, which causes a person's death or produces serious bodily offence, but these consequences cannot be imputed to them intentionally, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 64 (150) Ministra (v) – Apply; give to drink or eat; inject to introduce some substance into a person's body…

2. Participation in affray does not give rise to punishment where it occurs due to a non-censurable motive, namely because the agent participates to react to an attack, to defend another person or to separate the contenders. Article 153
Ill-treatment of incapacitated person

1. Whoever is responsible for supervising or educating or has as a subordinate in work activity an incapacitated person, particularly vulnerable due to illness, advanced age, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, and causes offence to that person's body or health, or subjects them to physical or mental ill-treatment, or cruel treatment shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, where another legal provision does not provide for a heavier penalty. 2. Where the victim is the agent's descendant, collateral, relative or affine up to the second degree, adoptee, or person living with them as husband and wife, the penalty referred to in the previous number shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits. Article 154
Ill-treatment of spouse

A person who commits physical or mental ill-treatment against their spouse or against a person living with them as husband and wife shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, where another legal provision does not provide for a heavier penalty. Article 155 Ill-treatment of minor

1. A person who must supervise a minor under 17 years of age, has responsibility for their education or uses them as a subordinate in work activity and:
a) Causes offence to their body or health, commits physical and mental ill-treatment or cruel treatment against them; 65 (152) Sensuravel – That which receives negative evaluation; that which we condemn or do not accept because it is bad. La sensuravel = That which does not receive negative evaluation; that which we do not consider negative or bad. b) Subjects them to economic exploitation, to dangerous work or that which may compromise their education or their physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development; c) Subjects them to slavery of any kind or analogous practice; d) Uses, recruits or offers them to use for prostitution, to produce pornographic material or perform pornographic spectacle; or
e) Uses, recruits or offers them to use to commit illicit acts or activities, namely in the production or trafficking of narcotics as defined by international convention,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, where another legal provision does not provide for a heavier penalty. 2. Whoever, in such a situation, uses a minor to beg as a poor person, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years, where another legal provision does not provide for a heavier penalty. 3. Where the victim is the agent's descendant, collateral, relative or affine up to the second degree, adoptee or person living with them in similar condition, the penalties referred to in the previous numbers shall be increased by one third in their minimum and maximum limits. Article 156 Aggravation by result

Where the ill-treatment described in articles 153 to 155 produces the effects written in article 146 the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years, and, where it causes death, imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. CHAPTER III
CRIMES AGAINST PERSONAL LIBERTY

SECTION I PERSONAL ASSAULT

66 (155) Kompromete (v) – Prejudice; cause danger. Article 157 Threat

1. Whoever, by any means, threatens another person with a crime so as to cause them fear or unease or so as to prejudice their liberty to determine themselves shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 158 Coercion

1. Whoever, by violence or threat with significant harm, compels someone to do something or not do something or tolerate some activity shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 159 Serious coercion

Where the agent commits coercion:
a) With threat of a crime punishable with imprisonment exceeding 3 years; b) By seriously abusing a function which they, as an official, have; c) Against a person who cannot defend themselves, due to their age, disability, illness or pregnancy; d) Against a person referred to in article 139, paragraph i), they shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. Article 160 Kidnapping

1. Whoever, in a situation not covered by the provision of criminal procedural law, detains, imprisons, maintains in prison or detention another person or, in any way, deprives a person of liberty shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Imprisonment from 2 to 8 years shall be applied where:
a) The deprivation of liberty exceeds 72 hours; 67 (157) Determina-án (v) – Make a decision; decide something

b) The agent commits the deprivation with offence to physical integrity, torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment; c) The deprivation causes the victim's death, due to the agent's negligence, or causes the victim to commit suicide; d) The agent commits the deprivation against a person who exercises public, religious or political authority; e) An agent of authority or member of a political organisation promotes, authorises or supports the deprivation. Article 161 Abduction

1. Whoever, by violence, threat or trickery, transfers another person from one place to another with the intention to:
a) Subject the victim to extortion; b) Commit a crime of assault, exploitation or sexual abuse; c) Obtain ransom or reward; or
d) Compel public authority or another person to commit an action or omission or endure some activity,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. 2. Imprisonment from 5 to 15 years shall be applied where there are also circumstances provided for in article 160, number 2. Article 162 Enslavement

68 (165) Astúsia (s) – Means to deceive; cunning; artifice; stratagem to deceive. Transfere sira mai Dili ho astúsia = Deceive them to make them come to Dili. 69 (165) Extorsaun (s) – take something from another person's hand by force, violence or threat
70 (165) Agresaun (s) – a person commits assault when they beat the victim, attack the victim or do something against the victim. 71 (165) Rezgate (s) – money or something that someone gives or does to remove a person or thing that someone is holding. 72 (165) Rekompensa (s) – Payment, compensation or prize that a person receives for something they did. 73 (165) Suporta (v) – Suffer, endure, tolerate

1. Whoever, by any means, places another person as a slave and uses them in this condition, shall be punished with imprisonment from 8 to 20 years. 2. The victim's consent has no relevance, where the agent uses any means referred to in the following article. 3. To apply the provisions of this article, a person shall be considered in a situation of slavery who is in submission, even if only de facto, to power corresponding to a right of ownership, or other real right, or linked to the destination of a thing. Article 163 Trafficking in persons

1. A person who recruits, alienates, cedes, acquires, transports, transfers, lodges or harbours someone, by threat, force or other coercion, by abduction, by fraud, by deception, by abusing their authority or abusing that person's vulnerable situation, or by delivering or receiving payment or benefit to obtain consent from a person who has authority over another person, in order to obtain the objective of exploitation, shall be punished with imprisonment from 8 to 20 years. 2. A person who recruits, transports, transfers, lodges or harbours a person under 17 years of age in order to exploit them shall be punished with the penalty provided for in the previous number, even if it does not involve the means referred to in the previous number. 3. To apply the provisions of this article, exploitation must include, at least, exploitation of another person's prostitution or other sexual exploitation, forced labour or service, slavery or practices similar to slavery, or servitude or extraction of organs. 4. The victim's consent has no relevance, where the agent uses any means referred to in no. 1. 74 (163) Aliena (v) – transfer property to another person; limit property right by constituting another real right to a good to benefit a person who is not the owner. 75 (163) Sede (v) – Leave; Renounce a right leaving that right to another person
76 (163) Aloja (v) – Provide shelter; provide a place to stay
77 (163) Akolle (v) – Receive in the home; provide shelter; provide a place to stay. Article 164 Aggravation

Where the agent commits the acts described in articles 162 and 163
a) To facilitate their or another person's sexual exploitation or use of the victim; b) Against a victim who is not yet 17 years old; c) Against a victim who is in a foreign country or whom they have taken to a foreign country; d) Uses the victim, against their will, to commit a crime; or
e) At the time they exercise activity that gives them public or religious authority in a group, region or in the whole country,
they shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. Article 165 Trafficking in human organs

1. A person who obtains, alienates, cedes, acquires, transports or transfers another person's tissue, organ, substance or body part, without consent or, for this, uses threat, force or other coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of their authority or of the victim's vulnerable situation, or by delivering or receiving payment or benefit, or assists another person to obtain, transact, transport or store such tissue, organ, substance or body, shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. 2. Where the acts referred to in the previous number produce any consequence provided for in article 146 or cause the victim's death, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 20 years and from 5 to 20 years, respectively. 3. The victim's consent has no criminal relevance, where the agent uses any means referred to in no. 1. Article 166 Sale of persons

1. Whoever, in a situation not covered by the provision of article 136, by any act or transaction, transfers a person or group of persons to another person or group of persons to receive as payment some amount or counterpart, reward or other advantage shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. Where the agent commits the acts referred to in the previous number:
a) Against a person who is not yet 17 years old; b) With abuse regarding authority arising from family, tutelary or curatelary relationship, economic or work dependency; c) With exploitation regarding a function or place which, by any title, they exercise in a prison establishment, establishment for education or correction, hospital, hospice, asylum, clinic or other health establishment or establishment for assistance or treatment; or
d) Against an unconscious or incapacitated person, particularly vulnerable due to illness, physical or mental disability,
they shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 12 years. 3. The victim's consent or the consent of a person who exercises any power over the victim has no criminal relevance. Article 167
Torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment

1. Whoever, with a function to prevent, investigate, decide on any typical infraction, execute the respective sanction or protect, guard, supervise or accompany a detained or imprisoned person, commits torture or cruel degrading or inhuman treatment against that person, in order to:
a) Obtain from that person or from another person a confession, testimony, declaration or information; b) Punish that person for an act that that person or another person has already committed or they think that that person or another person has committed; c) Frighten that person or another person, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. A person who, on their own initiative, by superior order or by agreement with the competent entity to exercise the functions referred to in the previous number, de facto exercises those functions by committing any act written therein shall also be punished with the penalty provided for in the previous number. 3. Torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment shall be considered to exist where any act causes acute physical or psychological suffering, serious physical or psychological exhaustion or there is any act using chemical products, drugs or other means, natural or artificial, with the intention to disturb the victim's capacity to make decisions or show their will freely. Article 168 Aggravation

1. A person who, as a rule and in the conditions written in the previous article:
a) Causes serious bodily offence, as written in article 146; b) Uses particularly serious means or methods of torture, such as beating, electroshock, execution simulation, hallucinogenic substances, sexual abuse or serious threat to family members; 83 (167) Agudu (adj) – strong; heavy
84 (168) Grave (adj) – Heavy; strong; grave partikularmente = very strong. c) Commits those acts to prevent or make it difficult for someone to freely exercise their political or associative right enshrined in the Constitution; d) Habitually commits the acts written in this article,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. 2. Where the acts written in this article or in the previous article cause the victim to commit suicide or die the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years. Article 169 Omission of denunciation

1. A hierarchical superior who, having learned that their subordinate committed any act described in articles 167 and 168, does not make a denunciation within 3 days starting from the day they obtained this knowledge, shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 6 years. 2. Whoever, having obtained knowledge through their profession and officially that someone committed any act described in articles 167 and 168, does not immediately communicate to their hierarchical superior or does not make the respective denunciation shall be punished with the penalty fixed in the previous number extraordinarily mitigated. Article 170
Freedom of assembly and demonstration

Whoever interferes in an assembly or demonstration in a public place or open to the public, legally authorised, such as preventing or seeking to prevent the assembly or demonstration from taking place, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. An agent of police authority who prevents or seeks to prevent, in a situation not covered by legal conditionalism, someone from exercising their right to assembly or demonstration described in the previous number shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years. 85 (170) Kondisionalizmu legál = legal condition (condition provided for by law (for a situation))

SECTION II SEXUAL ASSAULT

Article 171 Sexual coercion

Whoever compels another person to suffer or commit, with them or with another person, a relevant sexual act, by violence, serious threat, or, for this purpose, first causes that person to lose consciousness or be unable to resist, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. Article 172 Rape

Whoever, by the means referred to in the previous article, has with another person vaginal coitus, anal coitus or oral coitus or compels that person to allow insertion of any object into their anus or vagina shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 173 Aggravation

An agent who commits the sexual assaults referred to in articles 171 and 172:
a) With abuse regarding authority arising from family, tutelary or curatelary relationship, hierarchical, economic or work dependency; b) With exploitation regarding a function or place which, by any title, they exercise in a prison establishment, establishment for education or correction, hospital, hospice, asylum, clinic or other health establishment or other establishment for assistance or treatment; 86 (173) Laborál (adj) – regarding work
87 (173) Ospísiu (s) – House for charity, such as receiving and treating poor people or sick people, only; asylum; house for admitting people with mental disturbance (insane), only or not. 88 (173) Azilu (s) – Place for charity and receiving and teaching poor children and for receiving poor or invalid people. c) Against an unconscious or incapacitated person, particularly vulnerable due to illness, physical or mental disability; d) Against a victim under 17 years old,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, in the case provided for in article 171, and imprisonment from 5 to 20 years, in the case provided for in article 172. SECTION III SEXUAL EXPLOITATION

Article 174 Sexual exploitation of another person

1. Whoever, with the intention to obtain profit or uses the activity as their daily work, facilitates or, in any way, contributes to another person exercising prostitution or committing other sexual acts shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. 2. The agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, where there are also any of the following circumstances:
a) Exploitation of the victim who is in abandonment or economic need; b) Violence, serious threat or coercion against the victim; c) The victim's displacement from the country where they live or stay to another country; d) Retention of the victim's identification documents. Article 175 Child prostitution

1. Whoever commits acts regarding sexual exploitation referred to in the previous article against a person who is not yet 17 years old, even with the victim's consent, shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, in the case provided for in number 1 of the previous article, and with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years, in the case where there is any circumstance covered by number 2 of the previous article. 2. Whoever offers, obtains, seeks or delivers a person who is not yet 17 years old for child prostitution shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years, where another legal provision does not establish a heavier penalty. Article 176 Child pornography

1. A person who, for predominantly sexual purposes, exposes or represents a person who is not yet 17 years old performing sexual activity, real or simulated, or, by any means, exhibits such activity or the minor's sexual organs shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. 2. This penalty shall also be applied to a person who produces, shares, disseminates, imports, exports, sells, possesses means of communication, instruments, documents or records for the purpose referred to in the previous number or to divulge those acts. SECTION IV SEXUAL ABUSE

Article 177 Sexual abuse of minor

89 (176) Predominantemente (adv) – Mainly. 90 (176) Expoem (v) – Show to people to see. Expoem fotografia ka pintura = place photograph or painting in exhibition for people to see. 91 (176) Reprezenta (v) – make representation; put in photograph or painting. Pintór reprezenta labarik ho nia inan = painter paints child with their mother. Fotógrafu reprezenta paizajen ho karau timur = Photographer takes photograph of landscape with water buffalo. 92 (176) Reál (adj) – That which happens or exists. Labarik halo aktividade seksuál reál = Child actually performs sexual activity. Labarik halo aktividade seksuál simulada = Child pretends to perform sexual activity
93 (176) Simulada (adj) – That which is only pretended; that which does not actually happen as we see or think. Labarik halo aktividade seksuál simulada
= Child pretends to perform sexual activity. Labarik halo aktividade seksuál reál = Child actually performs sexual activity. 94 (176) Divulga (v) – Make people know; release or share information (about something) for people to know. 1. Whoever commits vaginal coitus, anal coitus or oral coitus with a child who is not yet 14 years old shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years. 2. Whoever commits a relevant sexual act with a child who is not yet 14 years old shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 178
Sexual act with adolescent

An adult who, in a situation not covered by the provision of this section, commits a relevant sexual act with a child aged 14 to 16, by abusing their inexperience shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 5 years. Article 179
Sexual abuse of person unable to resist

Whoever commits a relevant sexual act with an unconscious or incapacitated person, particularly vulnerable due to illness, physical or mental disability, by exploiting their incapacity, shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. Article 180 Sexual fraud

1. A person who, by exploiting a person's error regarding their identity, commits vaginal coitus, anal coitus or oral coitus or relevant sexual act with that person, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 181 Sexual exhibitionism

95 (178) Inexperiénsia (s) – Lack of experience. The situation or state of a person who has no experience. 1. A person who publicly disturbs another person by committing an act of sexual character shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. A person who commits vaginal coitus, anal coitus or oral coitus in another person's presence, against that person's will, even in private shall also be punished with this penalty. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 4. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. SECTION V COMMON PROVISIONS

Article 182 Aggravation

1. The penalties provided for in sections II to IV of this chapter shall be aggravated by one third in their minimum and maximum limits where:
a) The victim's age is less than 12 years at the time the agent commits the act; b) The agent transmits to the victim venereal, syphilitic disease or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; c) Due to the act the victim dies, commits suicide or attempts suicide; d) The victim is the agent's descendant, collateral, relative or affine up to the second degree, adoptee or person living with them in similar condition or in a relationship that gives rise to hierarchical, economic or work dependency. 2. Where several circumstances provided for in the previous number concur at once, only one of those circumstances is relevant as a circumstance that modifies the abstract framework of the legal type; the others enter into the assessment to determine the concrete penalty. CHAPTER V AGAINST PRIVATE LIFE
Article 183 Disclosure

1. A person who, by even lawful means, learns facts about another person's private or sexual life and, without that person's consent and without just cause, publicly releases those facts shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 184 Violation of secrecy

1. A person who, without consent, reveals another person's secret which they learned through their status, office, employment, profession or art shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. 2. Where the secret concerns commercial, industrial, professional or artistic activity, which they learned in the circumstances described in the previous number, and causes prejudice to another person or to the State, imprisonment of 2 years or a fine shall be applied. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 185 Violation of domicile

100 (182) Releva (v) – Have relevance; shall be considered
101 (182) Valorasaun (s) – Act or effect of valuing; give positive or negative value; consider or assess to aggravate or mitigate. With assessment we give value or assess something or someone. Juíz halo valorasaun atu determina pena = judge gives value or assesses the act that the accused committed and all relevant circumstances to obtain the penalty they must give to the accused. 102 (182) Determina (v) – Calculate; assess. 103 (184) Ofísiu (s) – function; public office; employment. 1. A person who enters another person's dwelling without consent or, having authorisation to enter, remains in the dwelling after receiving notification to leave, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. Where, to commit the crime more easily, they use night, exploit a dwelling in a deserted place, gather with other persons so that together they become three or more persons, use a weapon, use violence, threaten with violence or use climbing, breaking or false key, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 3. Where at the time the agent commits the crime someone is inside the house, the penalty provided for in the previous number shall be increased by one third in its minimum and maximum limits. 4. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 5. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 186
Entry into other place closed to the public

1. A person who commits the act described in the previous article, numbers 1 and 2, in another place that is closed or fenced with a wall and where the public cannot freely enter shall be punished with the penalties provided for in those numbers, respectively, with their minimum and maximum limits reduced by half. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. Article 187
Violation of correspondence or telecommunication

1. A person who, without consent and in a case that procedural rules do not admit, opens a parcel, letter or other writing intended for another person or obtains knowledge about their content or does not let the addressee receive the parcel, letter or other writing shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 104 (185) Abitasaun (s) – Place where a person stays; place that a person uses as their home. 2. This penalty shall also be applied to a person who, in those circumstances, interferes with or learns the content of telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication communication. 3. A person who divulges the content of a letter, parcel, closed writing, telephone call or other communication referred to in the previous number, even if they learned the content by lawful means, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. 4. Where an official in the post, telegraph, telephone or telecommunication commits the acts that the previous numbers describe the minimum and maximum limits of this penalty shall be aggravated by one third. 5. To conduct criminal proceedings a complaint is required. TITLE III
CRIMES AGAINST LIFE IN DEMOCRACY

CHAPTER I
CRIMES AGAINST PEACE AND PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

Article 188 Criminal association

1. A person who promotes or establishes a group, organisation or association that uses as its purpose or its activity to commit crimes shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. A criminal group, organisation or association shall be considered a gathering of two or more persons who, over a period of time, work together to commit or make another person commit crimes, to disturb public order or to obtain directly or indirectly any benefit or advantage. 3. A person who joins any criminal group, organisation or association, supports any criminal group, organisation or association, or participates in the activity of any criminal group, organisation or association shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 4. A person who leads or directs the groups, organisations or associations that the previous numbers refer to shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. 5. The penalties that the previous numbers fear may receive extraordinary mitigation where the agent prevents or strives strongly to prevent the group, organisation or association from continuing or informs the authority of the existence of those groups to enable the authority to prevent those groups from committing crimes. Article 189 Incitement to crime

1. A person who, publicly and by any means, incites people to commit any crime shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. A person who, in private or in public, praises or gives reward to a person who committed any crime to incite other people to commit similar crimes shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 3. Where in the cases that the previous numbers fear someone actually commits the crime that the agent wanted to incite people to commit, that agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 5 years, where another legal provision does not establish a heavier penalty. Article 190 Participation in riot

1. Whoever participates in a public riot, in which people collectively commit violence against persons or property, shall be punished with imprisonment of 1 year or a fine, where another legal provision does not establish a heavier penalty. 2. Where the agent provokes or directs the riot, they shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years. 3. If the riot is armed, the penalty referred to in the previous numbers shall be doubled in its minimum and maximum limits. Article 191
Impediment to exercise of political right

A person who, by violence, prevents another person from exercising their political right shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. Article 192 Influence trafficking

1. A person who, themselves or through another person, with their authorisation or ratification, requests or receives, for themselves or for another person, patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage or the promise of such advantage, for them to abuse influence, real or supposed, that they exercise over any public entity, shall be punished with:
a) Imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, provided that another legal provision does not establish a heavier penalty, where they have the objective to obtain any favourable illicit decision; b) Imprisonment of 1 year or a fine, provided that another legal provision does not establish a heavier penalty, where they have the objective to obtain any favourable licit decision. 2. A person who, themselves or using another person, with their authorisation or ratification, gives or promises patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage to the persons referred to in the previous number to obtain the purpose referred to in the previous number, paragraph a), shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 4 years or a fine. Article 193 Disobedience to order to disperse

1. A person who does not follow a legitimate order to leave a public gathering or assembly, which legitimate authority gives, with warning that, if they do not follow, they commit a crime, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. If the disobedient person promotes the gathering or assembly, they shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. Article 194
Abuse of public signal or uniform

1. A person who abusively uses a signal or call for alarm or help, or pretends to make people believe that they need another person's help due to disaster, danger or situation of collective need shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. 2.The same penalty shall also be imposed on anyone who improperly or abusively uses a uniform, attire, costume or insignia that identifies a public or international activity, authority or institution as a means to facilitate the commission of some illicit act. Article 195 Usurpation of function

1. Anyone who, without authorization, exercises a function or practices an act that only a public official, military command or public security force may practice, thus presenting themselves, expressly or tacitly, as a person having such capacity, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who exercises a profession that, according to law, only persons having a title or fulfilling certain conditions may exercise, thus presenting themselves, expressly or tacitly, as a person having such title or fulfilling such conditions, shall also be punished with the same penalty. 3. Anyone who continues to exercise a public function despite having received official notification of their dismissal or suspension from such function shall also be punished with the same penalty. CHAPTER II
AGAINST STATE SECURITY

Article 196 Treason against the homeland

Anyone who, through violence, threat of violence, usurpation or abuse of sovereign function, prevents or attempts to prevent the exercise of national sovereignty in the territory of Timor-Leste or in any part of that territory or endangers the integrity of the national territory, as a means to submit or surrender to foreign sovereignty, shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 30 years. Article 197
Service or collaboration with enemy armed forces

1. A Timorese citizen who collaborates with a foreign country or group or with their representatives or serves under the flag of a foreign country in time of war or armed action against Timor-Leste shall be punished with imprisonment from 15 to 25 years. 2. Preparatory acts relating to the facts described in the previous number shall give rise to imprisonment from 3 to 15 years. 3. A Timorese person or resident in the national territory who practices acts suitable to assist or facilitate armed action or war that a foreign country or group conducts against Timor-Leste shall be punished with imprisonment from 10 to 20 years. Article 198 Sabotage of national defense

Anyone who, with the intention to prejudice or endanger national defense, destroys, damages or renders unusable, totally or partially:
a) Works or materials of the armed forces or works or materials allocated to the armed forces; b) Routes or means of communication or transport; c) Any installation related to communication or transport; or
d) Factories and depots,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. 107 (198) Allocated (adj) – That which has already been designated for. Allocated to the armed forces = that which has already been designated for the armed forces; that which the armed forces will use. Article 199
Campaign against peace efforts

A Timorese person or resident in the national territory who, in time of preparation for or conduct of war, disseminates, by any means, to the general public, rumors or statements, their own or another's, which they know to be false, totally or partially, in order to prejudice efforts for Timor-Leste's peace or to assist a foreign enemy, shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 200
Violation of State secrets

1. Anyone who enables an unauthorized person to know or discloses to the public any facts, documents, plans, objects, knowledge or information which, due to the Timorese State's interest in external security or in the conduct of foreign policy, a foreign country should not know, thus endangering such interest, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 10 years. 2. Anyone who collaborates with a foreign government or group with the intention to commit the facts referred to in the previous number or recruits or assists persons who must commit such facts shall be punished with the penalty provided in the previous number. 3. When the agent who commits the facts described in the previous number exercises a political, public or military function which, by its nature, should prevent them from committing such facts more strongly than an ordinary citizen, imprisonment from 5 to 15 years shall be applied. Article 201 Diplomatic infidelity

Anyone who, officially representing the Timorese State, with the intention to prejudice national rights or interests:
a) Conducts negotiations concerning the State with a foreign government or international organization; or

b) Assumes commitments in the name of Timor-Leste without authorization to assume them,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 202 Alteration of the lawful State

1. Anyone who, through violence, threat of violence or incitement to civil war, seeks to overthrow, change or dominate the lawful State established by the constitution shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. 2. Anyone who commits the act described in the previous number with armed violence must be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 20 years. 3. Anyone who makes public incitement or distributes weapons to anyone to commit the acts described above shall be punished, respectively, with the penalty for attempt. Article 203
Attack against the highest representative of a sovereign organ

1. Anyone who commits an attack against the highest representative of a sovereign organ or a person who, according to the constitution, substitutes them, or a person whose appointment has already been announced but who has not yet assumed the position, shall be punished with imprisonment from 8 to 20 years. 2. When a crime against life, physical integrity or liberty is consummated, the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 12 to 25 years. 3. The penalties provided in the previous numbers shall also apply to anyone who commits the acts already described against a foreign person who falls within the situation provided in number 1, ambassadors and persons serving as directing organs of international organizations, when they are residing in Timor-Leste. Article 204
Coercion against a constitutional organ

1. Anyone who, through violence or threat of violence, prevents or limits a sovereign organ from exercising its function freely shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. 2. Anyone who commits the act described in the previous number against an organ of district or local power shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 3. When someone commits the act described in number 1 against any member of those organs, the maximum and minimum limits of the penalties referred to in numbers 1 and 2 shall be reduced by half. Article 205
Disturbance of the functioning of constitutional organs

Anyone who through tumult, disorder or shouting illegitimately disturbs the functioning of the organs referred to in the previous numbers or anyone sitting in those organs to exercise their function shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. Article 206
Outrage against national symbols

Anyone who publicly, by word, gesture or written dissemination or by other means of communication with the public, offends the national flag or anthem, the arms or emblem of Timorese sovereignty or shows disrespect due to those symbols shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. CHAPTER III AGAINST LIFE IN SOCIETY

SECTION I CRIMES OF COMMON DANGER

Article 207 Driving without a license

Anyone who uses a motorized vehicle without having the license required by law shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. Article 208
Driving under the influence of alcohol or psychotropic substances

1. Anyone who, at least through negligence, operates a motorized vehicle when they have 1.2sg of alcohol in each liter of their blood shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who, at least through negligence, operates a motorized vehicle when they are not in a condition to drive safely because they are under the influence of narcotics or under the influence of analogous products that cause physical, mental or psychological disturbance. Article 209 Dangerous driving

1. Anyone who operates a motorized vehicle on a public road and, due to not being in a condition to drive safely or due to grossly violating road traffic rules, endangers another person's life or physical integrity shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years. 2. Negligence regarding the conduct or danger shall give rise to imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. Article 210
Attack on transport safety

1. Anyone who commits acts suitable to destroy or reduce safety in means of transport and, thus, endangers another person's life or physical integrity shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. Number 2 of the previous article also applies here. Article 211 Prohibited weapons

1. Anyone who, in situations not authorized by law, manufactures, imports, transports, sells or gives to another person firearms, chemical weapons, biological weapons, nuclear weapons, ammunition for such weapons, substances to manufacture such weapons or for them to function or other types of explosives shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 2. When the facts described in the previous number have the purpose of using such weapons in war, imprisonment from 2 to 8 years shall be applied. 3. An agent who, without legal authorization, possesses, uses or carries a firearm shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. Article 212 Drunkenness and intoxication

1. Anyone who, at least through negligence, renders themselves non-imputable due to drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages or toxic substances and in that state commits some typical illicit act shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine. 2. The penalty may not be heavier than that provided for the typical illicit act that the agent committed. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 213
Qualification to exercise certain activities

1. Anyone who, without legal qualification, sells, administers, prescribes or gives, in any way, to another person, habitually, pharmaceutical or other products whose commerce and prescription, administration and dispensation only health professionals or entities with due license may do shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the facts referred to in the previous number endanger another person's life, imprisonment from 1 to 4 years shall be applied. Article 214
Adulterated or deteriorated products

1. Anyone who places for people to purchase, administers or gives, in any way, food, pharmaceutical or other products which, due to being deteriorated, adulterated or contaminated,

may endanger life shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. When the facts described in the previous number cause the victim's death due to their consumption of such products, the penalty is from 3 to 12 years. SECTION II
CRIMES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT

Article 215 Against the environment

1. Anyone who, contrary to legal or regulatory provisions protecting the environment, provokes or causes, directly or indirectly, emission, discharge, radiation, extraction or excavation, landfilling, noise, vibration, injection or deposit in the atmosphere, in soil, subsoil or terrestrial, maritime or underground water, including in border zones, or water capture, which may seriously prejudice the equilibrium of natural systems, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the agent deliberately releases, emits or introduces ionizing radiation or other substances into the air, land or maritime, continental, surface or underground water, in quantities that cause one or more persons to suffer serious bodily harm requiring medical or surgical treatment or cause irreversible sequelae, they shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years, and, if they cause someone's death, they shall be punished with imprisonment from 5 to 15 years. Article 216 Aggravation

1. When an industrial or commercial establishment commits the activities provided in the previous article and any of the following circumstances exist:
a) The industry or commercial activity operates clandestinely without license or administrative authorization; b) Does not comply with the express order of the competent administrative authority to correct or suspend the activity referred to in the previous article; c) Does not comply with safety rules or procedures provided in legal or regulatory provisions; d) By any means deliberately prevents the inspection process of the competent administrative authority or falsifies information about the consequences of the industry or commercial activity; e) Produces irreversible or catastrophic environmental deterioration,
the maximum and minimum limits of the penalty provided in the previous number shall be increased by one third. 2. Criminal responsibility shall also be borne, under the previous number, by the person sitting as individual holder, the person who legally represents the collective person that owns the offending industrial or commercial establishment, the person who acts as the legal representative of that collective person, and also, in irregularly constituted societies, the partners or members who authorized those actions. Article 217 Against flora and fauna

1. Anyone who, with serious prejudice to the environment, cuts, burns, poisons, collects or illegally traffics in flora species classified as threatened or in danger of extinction, or their seeds, due to destroying or seriously altering their natural habitat, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. The penalty provided in the previous number shall also apply to anyone who introduces or facilitates entry of non-autochthonous species and, thus, prejudices biological equilibrium, contrary to law or provisions of general character to protect fauna or flora species. Article 218
Threatened or endangered species

1. Anyone who hunts or fishes threatened species or practices activities that prevent the development of such species or create difficulties for their reproduction or migration, contrary to law or provisions of general character to protect wild fauna species, or commerces or traffics in such species, totally or partially, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. An agent who commits the acts referred to in the previous number:
a) In a terrestrial or maritime zone declared a protected natural zone; b) Against species or subspecies classified as in danger of extinction
shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine. Article 219 Illegal fishing

1. Anyone who practices fishing in national maritime waters without a fishing license from the competent administrative authority shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the agent is a collective person, criminal responsibility shall be borne, under the previous number, by the person who, according to law, represents that collective person, the person who acts as the legal representative of that collective person, and also, in irregularly constituted societies, the partners or members who authorized those actions. 3. Fishing for domestic subsistence is not punished under number 1. Article 220 Illicit fishing means

Anyone who uses firearms, explosives, toxic substances or other instruments or similar arts with destructive efficacy against marine fauna to capture fishery resources in national terrestrial or maritime waters shall be punished with imprisonment up to 5 years or a fine. Article 221

Prohibited burning
1. Anyone who, in a season not for burning or without necessary administrative authorization, conducts burning that causes destruction of forests, plantations or crops shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 2. An agent who conducts legal burning but, through negligence, provokes the prejudice referred to in the previous number shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. SECTION III OTHER CRIMES

Article 222
Impediment or disturbance of procession, ceremony or worship

1. Anyone who, through violence or threat of violence or any coercion, prevents or disturbs the conduct of a funeral procession or ceremony or the exercise of religious worship shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 223
Profanation of objects or places of worship or veneration

1. Anyone who, in order to cause alarm or disturb social peace, profanes a place or object of religious worship or veneration shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who offends or insults another person because of their faith or religious function, in a manner suitable to cause social alarm or disturbance shall be punished with the same penalty. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 224

108 (223) Alarm (n) – Shock; fear
109 (223) Profane (v) - violate something or a place that is sacred
110 (223) Veneration (n) – Adoration; behavior that shows great respect
111 (223) Disturbance (n) – Confusion; instability

Destruction, subtraction, concealment or profanation of corpse

1. Anyone who subtracts, destroys or conceals a corpse or any human remains or cremated remains, contrary to the will of the person having the right or without that person's will and in situations not authorized by law, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who profanes a corpse or any human remains or cremated remains through acts that show disrespect for the deceased shall be punished with the same penalty. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 4. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 225
Failure to fulfill alimentary obligation

1. Anyone who has an obligation to provide alimony and is in a condition to fulfill that obligation but does not fulfill that obligation to the point of endangering the alimentary recipient's ability to satisfy their fundamental needs, even though another person's assistance has removed that danger, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 226 Subtraction of minor

1. Anyone who subtracts or refuses to deliver a minor to the person who has assumed the function of caring for that minor or causes that minor to run away shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. If such facts are done with violence or threat of violence, imprisonment from 1 to 4 years shall be applied. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 227 Omission of assistance

112 (225) Alimony (n) – Food, clothing, place to live, education, treatment and medicine for health that according to law a person must provide to their child or their spouse or others

1. Anyone who, in a time of serious need, namely due to disaster, accident, public calamity or common danger, which endangers another person's life, physical integrity or liberty, does not provide necessary assistance to remove that danger, through personal action or promotion of assistance, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. 2. When the person who omits necessary assistance is the one who caused the situation provided in the previous number, that omitter shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. 3. The omission of assistance does not give rise to penalty when there is serious danger to the omitter's life or physical integrity or when, due to other relevant reason, such assistance cannot be required of them. 4. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 228 Refusal of medical assistance

A doctor or health professional who refuses assistance relating to their profession in a situation where there is danger to another person's life or serious danger to another person's physical integrity, which there is no other way to remove, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. CHAPTER IV ELECTORAL CRIMES

Article 229 Fraud in census

1. Anyone who prevents another person, whom they know has the right, from registering themselves, inserts facts they know to be false, omits facts they must inscribe or, by any means, falsifies the electoral census shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 113 (227) Relevant (adj) – Important; heavy; strong
114 (228) Refuse (v) – Unwilling to give or do (something)
115 (228) Physical integrity – Complete body, which is not injured or sick

2. When the agent uses violence or provokes cunning deception to prevent someone from registering themselves, imprisonment from 2 to 6 years shall be applied. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 230 Obstruction of candidacy

Anyone who, by any means, prevents another person, party or political force, whom they know has the right, from competing in an electoral act shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. Article 231 Ineligible candidate

1. Anyone who presents their candidacy when they know they do not have the capacity to be elected shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 232
Deficiency in electoral register

Anyone who, charged with elaborating the electoral register or guaranteeing its correctness, does not elaborate or does not make that correction or prevents their legal substitute from doing so, thereby preventing the electoral act from being held, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. Article 233 Illicit electoral propaganda

116 (229) Deception (n) – Mistaken belief. Cunning deception = Mistaken belief through lies
117 (229) Cunning (adj) – That which uses lies
118 (229) Register themselves (v) – Put name; make their inscription. 119 (232) Electoral register – A list with the names of people who can vote
120 (232) Correctness (n) – Correct. Guarantee the correctness of the electoral register
= guarantee the electoral register has nothing wrong. Make correction = Correct; fix; make correct. 1. Anyone who uses means of propaganda prohibited by law or continues propaganda after the established deadline has passed, or conducts propaganda in a prohibited place shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. 2. Anyone who prevents another person from exercising their right to conduct electoral propaganda or illegitimately destroys electoral propaganda shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. Article 234 Obstruction of freedom to choose

1. Anyone who through violence, threat of violence or fraudulent artifice compels another person, against their will, not to vote or to vote in a determined direction or buys or sells a vote shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. The same penalty shall also apply to anyone who, charged with assisting a blind person or a person who has the right to such assistance, does not respect the direction of the vote communicated to them. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 235 Disturbance of electoral act

1. Anyone who, by any means, disturbs the functioning of a voting assembly shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. 2. The agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years when they cause that disturbance:
a) Through violence or threat of violence; b) Through tumult or popular gathering near the voting assembly; c) Through intentional cutting of electrical energy; 121 (234) Artifice (n) – Means; device; mechanism
122 (234) Determined (adj) – One direction that is clearly indicated. Determined direction = one direction that is clearly indicated. 123 (234) Charged (v) - Has received an obligation or position; has received some work to do. Charged with assisting = has received the obligation to assist. d) Through the absence of persons indispensable for that act when that absence creates great difficulty for the electoral act to begin or continue. 3. The provisions of the previous numbers shall also apply to an agent who commits such acts when, after voting has finished, the counting of results is being conducted. Article 236
Obstruction of supervision of electoral act

1. Anyone who, in any way, prevents the representative of a legally constituted party or political force competing in the electoral act from exercising their competence to conduct supervision shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 237 Fraud in voting

1. Anyone who votes despite not having the right to vote or votes repeatedly despite having already voted in that electoral act shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who deliberately allows someone to commit the acts provided in the previous number shall be punished with the same penalty. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 238 Fraud in scrutiny

1. Anyone who, in any way, falsifies the counting of votes in the act of ascertaining or publishing electoral results shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 2. Anyone who, with fraudulent intention, substitutes, destroys, suppresses, violates,

124 (235) Indispensable (adj) – That which is truly needed; that which cannot be left out. 125 (236) Competing (n) – That which has entered as a candidate in the election
126 (238) Counting (n) – Act or activity of counting

views or falsifies a ballot or count or document relating to the election shall be punished with the same penalty. Article 239 Refusal of electoral position

Anyone who, having received appointment to sit at the table of a voting assembly and, unjustifiably, refuses to assume or abandons that function shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. Article 240
Violation of secrecy in scrutiny

Anyone who in an electoral act with secret scrutiny violates secrecy by taking or disclosing knowledge about whom another person voted for shall be punished with imprisonment up to 1 year or a fine. Article 241
Duty of neutrality or impartiality

A public official in electoral administration or a collaborator of electoral administration who violates their duty of neutrality and impartiality shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. Article 242 Aggravation

When anyone who commits any crime provided in this chapter performs a public function, namely in government, national parliament, or armed forces, as a judicial magistrate or in the Public Prosecutor's Office, in police forces or other administrative organs, the penalty provided in each type shall rise to double in its minimum and maximum limits. CHAPTER V

127 Scrutiny (n) – Voting; activity to know how many votes each candidate received

AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Article 243 Obstruction of public authority

1. Anyone who, through violence or serious threat against a public official or agent of military, militarized or police forces, does not allow them to practice an act relating to their function or makes them practice an act contrary to their duty shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 2. When the act referred to in the previous number is actually done or actually prevented, imprisonment from 2 to 8 years shall be applied. Article 244 Disobedience

1. Anyone who does not comply or continues not to comply with a legitimate order or mandate regularly communicated, which a competent authority or official gives, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine:
a) When a legal provision so determines; or
b) When that authority or official informs the agent that, if they do not comply with that order or mandate, they will incur criminal responsibility. 2. In situations where a legal provision qualifies an act as qualified disobedience, imprisonment from 1 to 4 years shall be applied. 3. Disobedience to a specific prohibition or interdiction that a criminal sentence determines and also disobedience to an accessory penalty or security measure that does not deprive liberty shall give rise to the penalty referred to in number 1. Article 245 Freeing prisoner
1. Anyone who, by illegal means, frees a person who has legally lost their liberty or, by any means, helps that person escape shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 2. When such acts are committed with violence, weapons or with the collaboration of more than two people, imprisonment from 2 to 8 years shall be applied. Article 246 Evasion

1. Anyone who, according to law, has lost their liberty and escapes shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years. 2. When evasion is achieved by the means described in the previous article, number 2, imprisonment from 2 to 6 years shall be applied. Article 247 Official's assistance in evasion

1. An official who assists someone to commit the acts provided in the previous articles shall be punished with the penalty established therein plus one third in its minimum and maximum limits. 2. When the official who has the obligation to hold or conduct surveillance of the evader gives assistance to commit such acts, the maximum and minimum limits of the provided penalties shall be further increased by half. 3. When evasion arises due to gross negligence of the official who must watch the evader, imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine shall be applied. Article 248 Prisoners' mutiny

1. Persons who, having lost their liberty according to law, having already conspired and combining their efforts with persons in circumstances similar to theirs, attack or threaten with violence the person who has the obligation to watch or guard them, in order to achieve their evasion or another person's evasion or compel that person to practice some act or not practice some act, shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 2. When through the behaviors described in the previous number some of the agents or some other persons actually escape, imprisonment from 3 to 10 years shall be applied. Article 249
Diversion or destruction of objects in public power's hands

Anyone who destroys, damages or renders unusable, totally or partially, or in any way, subtracts from public power that has received or controls documents or other movable objects, or things arrested, seized or objects under precautionary provision shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years, when another norm does not give rise to a heavier penalty. Article 250
Breaking of mark, seal or edict

1. Anyone who opens, tears or renders unusable, totally or partially, a mark or seal, which a competent official has legitimately placed to identify or make inviolable something or to certify that arrest, seizure or precautionary provision has already fallen upon something, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Anyone who, in any way, intentionally, prevents the addressee from knowing an edict that a competent official has posted shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years or a fine. TITLE IV
CRIMES AGAINST PATRIMONY

CHAPTER I AGAINST PROPERTY

Article 251 Simple theft

1. Anyone who, with illegitimate intention to make their own or another's, subtracts another person's movable thing shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. To conduct criminal proceedings, a complaint is required. Article 252 Aggravated theft

1. An agent who commits the acts referred to in the previous article shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years, when:
a) That movable thing of another person has great scientific, artistic or historical value or is something important for economic or technological development; b) That movable thing of another person is a vehicle, which a vehicle or passenger in a collective vehicle is carrying, or is held at a dock or station for embarkation or disembarkation; c) That movable thing of another person is something to be used in religious worship or in veneration of the memory of the deceased and is held in a place for worship or in a cemetery; d) The agent takes advantage of night to commit that theft more easily; e) The victim suffers considerable prejudice due to that appropriation; f) The agent enters a dwelling, public service installation, commercial or industrial establishment with the intention to commit theft; g) The agent uses a false key, scaling or breaking to realize their intention; h) The agent takes advantage of the victim's special vulnerability in disaster, accident or public calamity; i) The agent takes advantage of special trust arising from their relationship with the victim or with the place where the subtracted thing is held by its owner; j) The agent commits theft as their daily work; k) Three or more persons, including the agent, commit that crime; l) The subtracted thing has a value exceeding US$
1,000 but not exceeding $5,000. 128 (252) Commits theft as their daily work = Commits theft as a way of life. 129 (252) Including (v) – Counted with. Three persons, including the agent = three persons, counted with the agent. 2. When the subtracted thing has a value exceeding US$5,000, imprisonment from 3 to 10 years shall be applied. 3. When several circumstances referred to in number 1 characterize one conduct, only the circumstance that has the strongest aggravating effect shall be considered to determine the abstract framework of the applicable legal type and the other circumstances shall be valued as circumstances of general character to determine the measure of the penalty. 4. When the stolen thing has a value less than US$50, the circumstances written in number 1 function only as aggravating circumstances of general character. Article 253 Robbery

1. Anyone who, with illegitimate intention to make their own or another's, subtracts or compels delivery to them of another person's movable thing, through violence against a person, threat of imminent danger to a person's life or to a person's physical integrity, or places that person in a situation where they cannot resist, shall be punished with imprisonment from 3 to 10 years. 2. When, together with the agent's conduct, there also arises any circumstance written in the previous article, number 1, imprisonment from 4 to 12 years shall be applied. 3.3. When the conduct causes danger to the victim's life or serious offense to the victim's physical integrity, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 5 to 15 years. 4. When the conduct causes the death of someone, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 5 to 20 years. Article 254 Violence following subtraction

A person who, after someone has already committed theft, acts as described in the previous article in order to retain the appropriated thing or prevent the appropriated thing's

130 (253) Eminent (adj) - That which is about to occur soon

restitution shall receive the penalties established for the crime of robbery, respectively. Article 255
Theft for vehicle use

1. A person who uses an automobile or motorized vehicle, aircraft, boat or bicycle without the authorization of the person who has the right shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 256 Abuse of trust

1. A person who, illegitimately, makes their own a movable thing that was delivered to them with a title131 that does not transfer ownership shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 257
Aggravated abuse of trust

1. When the movable thing has a value higher than US$1,000, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. The penalty described in the previous number and in article 256 shall have its minimum and maximum limits increased by one third when the agent received the thing for deposit by order of law, by reason of their office, employment or profession or as guardian, curator or depositary. Article 258 Simple damage

1. A person who, totally or partially, destroys, damages or renders useless another person's thing shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 131 (256) Title (n) – Quality; basis

2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 259 Aggravated damage

1. A person who, totally or partially, destroys, damages or renders useless a thing:
a) That is for public use or has public utility; b) With important scientific, artistic or historical value or with great importance for technological or scientific development; c) Concerning means of communication or transport with great social importance; d) Thus causing damage higher than US$1,000; e) Belonging to another person, that is to be used in religious worship or to venerate the memory of the dead and kept in a place for worship or in a cemetery,
shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. Article 260 Damage with violence

When the agent commits the acts described in articles 258 and 259 with violence against someone or with threat of imminent danger to life or physical integrity, or by placing that person in a situation where they cannot resist, a prison sentence of 4 to 12 years shall be applied. Article 261 Usurpation of immovable property

1. A person who, with violence or serious threat against another person, invades or occupies another person's immovable property, with the intention of exercising a right of ownership, possession, use or easement that the law, judgment, contract or administrative act does not protect132, shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years. 132 (261) Protect (v) - To safeguard

2. When the means the agent uses constitutes a crime punishable with a heavier penalty than that which the previous number imposes133, that penalty shall be applied. Article 262 Alteration of boundary markers

1. A person who, with the intention of making their own or another person's, totally or partially, another person's immovable property, removes or alters a boundary marker or any sign that serves to establish limits concerning ownership of immovable property shall receive a prison sentence of up to 1 year or a fine. 2. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 263 Arson

1. A person who, intentionally, causes a fire in a house, building, establishment, means of transport, forest, plantation or other property and, thus, causes danger to life, physical integrity or patrimonial property with a value higher than US$5,000 shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. For the acts described in the previous number concerning public property or property in which a public service operates, a prison sentence of 2 to 10 years shall be applied. 3. If the agent commits these acts through negligence, they shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine, when another legal provision does not provide for a heavier penalty. 4. When only the danger referred to in number 1 arises through negligence, a penalty of 2 to 6 years shall be applied. 5. In the cases that number 4 provides for, there must be a complaint to carry out criminal proceedings. Article 264 Active repentance

When, having committed the crimes provided for in articles 251, 252, 256 to 261 and 263,
no. 4, but, before the hearing for judgment begins, the agent commits some act to repair,

133 (261) Impose (v) – To provide for; to establish

integrally or partially, the damage they caused, the penalty may receive extraordinary mitigation. Article 265 Definition

For the purposes of this code's provisions, the following shall be considered:
a) "Breaking in" the breaking134, fracture or destruction, total or partial, of a device that serves to close or prevent entry, from outside or inside, to a house or to a closed place that depends on that house; b) "Climbing" entry into a house or closed place that depends on that house, through a place not ordinarily used as an entrance or through a device to close or prevent entry or passage; c) False key
i) An imitated, counterfeited or altered key; ii) A true key when, fortuitously135 or surreptitiously, it leaves the hands of the person who has the right to use it; and
iii) A picklock136 or instrument that can be used to open a lock or other security device. CHAPTER II
AGAINST PATRIMONY IN GENERAL

Article 266 Simple fraud

1. A person who, with the intention of obtaining illegitimate enrichment for themselves or for another person, through error or deception concerning a fact that they astutely provoke, causes another person to commit an act that causes patrimonial damage to that person or to another person shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 134 (256) Breaking (n) – Act that breaks something
135 (265) Fortuitously (adv) – Casually; accidentally
136 (265) Picklock (n) – Metal tool to open locks or padlocks

3. The provision of article 264 also applies here. 4. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 267 Aggravated fraud

1. A person who, through their conduct described in the previous article:
a) Causes damage with a value higher than US$2,000; b) Commits fraud as their daily occupation; c) Places the victim in a difficult economic situation,
shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years. 2. The provision of article 264 also applies here. Article 268 Computer fraud

1. A person who, with the intention of obtaining illegitimate enrichment for themselves or for another person, causes patrimonial damage to another person, by interfering with the result of computer data processing or by making incorrect structuring of a computer program, not using data correctly or completely, using data despite lacking authorization or intervening in any way in processing despite lacking authorization, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 269
Aggravated computer fraud

When the conduct described in the previous article causes any circumstance described in article 267,
no. 1, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years. Article 270 Extortion

1. A person who, with the intention of obtaining for themselves or for another person illegitimate enrichment, compels another person, with violence or threat of important harm, to make a patrimonial disposition137 that causes damage to that person or to another person, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. 2. When any circumstance provided for in article 252 arises, the agent shall receive the penalty provided for in that article. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 271 Simple receiving

1. A person who, before seeking to know whether it has legitimate provenance or not, acquires or receives, with any title, a thing that, according to its nature or according to the person who has, holds or offers it, or according to its price or the conditions of its sale or offer, a person with ordinary care has reason to suspect that the thing comes from criminal conduct against another person's patrimony shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine penalty. 2. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 272 Aggravated receiving

1. A person who, with the intention of obtaining patrimonial advantage for themselves or for another person, hides a thing that another person obtained through a crime against patrimony, receives, gives as pledge, makes their own with any title, holds, keeps, delivers or contributes to delivering the thing to another person, or in any way seeks a way for the thing or its value or product that comes directly from the thing to remain in their hands or in another person's hands shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. The agent who commits the acts described in the previous number shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years when:

137 (270) Patrimonial disposition – a person makes a patrimonial disposition when they deliver to another person some patrimonial property. a) They commit receiving as their daily occupation to live or habitually; b) The property, value or product has a value138 higher than US$2,000; c) At the time of committing the receiving they knew that the crime was committed in any circumstance described in article 253,
no. 1. Article 273 Assistance to criminal

1. A person who, after a crime against patrimony, helps the agent of that crime to benefit from the thing they obtained in that way or the benefit that comes directly from the appropriated thing shall receive a prison sentence of up to 1 year or a fine. 2. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 274 Harmful administration

1. A person who, when having an obligation to manage or administer another person's interest, service or patrimonial property, even if they are also a partner of the company or collective person that owns the interest, service or property, causes economically significant patrimonial damage by intentionally violating rules concerning control or management or acting with serious violation of the duty concerning their function, shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years. 2. If the property, interest or service referred to in the previous number belongs to the State, a collective person with public utility, a cooperative or a popular association, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. 3. These penalties shall also be applied to a person who makes their own or lets another person make their own, illegitimately, a thing that they can manage only according to the purpose that those who administer another person's patrimony must follow. Article 275

138 (272) Value (n) - Price

Negligent administration
1. A person who, in the conditions described in the previous article's number 1, causes patrimonial damage because they do not act with the care that, according to the circumstances surrounding their conduct and as they are able, they have an obligation to use, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 1 year or a fine. 2. If the property or interest is that described in the previous article, number 2, a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine shall be applied. 3. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. Article 276
Intentional bankruptcy or insolvency

1. A person who, by any means, leads some company to bankruptcy or places it in insolvency, with the intention of harming creditors, when that bankruptcy or insolvency receives a declaration, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. If the fact described in the previous number concerns a public enterprise or cooperative, the penalty's minimum or maximum limit shall be aggravated by one third. Article 277
Negligent bankruptcy or insolvency

1. A person who causes bankruptcy139 or insolvency140 through serious carelessness141 or imprudence142, manifest prodigality143 or exaggerated expense, or through gross negligence in their activity, when that bankruptcy or insolvency receives a declaration, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine. 139 (277) Bankruptcy (n) – Situation in which some merchant or commercial company enters when they cannot fulfill their obligation because their debt is greater than their patrimony
140 (277) Insolvency (n) – Situation in which someone enters when they cannot pay their debt because their patrimony is not enough to pay. 141 (277) Carelessness (n) – Lack of care
142 (277) Imprudence (n) – Lack of care; careless act; not thinking beforehand (before doing something)
143 (277) Prodigality (n) – Quality of a person who spends wastefully

2. To carry out criminal proceedings there must be a complaint. TITLE V
CRIMES AGAINST THE REALIZATION OF JUSTICE

Article 278
Falsity in testimony or declaration

1. A person who, in testimony as a party, having taken an oath and having received a warning about the penal consequences that will fall upon them for false testimony, gives a false declaration concerning a fact about which they must give testimony shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. A suspect or accused shall receive the same penalty here for a declaration concerning their identity and criminal record. 3. When, due to the conduct described in the previous numbers, someone loses their freedom, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. Article 279
Falsity in testimony, expertise, interpretation or translation

1. A person who, as a witness, expert, technician, translator or interpreter before a tribunal or before a competent official to receive as a means of proof testimony, report, information or translation, gives testimony, presents a report, gives information or makes a false translation shall receive a prison sentence of up to 4 years or a fine. 2. A person who refuses to give testimony or present a report, information or translation when they have no just cause144 shall receive the same penalty. 3. When, having taken an oath and having received a warning about the penal consequences that will fall upon them, the agent commits the fact referred to in no. 1, a prison sentence of up to 5 years shall be applied. 144 (279) Cause (n) – Motive. Just cause – Motive that justifies someone not committing some act or not committing the act within the deadline. 4. When the conduct described in the previous numbers causes someone to lose their freedom, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. Article 280 Equivalence to desistance

The repentance and retraction of the agent who commits some fact described in the previous article before the falsity's effect receives consideration in a decision or the falsity causes damage to another person is equivalent to desistance. Article 281 Bribery

1. A person who convinces145 or attempts146 to convince another person, with a present or promise concerning patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage, to commit the fact referred to in article 278 or 279 and that person indeed commits that fact, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 4 years. 2. When the fact that articles 278 and 279 refer to is not actually committed, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. Article 282 Denial of justice

1. An official who in a procedural inquiry, jurisdictional process, process for counter-order or disciplinary matter, knowingly, decides or does not decide, promotes or does not promote, investigates or does not investigate or commits an act in their function, against the law, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the official commits the fact described in the previous number with the intention of harming or benefiting someone, they shall receive a prison sentence of up to 5 years. 145 (281) Convince (v) – To use strong reasoned argument or logical argument to make another person follow our thinking; to persuade; to lead; to induce. 146 (281) Attempt to convince (v) – To pressure someone to induce them to do something; to insist in order to do or obtain something. 3. When the conduct that the previous numbers describe causes someone to lose their freedom, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 4. When the agent commits the previous conduct through gross negligence, the penalty's minimum and maximum limit shall be reduced to half. Article 283 Coercion of magistrate

1. A person who, with violence, threat of important harm or by any means prevents a judge or public prosecutor from freely exercising their function shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years. 2. When, to commit these acts, the agent uses a political, public, military or police position that they hold, a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years shall be applied. 3. When, due to the conduct described in the previous numbers, the magistrate omits or commits some act against express law and that act causes damage to another person, a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years shall be applied. Article 284
Obstruction of jurisdictional activity

1. A person who, by any means, makes opposition, causes difficulty or blocks a judicial decision with res judicata from being fulfilled or executed shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 5 years. 2. When the agent who commits the acts provided for in the previous numbers exercises a political, public or military function that, according to its nature, should block them from committing these acts, they shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. Article 285 Slanderous denunciation

1. A person who, by any means, before an authority or publicly, with awareness that the imputation is false, denounces or spreads suspicion that someone committed a crime

with the intention of subjecting that person to criminal proceedings shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the agent makes a false imputation concerning a counter-order or disciplinary illicit, the penalty shall receive extraordinary mitigation. 3. When an official who has an obligation to carry out criminal proceedings fraudulently promotes the fact described in the previous numbers, the applicable penalty's minimum and maximum limit shall be aggravated by one third. Article 286 Non-participation

A person who, having had knowledge that someone committed some public crime and having an obligation to make a report, does not report shall receive a penalty concerning that crime which they concealed with its minimum and maximum limit reduced by two thirds. Article 287
Prevarication of magistrate or official

1. A judge, public prosecutor or official who in any phase of a jurisdictional process, with the intention of benefiting or harming another person, commits some act that falls within their functional power or does not commit an act that they have an obligation to commit shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. 2. When the fact described in the previous number causes someone to lose their freedom or causes illegal imprisonment or detention, a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years shall be applied. Article 288
Prevarication of lawyer or public defender

1. A lawyer or public defender who intentionally harms a case that is entrusted to their patronage shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years. 2. A lawyer or public defender who, in a single case, advocates or exercises defense for persons whose interests are in conflict, with the intention of benefiting or

harming some of them, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. Article 289 Simulation of crime

1. A person who, without saying who committed it, denounces a crime or makes a competent authority suspect that someone committed some crime, when they know that there is no crime, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine. 2. If this fact concerns a contravention, counter-order or disciplinary illicit, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of up to 1 year or a fine. 3. When an official who has an obligation to institute proceedings against the facts described in the previous numbers commits these facts, the applicable penalty's minimum and maximum limit shall be aggravated by one third. Article 290 Personal favoritism

1. A person who, totally or partially, prevents, frustrates147 or eludes the authority's probative or preventive activity, with the intention or with awareness of preventing a person who committed a crime from receiving a penalty or security measure, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt gives rise to punishment. 3. When an official who intervenes or has competence to intervene in a process or has an obligation to execute a penalty or security measure or to order its execution commits this favoritism, a prison sentence of 2 to 5 years shall be applied. 4. The acts described in number 1 do not give rise to penalty when:
a) The agent commits the fact to also prevent a penalty or security measure from being applied or executed against them; b) The person whom the agent wants to favor with this conduct is the agent's spouse, descendant, ascendant, adopter, adoptee or relative or affine up to

147 (290) Frustrate – to make something not produce its result or effect; to make something fail

the second degree, or a person who lives with them as husband and wife. Article 291
Violation of justice's secrecy

1. A person who, against legal determination and without just cause, releases to the public the content of a penal procedural act that falls within justice's secrecy or an act whose publicity a decision has already prohibited, shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years. 2. When the agent commits this violation through means of social communication, a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years shall be applied. TITLE VI
CRIMES IN THE EXERCISE OF PUBLIC FUNCTION

Article 292 Passive corruption for illicit act

1. An official who, themselves or through another person, with their authorization or ratification, requests or receives, for themselves or for another person, patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage or the promise of that advantage, even though they have no right to it, to commit or not commit some act against the obligation they have due to the position they hold, even if that act or omission already occurred before the request or acceptance arose, shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 15 years. 2. When the agent, before committing this fact, voluntarily refuses the offer or promise that they already received or returns the advantage, or, if the advantage is a fungible thing, its value, they shall not receive a penalty. 3. The penalty shall receive special mitigation when the agent indeed helps to obtain decisive proof to identify or capture other responsible persons. Article 293 Passive corruption for licit act

1. An official who, themselves or through another person, with their authorization or ratification, requests or receives, for themselves or for another person, patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage or the promise of that advantage, even though they have no right to it, to commit or not commit some act not against the obligation they have due to the position they hold, even if that act or omission already occurred before the request or acceptance arose, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. An official who, themselves or through another person, with their authorization or ratification, requests or receives, for themselves or for another person, patrimonial or non-patrimonial advantage or the promise of that advantage, even though they have no right to it, from a person who already requested, will soon request or will later request something that they must exercise the function they hold for that person to obtain, shall receive the same penalty. Article 294 Active corruption

1. A person who, themselves or through another person, with their authorization or ratification, gives or promises to an official or to another person with that official's knowledge, patrimonial advantage that the official has no right to receive, with the purpose indicated in article 292, shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years. 2. When through the conduct described in the previous number the agent wants to obtain the purpose that article 293 indicates, they shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine. Article 295 Embezzlement

1. An official who, against the law, makes their own or makes another person's money or movable thing, public or private, that is entrusted to them or comes into their hands or they can hold due to their function, shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years, when another legal provision does not order the application of a heavier penalty. 2. An official who lends, pawns or, in any way, encumbers the value or object that the previous number concerns shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine, when another legal provision does not order the application of a heavier penalty. 3. When the money or movable things that the previous numbers concern have a value higher than US$5,000, a prison sentence of 4 to 12 years or 2 to 5 years shall be applied, respectively. 4. When the money or movable things that number 1 concerns have a value lower than US$50, a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine shall be applied. Article 296 Embezzlement by use

An official who uses or lets another person use for a purpose that does not fall within its destination a vehicle or other movable thing with significant value, that comes into their hands or they can hold due to their function, to obtain for themselves or for another person illegitimate benefit or cause damage to someone, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years, when these things come into their hands or they can hold them due to their function. Article 297 Abuse of power

An official who abuses power or violates an obligation, that comes from the function they hold, to obtain benefit for themselves or for another person or cause damage to another person shall receive a prison sentence of 1 to 4 years, when another legal provision does not order the application of a heavier penalty. Article 298 Abuse with public force

An official who, having competence to use, requisition or order the use of public force, uses, requisitions or orders the use of that force to prevent the execution of law, a regular mandate of justice or a legitimate order of public authority

shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years, when another legal provision does not order the application of a heavier penalty. Article 299 Economic participation

1. An official who must intervene in a contract or operation or other activity, due to the public position they hold, and takes advantage of that condition to obtain for themselves or for another person, directly or through another person, patrimonial advantage or, in any way, illicit economic participation, and, thus, causes damage to the public interest that they must administer, supervise, defend or realize, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. When this conduct causes damage to the State higher than US$10,000, a prison sentence of 3 to 15 years shall be applied. Article 300 Refusal of cooperation

An official who, having received a request from a competent authority to give cooperation to administer justice or for another public service, and refuses that cooperation or, despite having no justified motive, does not give that cooperation, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. Article 301 Aggravation

1. When the holder of a political position or some magistrate commits the crimes that this title refers to, the respective penalty's maximum limit shall increase by one third. 2. Special legislation shall fix non-penal effects and procedure concerning the situations referred to in the previous number. Article 302 Concept of official
1. For the purposes of penal law, the expression official includes:

a) Civil official; b) Administrative agent; c) Members of the armed and police forces; d) A person who, even if provisionally or temporarily, with remuneration or gratuitously148, voluntarily or obligatorily, receives a function to hold or hold with another person an activity in administrative or jurisdictional public function, or, in similar circumstances, holds or holds with another person a function in an organism with public utility or participates in these functions. 2. For the purposes of penal law, the provisions of this title shall also be applied to a person who exercises a political, governmental or legislative function

TITLE VII FALSIFICATION CRIMES

CHAPTER I FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENT

Article 303
Falsification of document or technical notation

1. A person who, to cause damage to another person or to the State or to obtain illegitimate benefit for themselves or for another person:
a) Manufactures a false document or technical notation, falsifies or alters a document or abuses another person's signature to make a false document; b) Falsely149 inserts into a document or technical notation a juridically relevant fact; c) Falsely attests150 concerning a person, animal or thing's physical or psychic state or quality, based on scientific knowledge; 148 (302) Gratuitously (adv) – For free. 149 (303) Falsely (adv) – In a false manner
150 (303) Attest (v) - To declare to make someone believe; to certify. d) Uses a document or technical notation referred to in the previous paragraphs, that another person manufactured, falsified or issued
shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Falsification of technical notation shall be considered as an action that causes disturbance to a technical or automatic apparatus used to influence the result of technical notation. 3. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 304 Aggravated falsification

1. When the facts referred to in the previous article,
no. 1, concern an authentic document or document with the same force as an authentic document, sealed will, money order, bill of exchange, check, other document transmissible by endorsement or technical notation concerning the identification, total or partial, of an automobile vehicle, aircraft or boat, the agent shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. 2. If an official commits the facts described in the previous article or in article 309, number 1, when they are currently holding their function, a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years shall be applied. Article 305
Falsification of public document

An official who, in the function they hold, to cause damage to another person or to the State or to obtain illegitimate benefit for themselves or for another person:
a) Omits a fact that the document to which the law gives public faith must certify or authenticate; or
b) Intercalates an act or document in a protocol, register or official book not following legal formality
shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. Article 306
Use of another's identification document

A person who, with the intention of causing damage to another person or to the State, uses another person's identification document shall receive a prison sentence of up to 1 year or a fine. CHAPTER II FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY

Article 307 Counterfeiting of currency

1. A person who counterfeits currency or depreciates legitimate metallic currency, with the intention of putting it into circulation as genuine, shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years. 2. When, together with the facts described in the previous number, the agent also puts that currency into circulation, the penalty's maximum limit shall be aggravated by one third. 3. A person who, according to an agreement with the falsifier, puts up for people to buy, puts into circulation or, by other means, disseminates that currency shall receive a prison sentence of 3 to 10 years. Article 308 Passing of false currency

Whoever, in cases not falling within the previous article, acquires to put into circulation or indeed puts into circulation, sells or, by any means, disseminates counterfeited or depreciated currency, as genuine currency, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. Article 309
Counterfeiting of sealed or stamped value

1. A person who commits counterfeiting or falsification of sealed or stamped value that only the Timorese State can manufacture or supply, to sell, use or, in another way, put into circulation as legitimate, shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 8 years. 2. A person who commits these described acts concerning a postal stamp or other means of postal franking

that Timor-Leste's post office uses shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 3. A person who uses the falsified products that the previous numbers concern, even knowing that these products are falsified, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 2 years or a fine. 4. Attempt gives rise to punishment. Article 310
Counterfeiting of seal, stamp, mark or cancellation

1. A person who, with the intention of using as authentic or intact, acquires, counterfeits151 or falsifies some authority or public department's seal, stamp, mark or cancellation shall receive a prison sentence of 2 to 6 years. 2. Whoever uses the objects that the previous number concerns, when they know that the thing is falsified or lacks authorization from the person who has the right to give it, shall receive a prison sentence of up to 3 years or a fine. 3. When the falsifier themselves uses the objects already concerned, the penalty referred to in number 1's maximum limit shall be aggravated by one third. 4. Attempt concerning the facts that number 2 describes gives rise to punishment. Article 311 Weight and measure

1.1. Any person who, with the intent to harm another person or the State, counterfeits or, by any means, alters, or, having committed such acts, uses weights, measures, scales or other measuring instruments shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Attempt shall give rise to punishment. Article 312 Seizure and forfeiture

Counterfeit, falsified or altered currency and equivalent objects

151 (310) Counterfeit (v) – To make something according to an original in order to sell or give to another person as original; to make something false. and also weights, measures or instruments intended to be used to commit the crimes provided for in this title shall be seized and rendered unusable or destroyed. TITLE VIII
CRIMES AGAINST THE ECONOMY

Article 313 Money laundering

1. Any person who, knowing that any property or proceeds derive from the crime of terrorism, trafficking in arms or nuclear products, trafficking or sale of persons, pornography with minors, corruption, fraud or extortion, fiscal fraud, trafficking in protected species and trafficking in human organs or tissues or any other serious crime, which any person has committed, with any form of participation, and giving rise to a penalty with a minimum limit higher than 4 years' imprisonment:
a) Converts, transfers, assists or facilitates any operation to convert or transfer such property or proceeds, wholly or partially, directly or indirectly, in order to conceal or disguise the illicit origin of such proceeds or to assist any person implicated in any of these infractions to evade the legal consequences arising from his or her conduct; b) Conceals152 or disguises153 the nature, origin, location, disposition, movement or ownership of or rights concerning such property or proceeds; c) Acquires or receives such advantage under any title or uses, holds or preserves such advantage,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 4 to 12 years. 2. The penalties for the acts set out in the preceding number, subparagraphs a) to c), shall continue to apply even if the agent committed the act constituting the predicate crime154 in non-national territory or does not know where the crime was committed or whether the crime was actually committed. 152 (313) Conceal (v) – To hide. 153 (313) Disguise (v) – To pretend in order to hide
154 (313) Predicate crime – The crime from which the property, proceeds or right to be laundered derives. 3. The knowledge, intent or purpose that must enter as a constitutive element of the crime may be recognized from the effective and concrete factual circumstances. 4. There need not be a prior conviction for the commission of the predicate crime in order to demonstrate and prove that the proceeds have an illicit origin. 5. The predicate infraction also includes crimes which the agent committed in non-national territory when such acts constitute a crime in the State where the agent committed the crime and in the territory of Timor-Leste. 6. The crime of money laundering does not apply to the person who committed the predicate crime. 7. Attempt at money laundering gives rise to conviction and may also give rise to a reduction in penalty as a general rule. 8. The penalty provided for the typical illicit acts described in number 1, subparagraphs a) to c) may not be higher than the maximum limit of the penalty provided for the corresponding predicate infraction. Article 314 Fiscal fraud

1. Any person who, in order not to pay or to cause another not to pay, wholly or partially, any tax, fee or pecuniary fiscal obligation that must be paid to the State, by reason of
a) Not declaring facts giving rise to taxation or which are necessary to make the assessment; b) Incorrectly155 declaring facts which serve as the basis for taxation; c) Preventing by any means or withholding156 elements necessary to carry out inspection of the activity or facts giving rise to taxation,
shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years. 2. When the amount due that has not yet been paid is higher than 5,000 US dollars the agent shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 8 years. 155 (314) Incorrectly (adv) – Wrongly. To declare incorrectly = to declare wrongly; not to declare truthfully. 156 (314) Withhold (v) – Not to include or describe (something) in a situation where, according to law, one must include or describe; to hide. Article 315
Illicit importation and exportation of goods or merchandise

1. Any person who exports or imports goods or merchandise which, according to law, must have a license from any entity in order to import or export, without having a license, or not passing through customs shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. When the agent commits the act through negligence a penalty of imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine shall be applied. Article 316 Smuggling

1. Any person who does not pass through customs or through other mandatory control goods or merchandise entering or leaving the territory of Timor-Leste which he or she imports or exports shall be punished with imprisonment from 2 to 6 years or a fine. 2. When the goods or merchandise have a value higher than 10,000 US dollars or the agent habitually commits the acts described in the preceding number a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 8 years or a fine shall be applied. 3. When the conduct referred to in the preceding numbers concerns goods or merchandise which must have a license to import or export or whose importation or exportation is prohibited by law, the minimum and maximum limits of the penalty referred to in the preceding numbers shall be aggravated by one sixth. Article 317 Evasion of duties

1. Any person who imports or exports goods or merchandise but evades paying wholly or partially the duties or customs fees which he or she must pay by reason of the entry or exit of such merchandise shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years or a fine. 2. When the goods or merchandise have a value higher than 10,000 US dollars or the agent habitually commits the acts described in the preceding number a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 6 years or a fine shall be applied. Article 318 Exemption from penalty

An agent who commits the acts described in the preceding articles may be granted exemption from penalty when he or she voluntarily pays the duties or customs fees to be assessed and his or her conduct is only occasional157. Article 319 Irregular administration of public funds

1. Any person who gives public funds an application which is not the same as that which the law establishes shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years or a fine. 2. When such irregular application is not made for a public purpose which the law establishes a penalty of imprisonment from 2 to 6 years shall be applied. Article 320
Disobedience to requisition of goods

1. Any person who does not comply with a requisition of goods considered indispensable to establish economic activity or public consumption, as ordered by the Government, shall be punished with imprisonment from 1 to 4 years or a fine. 2. Negligent conduct shall give rise to a penalty of imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. Article 321
Destruction of goods relevant to the economy

1. Any person who, by any means, destroys, damages or renders unusable goods which have a relevant interest for the national economy or, in any way, removes such goods from the legal obligation which must exist by reason of

157 (318) Occasional (adj) – Which happens by reason of some circumstance; accidental; eventual; casual; fortuitous; unforeseen. Occasional conduct = conduct which arises by reason of some circumstance, but in a normal situation does not happen. the interest of the national economy shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Negligent conduct shall give rise to a penalty of imprisonment for up to 1 year or a fine. Article 322 Exploitation of illicit gambling

1. Any person who, in any way, exploits games of fortune or chance in places other than those which the law authorizes and without due legal authorization or ensures158 luck through error, deceit or any equipment, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 2. Games of fortune or chance are those whose result is uncertain because they are based only or mainly on luck. Article 323 Disturbance of public acts

Any person who, with the intent to prevent or prejudice the result of a judicial auction or with respect to a judicial auction or public tender, manages, through gift, promise, violence or threat, to cause any person not to submit a bid or not to compete or, even if submitting a bid and auction, such person does not carry out such acts with freedom, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine. 158 (322) Ensure (v) – To hold firmly, to guarantee. Law 13/2008, of 13 October Legislative authorization in penal matters

The constitutional mechanism concerning legislative authorization is set out in article 96, no. 1, subparagraph a), of the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. This constitutional mechanism makes the legislative process proceed more quickly: Parliament defines the general orientation of legislative policy which frames the definitive diploma; the Government shall harmonize each aspect concerning legal technique, according to the orientation coming from the National Parliament. Thus the separation in the competence of each constitutional organ to exercise legislative power shall continue to be followed. This law for legislative authorization fixes its content and exact extension in order to guarantee respect for the fundamental rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens in the area of Criminal Law. The solutions presented also take into account the general principles which the international legal instruments which Timor-Leste has ratified consecrate, and also the social and cultural context of the country. The content of this legislative authorization also articulates with the Code of Criminal Procedure and complementary legislation which has already been approved and is in force. With this approval Indonesian Criminal Code shall no longer be applied subsidiarily in Timor-Leste and legislative diplomas which came into force after 20 May 2002 and have any norm which defines crimes, penalties or security measures shall be revoked or harmonized. Thus, based on articles 95, no. 1, and 96 of the Constitution, the National Parliament decrees, to be valid as law, the following:

Article 1 Object

Legislative authorization is given to the Government to approve the Criminal Code and revoke legislation in force in this matter, namely concerning the definition of crimes, penalties and security measures and their presuppositions. Article 2 Meaning and extension

1. The Criminal Code elaborated on the basis of this legislative authorization shall follow the constitutional principles and norms and also the norms in the international instruments which bind the Timorese State in this matter. 2. The meaning and extension of this authorization are as follows:
a) To establish a legal-penal system which protects legal goods essential to life in Timorese society and reintegrates the delinquent into society; b) To consecrate the principle of legality and the prohibition of analogy concerning the application of penal law, but with the possibility of applying the law which, after the commission of the crime, comes into force when, in a concrete situation, it favors the agent; c) To stipulate that exceptional or temporary law shall apply to acts committed during the time such law is in force even if the judgment is made at a time when such law is no longer in force; d) To establish norms which define the place and moment at which a person commits a crime; e) To consecrate the principle of territoriality in the application of Timorese penal law, indicating each limitation on this principle and the situations in which such law applies in non-Timorese territory; f) To regulate the general presuppositions of crime and, in this, to equate omission with action, except when the law has another intent, when any result enters into the legal type of crime and the agent has an obligation to avoid such result; g) To establish that, in order to have objective imputation, there must be a causal nexus between conduct and typical result; h) In order to have objective imputation there must be intent or negligence, and the various types of intent (direct, necessary and eventual) and the various types of negligence (conscious and unconscious) shall be defined; i) To provide that criminal responsibility for crimes provided for in the Criminal Code may not be transmitted and only singular persons are its agents, but also to admit that there may be responsibility for acting in the name of another person and special legislation may consecrate the criminal responsibility of collective persons; j) To consecrate the inimputability of minors under 16 years of age and also the requirements for inimputability by reason of psychic anomaly; k) To admit that the penalty may be aggravated when the agent's responsibility, at least for negligence, must embrace a result which does not enter into the type; l) To consecrate error concerning circumstances as a basis for removing intent and error concerning illicitness as a basis for removing culpability; m) Concerning the various forms of crime, to establish as a principle that preparatory acts may not give rise to punishment, and also rules concerning the punishment of attempt in intentional crimes which give rise to imprisonment higher than 3 years; n) To define the concept of attempt, the punishment of attempt up to where, cases in which there is impossible attempt, voluntary desistance and subsequent repentance, in singular action or in participation; o) To establish the various forms of authorship, instigation or complicity, and to define the responsibility of participants in culpability and illicitness; p) To provide for and define presuppositions for situations in which many crimes enter into concurrence, many sanctions enter into concurrence, crimes enter into concurrence with another infraction and many norms enter into concurrence; q) To establish rules concerning punishment for crimes which enter into concurrence, even with supervenient knowledge, and also to admit that cumulation may give rise to imprisonment for up to 30 years and a fine for up to 600 days; r) To define continued crime and rules concerning its punishment with the penalty applicable to the most serious conduct; s) To consecrate causes which exclude illicitness and culpability, and to autonomize them systematically and define the presuppositions for the application of each; t) To include in one title the various circumstances which, even if they do not enter into the legal type, have relevance to determine the agent's criminal responsibility; u) To enumerate159 general aggravating circumstances and also general attenuating circumstances; v) To provide for a general clause concerning extraordinary attenuation, together with special cases provided for in the law and to delimit their consequences in the determination of the penal framework, with a model which includes various degrees of attenuation; w) As general modificative aggravating circumstances, to consecrate recidivism and criminal habituality with their presuppositions and consequences for the penalty; x) To establish a system concerning penalties and security measures and to base their difference on whether the agent who committed the act has capacity or not to receive culpability; in the first case the concrete penalty may not be more serious than the agent's culpability and in the second case it must be based on the agent's dangerousness; y) To enunciate principles determinative160 for choosing the penalty and security measure and also determinative concerning the effect of penalties and security measures and concerning the counting of time in which there is deprivation of liberty before conviction; z) Concerning the execution of penalties and measures privative of liberty, to provide for the possibility of granting conditional release and probation regime, when, with the consent of the convict and with other requirements which shall be set out in complementary legislation which shall provide for conditions

159 Enumerate (v) – To make a list. To enumerate aggravating circumstances = To include in a list the aggravating circumstances. 160 Determinative (adj) – Fundamental; which serves as a basis; which serves as a foundation; which has great influence. for the execution of imprisonment, the rights and obligations of prisoners and also open regime; aa) To establish a system of criminal sanctions for imputables based on the following principal penalties: imprisonment, fine, community service and admonishment; bb) Imprisonment with its minimum duration of 30 days and maximum of 30 years, with the possibility of suspending its execution when the penalty applied is not longer than 3 years and the fulfillment of such penalty is not necessary to prevent future crime, with or without conditions to fulfill any duty and/or to enter into accompaniment for reinsertion during the period of suspension; cc) To regulate the possibility of modifying the suspension regime which is newly applied and the revocation of suspension when during the period of suspension the convict commits an intentional crime which gives rise to him or her receiving a penalty of imprisonment or in the case where there is intentional non-fulfillment of the obligation which falls upon him or her; dd) To consecrate a regime concerning the substitution of imprisonment applied which is not longer than 12 months with a fine or community service, according to each circumstance, with an obligation on the court to justify non-substitution in situations where, even if possible, this measure is not applied; ee) Not to give correspondence between alternative imprisonment and substitutive fine and, when there is unjustified non-payment of such fine, to give an obligation to apply imprisonment which is newly applied; ff) To stipulate that the fine penalty must be fixed according to time, with its minimum of 10 days and its maximum of 360 days, as a rule, and to determine that each day of fine shall have correspondence with an amount, with its minimum of half a dollar and its maximum of 200 dollars, which shall be fixed according to the convict's economic and financial situation; gg) When directly applying a fine penalty, to stipulate an obligation to give correspondence to such fine with alternative imprisonment for a corresponding time reduced by 2/3, and also the possibility of paying the fine by installment, reduction or exemption of such fine in cases

where there is great supervenient difficulty or impossibility of paying such fine; hh) To provide for the possibility of placing a penalty of community service in place of a penalty of imprisonment or a penalty of fine in situations concerning petty criminality and medium criminality and to establish conditions for its application and execution according to coordination with reinsertion services, and also cases concerning exemption or reduction, and to leave to complementary law to regulate other conditions concerning the application and functioning of this penalty; ii) To consecrate the penalty of admonishment for cases not punishable with abstract imprisonment longer than 3 years, namely, cumulatively, where there is reparation for damage, the agent is a primary delinquent and admonishment is sufficient to make prevention and recovery; jj) To establish a system of accessory penalties, in which, by reason of certain crimes, rights and the exercise of professions shall be prohibited, namely, temporary suspension from public function, prohibition from exercising functions, prohibition from driving, cancellation of license to possess firearms and expulsion of foreigners; these accessory penalties do not function automatically but are applied only when a principal penalty is applied and their measure varies according to the measure of culpability; kk) To consecrate for those who have already been declared inimputable by reason of psychic anomaly the possibility of applying a security measure, with limited temporal duration, namely internment when dangerousness counsels it and also to consecrate that the obligation to apply such measure ends when the state which gave rise to such measure ends, and for foreigners expulsion may be placed in place of such measure; ll) To provide also for inimputables by reason of psychic anomaly measures of professional interdiction, cancellation of license and prohibition from driving; mm) To establish an autonomous chapter concerning the determination of concrete penalty, for imprisonment and for fine, indicating general principles and operations necessary for the choice and quantification of such penalty; nn) To establish that civil law regulates compensation for loss and damage arising from the commission of crime, and also its presuppositions and calculation, but, except for another declaration by the injured party, the court shall award compensation ex officio and the credit arising from this shall have privilege; oo) To determine conditions which give rise to the court declaring forfeited objects or advantages arising from crime; pp) To define, as a criterion for exercising the right to complaint, the various crimes as public or semi-public, to identify the holder of this right, the time limit for exercising this right and conditions for renunciation and desistance of this right; qq) Concerning the extinction of criminal responsibility, to fix the time limit for the prescription of criminal proceedings, taking into account the various frameworks of the various crimes, how to count and causes for the suspension of prescription; rr) To fix the time limit for the prescription of penalties, security measures and accessory penalties, and also situations which give rise to the suspension of prescription; ss) To regulate other extinctions of responsibility, by reason of the agent's death, by reason of amnesty, by reason of generic pardon and by reason of pardon; tt) To consecrate imprescriptibility for criminal proceedings and penalties for war crimes, crimes against peace, humanity and freedom; uu) To organize the special part of the Criminal Code, book II, in which the various types of crime are included according to the legal good protected in titles and chapters as homogeneous as possible; vv) In title I to include illicit acts concerning the crime of genocide and crimes against humanity, war crimes, including prohibited conducts which use methods and means referred to in international law, war crimes against property and against goods protected with distinctive insignia or emblem or other rights, and, also in this title, the crime called crime against peace and freedom, namely to prohibit incitement to war, racially or religiously discriminatory conduct, trafficking and enslavement

of persons and also to consecrate a type of crime concerning terrorism; ww) In title I of the general part the future Criminal Code of Timor-Leste must also pay attention to the international obligations which the Country has already accepted when it subscribed to and ratified the Statute of the International Criminal Court; xx) In title II of the special part legal goods which are eminently personal shall be protected, such as life, physical integrity, personal freedom, honor and protection of private life; yy) To structure protection of the legal good life with provision for various penal frameworks according to what type of culpability the agent has (intent and negligence) and circumstances which qualify the degree of censurability as lesser or greater, namely according to its motive, the quality of the victim and the means and method used to realize the criminal design; zz) To consecrate protection of uterine life; to provide as privileged the conduct of an infanticidal parturient in limited cases which happen during childbirth by reason of the disturbing influence of childbirth; to criminalize incitement to suicide and abandonment or intentional exposure of another person which creates danger to life; aaa) To define a broad incriminating norm which prohibits conduct violating the physical integrity of another person, with graduation of the abstract penal framework according to the agent's illicitness and culpability which is indicated in the gravity of the injury, according to the type of culpability and according to whether the result which exceeds the criminal design formulated may give rise to imputation or not, at least for negligence - what doctrine calls aggravation by result; bbb) To autonomize incrimination for offense with poisonous substance, reciprocal offense and participation in a fight with two or more persons; ccc) In the context of bodily offense, to implement two legal types of crime which provide for punishment for ill-treatment of minors or incapables and for spouse or person who lives as husband or wife; ddd) In the chapter concerning personal freedom, conduct which, traditionally and according to comparative law, integrates the types of crime of threat, coercion, kidnapping, abduction, and other acts which violate individual freedom and, specifically, to create a typical illicit act concerning trafficking in persons and omission of denunciation with respect to situations which may constitute these crimes; eee) To consecrate a chapter on sexual criminality, with emphasis on the legal good of freedom in this area as determinative for the conduct to be criminalized, in order to protect those who are still younger from acts for which they do not yet have preparation to, according to their conscience, decide with freedom, to incriminate conduct which constitutes the most common forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, such as with fraud or by reason of age; fff) To incriminate especially practices which constitute sexual prostitution, child pornography and other sexual acts with minors under 12 years of age; ggg) To include criminalization for violation of secrecy, violation of domicile and other places and violation of correspondence and telecommunications; hhh) To bring together in one title only the crimes which protect legal goods concerning public peace and tranquility, the security of the State, life in society, against public authority and in the context of electoral activity; iii) Concerning conduct which may violate public peace and tranquility, to prevent criminal association, public instigation to commit crime, participation in public riot, conduct which prevents citizens from exercising political rights, disobedience to legitimate order to disperse, to criminalize practices which constitute trafficking in influence and also to punish abuse of public signs or uniforms; jjj) Concerning the internal security of the State, to provide for incriminating norms for conduct which may actually create danger to such security, namely to consecrate as legal types of crime treason to the fatherland, collaboration with enemy armed forces of the Timorese State, sabotage of national defense and campaign against efforts

for peace in Timor-Leste, attack against the Head of State or other constitutional organs or conduct which seeks to alter the State according to law, diplomatic infidelity161, violation of State secrecy and outrage162 to Timorese national symbols; kkk) To criminalize fraudulent conduct in electoral activity independently of its agent and the phase of the electoral process, obstruction of exercising candidacy or illegal exercise of candidacy, electoral propaganda against the respective legal framework163 and actions which disturb the normal development of electoral acts; lll) Life in modern society develops together with conduct which may give rise to danger with more or less proximate concretization and may violate goods whose integrity must be guaranteed, such as driving motor vehicles, using or possessing weapons and activity with relevance to citizens and public health; therefore some types of crime concerning this matter must be provided for; mmm) Thus also conduct which violates religious values implanted in Timorese society, non-fulfillment of alimentary obligation and other obligations concerning the custody of minors, of solidarity in calamity or disaster or obligations which fall upon certain professional activities must be criminalized; nnn) To criminally sanction conduct harmful164 and unsustainable to the environment, namely fauna, flora, natural habitat and resources in the Timorese subsoil; ooo) To criminally sanction conduct against the exercise of public authority, namely with acts which constitute disobedience, obstruction, destruction, resistance or usurpation of public office; ppp) Concerning the executing action of penalties and security measures which remove liberty, to criminalize conduct which constitutes removal of prisoner, evasion,

161 Infidelity (s) – Treason; violation of trust
162 Outrage (s) – Offense; fault. 163 Framework (s) – Disposition. Legal framework = legal disposition; norm. 164 Harmful (adj) – Which harms or creates prejudice

assistance by an official for evasion and riot of prisoners; qqq) In order to protect patrimonial legal goods to consecrate in one chapter crimes against property and in another chapter crimes against patrimony; rrr) To establish a normative system protective of property based on the legal types of crime which have long been used in other penal legislation, such as theft, robbery, breach of trust and damage, and to structure these types as simple and aggravated, according to circumstances such as the value and nature of the thing appropriated, the means used, how the action is, violence, threat or coercion or other circumstances which may significantly increase culpability and illicitness; sss) Concerning property, to also autonomize norms which typify theft for use of vehicle, violence following subtraction, usurpation of immovable and alteration of boundary marker, also to incriminate involuntary damage and to define prohibited burning and types of arson as typical crimes concerning special damage by reason of the means and danger which it represents with the consequences which arise from such conduct; ttt) To protect patrimony in general with the following common incriminations, such as fraud, extortion, receiving and bankruptcy or insolvency, but especially computer fraud and various harmful and abusive administration, looking to new needs which arise in commerce with new technology and looking to the responsibility which must be demanded from persons who manage the goods or patrimony of another person and do not act correctly in such administration; uuu) In modern and democratic society justice and the exercise of justice are also goods which must receive penal protection; thus punishment must be consecrated for falsity of procedural acts, for various obstructions to jurisdictional activity, non-exercise of jurisdictional activity when it constitutes denial of justice and violation of the secrecy of justice; vvv) To also include incrimination for acts which constitute bribery, prevarication of magistrate or official and lawyer or public defender, and also other activity concerning personal favoritism in justice, together

with classic incriminations such as calumnious denunciation, simulation of crime or non-participation; www) Together with the references set out in the last two numbers, conduct must also be criminalized which, in the exercise of public function, constitutes corruption, peculation, abuse of power or public force or economic participation in business by persons who exercise public office or function; xxx) In one autonomous title conduct which constitutes falsification of document, technical notation, currency and sealed or stamped value, weights and measures, marks, stamps and seals must be prevented with adequate incriminating norms, with their various sanctions according to the nature, probative or fiduciary value and public use or destination of the falsified object, and to provide for the possibility of seizure and forfeiture of objects intended to commit these crimes; yyy) In the area of the economy acts which constitute fiscal fraud or smuggling and evasion of duties concerning customs or border matters shall also be incriminated, together with criminal punishment for disobedience to requisition which the government orders and conduct which may disturb, prejudice or prevent the realization of any public act, such as public tender or judicial auction. Article 3
Articulation with the Code of Criminal Procedure

The Criminal Code which this legislative authorization refers to must articulate its moment of coming into force with the Code of Criminal Procedure and regulatory legislation concerning penal matters which is already in force, in order to guarantee legal security and coherence in the respective legal order. Article 4 Duration and extension

The legislative authorization given by this law is in force for 180 days, beginning at the moment this law comes into force. Article 5 Coming into force

This legal diploma comes into force on the day following its publication. Approved on 23 September 2008

President of the National Parliament in exercise Maria da Paixão de Jesus da Costa

Promulgated on 7 October 2008 Let it be published. President of the Republic Dr. José Ramos Horta

Law 6/2009, of 15 July (First amendment, as parliamentary appreciation, to the Criminal Code approved by Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April)

Life must receive protection beginning immediately from the conception of the human being. Having accepted this principle, we cannot forget that there are also situations which may justify interruption of pregnancy. However, because the goods which enter into conflict here are very serious, the life of the pregnant woman and the life of the fetus or embryo, both with equal value only, only in extreme situations may we consider such interruption legitimate: when with the sacrifice of one life one may save another life and it is not possible to preserve both lives at once. Thus, it must be established that interruption of pregnancy may exist only when with such interruption the pregnant woman does not die, and it is the woman who shall decide, according to her conscience, concerning such interruption. Thus, according to article 92, no.1, and 98, the National Parliament decrees, to have the force of law, the following:

Article 1 Amendment to the Penal Code

Article 141 of the Penal Code approved by Decree-Law 19/2009, of 8 April, and annexed to that diploma, is amended as follows:

"Article 141 (…)

1. (…)
2. (…)
3. (…)
4. The provision of the preceding number does not apply when, according to existing medical knowledge and experience and having done everything that can be done to save the pregnant woman and

the fetus or embryo's life, the interruption of pregnancy is what can avert death from the pregnant woman, namely with medical certification and performed by a doctor or other health professional, under the direction of a doctor, in a public health establishment or officially recognized, and with the pregnant woman's consent. 5. Before performing the interruption a panel of three doctors must certify the circumstances referred to in the preceding number, in a written and signed medical certificate; in that panel shall be included the doctor who performs or supervises the performance of the interruption of pregnancy. 6. The consent of the pregnant woman shall be given personally in a written and signed document, having heard, when possible, her spouse, or the person with whom she lives as if married, or another person, at the request of that woman, who shall give it, and, when possible, shall be given at least two days before performing that interruption. 7. When the pregnant woman is a minor, her legal representative shall give consent. 8. When the pregnant woman is an adult or emancipated person who is psychically incapable or a person who is suffering from psychic incapacity, her spouse or the person with whom she lives as if married, or her legal representative, ascendant or descendant, or, if there is none, any collateral relative, respectively and successively, shall give that consent. 9. When the medical certificate referred to in no. 5 cannot be obtained and/or the consent as written in
nos. 6 to 8 cannot be obtained, and the interruption must be performed urgently and cannot be delayed any longer, the doctor, having regard to each situation, shall decide, also using, when possible, the opinion of other doctors. 10. In the panel referred to in no. 5 shall be included a doctor who has adequate knowledge to evaluate the circumstances that justify the interruption of pregnancy, and, when possible, a gynecologist/obstetrician. 11. The doctors who issue the medical certificate and the doctors who perform or supervise the performance of the interruption of pregnancy must provide the necessary clarifications to the pregnant woman and, when it falls within the situation, to the persons whom nos. 7 and 8 refer to, namely concerning the method to be used in the interruption, the interruption

itself and its effects and its consequences for the pregnant woman's physical and psychic health. 12. Doctors and other health professionals have the right to present conscientious objection to any act concerning the interruption of pregnancy. 13. Doctors and other health professionals who invoke conscientious objection must guarantee the immediate intervention of another health professional in the acts that must be performed and also the immediate accompaniment of the pregnant woman. 14. Conscientious objection must be expressed explicitly and must be made known to the clinical head in the health establishment where the objector works". Article 2 Entry into force

This diploma enters into force on the day following its publication. Approved on 26 May 2009

President of the National Parliament Fernando La Sama de Araújo

Promulgated on 3 July 2009 Published by

President of the Republic José Ramos Horta

ALPHABETICAL INDEX

A

Disqualification from exercising certain activities - article 213 Criminal habituality - article 54
Breach of trust - article 256
Aggravated breach of trust - article 257 Abuse of power - article 297
Abuse of public sign or uniform - article 194 Abuse with public force - article 298
Sexual abuse of person unable to resist - article 179 Sexual abuse of minor - article 177
Harmful administration - article 274
Irregular administration of public funds - article 319 Negligent administration - article 275
Admonition - article 82
Prevarication by lawyer or public defender - article 288 Aggravation of sexual assault - article 182
Aggravation in slavery and trafficking in persons - article 164 Aggravation in crime in the exercise of public function - article 301
Aggravation by result - article 156 Aggravation by result - article 19 Agent - article 29
Death of agent - article 119 Aiding a criminal - article 273 Action and omission - article 11 Preparatory act - article 22
Sexual act with adolescent - article 178 Alteration of legal status - article 202 Alteration of mark - article 262 Threat - article 157
Amnesty - article 120
Amnesty and crime in concurrence - article 121 Analogy (prohibition) – article 2
Subsidiary application (penal code) - article 10
Seizure and forfeiture (in counterfeiting of currency) - article 312 Prohibited weapon - article 211
Active repentance in crimes against property - article 264 Subsequent repentance - article 28
Criminal association - article 188
Attack on safety in transport - article 210

Attack against the highest representative of sovereign organ - article 203
Degree of extraordinary attenuation - article 57 Authorship - article 30

B

Illicit importation and exportation of goods or merchandise - article 315
Money laundering - article 313 Aggravated fraud - article 267
Computer fraud - article 268
Aggravated computer fraud - article 269 Simple fraud - article 266

D

Prisoner's riot - article 248 Aggravated damage - article 259 Damage with violence - article 260 Simple damage - article 258
Prevarication by public defender - article 288 Definition of certain words concerning crimes against peace and humanity - article 137
Definition of certain words concerning crimes against property - article 265
Denial of justice - article 282 Slanderous denunciation - article 285 Smuggling - article 317
Destruction or smuggling of object in the hands of public power - article 249
Destruction of goods relevant to the economy - article 321 Destruction, subtraction, concealment or profanation of corpse - article 224 Rape - article 183
Duty of neutrality or impartiality - article 241 Voluntary desistance - article 26
Disobedience - article 244
Disobedience to order to disperse - article 193 Disobedience to requisition of goods - article 320 Right to complaint – articles 107 to 109
Holder of right to complaint - article 107 Racial or religious discrimination - article 135 Falsification of public document - article 305 Types of intent - article 15

E

Equation to desistance - article 280 Drunkenness and intoxication - article 212 Error concerning unlawfulness - article 18
Error concerning circumstances - article 17 Slavery - article 162
Endangered or threatened species - article 218 Excusing state of necessity - article 49 Justifying state of necessity - article 45 Evasion - article 246
Excess in legitimate defense - article 48 Exclusion of unlawfulness - article 43 Exploitation of illicit gambling - article 322 Sexual exploitation of others - article 174 Exposure or abandonment - article 143 Expulsion - article 87
Extinction – articles 110 to 122 Extortion - article 270 Sexual exhibitionism - article 181

F

Selling of persons - article 166
Fact committed in non-national territory - article 8 Intentional bankruptcy or insolvency - article 276 Negligent bankruptcy or insolvency - article 277
Falsity in testimony, expert opinion, interpretation or translation - article 279
Falsity in deposition or declaration - article 278 Aggravated falsification - article 304
Falsification of document or technical notation - article 303 Omission in electoral register - article 232
Place where fact is committed - article 6 Personal favoritism - article 290 Financing of terrorism - article 133 Tax fraud - article 314
Fraud in scrutiny - article 238 Fraud in census - article 229 Fraud in voting - article 237 Sexual fraud - article 180 Concept of official - article 302
Official's assistance in evasion - article 247 Aggravated theft - article 252

Theft for use of vehicle - article 255 Simple theft - article 251

H

Removal of prisoner - article 245 Against the environment - article 215
Aggravation against the environment - article 216 Against flora and fauna - article 217
Against life in society – articles 207 to 228 I
Unlawfulness in participation - article 34
Impediment to exercise of political right - article 191 Impediment or disturbance of procession, ceremony or worship - article 222
Imprescriptibility – article 117 Subjective imputation - article 14 Pardon - article 122
Infanticide - article 142
Diplomatic infidelity - article 201 Non-imputability due to psychic anomaly - article 21 Non-imputability due to age - article 20
Arson - article 263 Incitement to war - article 134
Incitement or assistance to suicide - article 144 Instigation - article 31 article 31
Incitement to crime - article 189 Interruption of pregnancy - article 141
Medical-surgical intervention and treatment - article 149 Entry into another place closed to the public - article 186 Exemption from penalty - article 318
J

Genocide - article 123
Prevarication by judge – article 287 K
Campaign against peace efforts - article 199 Ineligible candidate - article 231
Revocation of license to possess weapon - article 89 Cause of exclusion – articles 43 to 50

Cause of extinction in criminal responsibility - articles 110 to 122
Other causes of extinction in criminal responsibility – articles 118 to 122
Causes that exclude unlawfulness – articles 43 to 47 Causes that exclude culpability – articles 48 to 50 Breaking of mark, seal or edict - article 250 Prohibited burning - article 221
Coercion - article 158
Coercion of magistrate - article 283 Grave coercion - article 159
Coercion against constitutional organ - article 204 Sexual coercion - article 171
Aggravation of sexual coercion and sexual violation - article 173
Driving under the effect of alcohol or psychotropic substance - article 208
Dangerous driving - article 209 Driving without license - article 207 Conflict of duties - article 46
Concurrence with supervening knowledge - article 38 Consent - article 47
Contraband - article 316 Counterfeiting of currency - article 307
Counterfeiting of seal, stamp, mark or chancery - article 310 Counterfeiting of sealed or stamped value - article 309 Active corruption - article 294
Passive corruption for illicit act - article 292 Passive corruption for licit act - article 293 Crime – articles 11 to 50
Crime of sexual abuse - articles 177 to 181 Crime of personal assault – articles 158 to 170 Crime of sexual assault – articles 171 to 173 Electoral crime – articles 229 to 242
Aggravation of electoral crime - article 242 Crime of sexual exploitation – articles 174 to 176 Crime of falsification – articles 303 to 312
Crime of falsification of document – 303 to 306 Crime of falsification of currency – articles 307 to 312 War crime – articles 125 to 130
War crime against goods protected by distinctive insignia or emblem - article 128
War crime against other rights - article 130 War crime against persons - article 125
War crime against property - article 129

War crime with prohibited means of combat - article 127 War crime with prohibited method - article 126 Crime against the environment – articles 215 to 221 Crime against the economy – articles 313 to 323 Crime against persons – articles 138 to 187
Crime against state security – 196 to 206 Crime against physical integrity – articles 156 to 156
Crime against the administration of justice – articles 278 to 291 Crime against personal liberty – articles 157 to 182 Crime against patrimony – articles 251 to 277
Crime against patrimony in general –articles 266 to 277 Crime against peace and liberty – 131 to 135
Crime against peace and public tranquility – articles 188 to 195 Crime against peace and humanity – articles 123 to 137
Crime against peace and humanity - common provisions – articles 136 to 137
Crime against property – articles 251 to 265 Crime against humanity - article 124
Crime against life – articles 138 to 144
Crime against life in democracy – articles 188 to 250 Crime against life in society - articles 207 to 228
Other crimes against life in society – articles 222 to 228 Crime against private life – articles 183 to 187
Crime with other infraction - article 40
Crime in the exercise of public function – articles 292 to 302 Crime in concurrence - article 35
Crime in concurrence and continued crime – articles 35 to 42 Crime of genocide and against humanity – articles 123 to 124 Crime of genocide, against peace and humanity and concerning war - article 117
Continued crime - article 41
Crime against public authority – articles 243 to 250 Agent of crime – articles 29 to 34
Form of crime – articles 22 to 28
Juridical consequence of crime – articles 59 to 105
Crime - general provisions of juridical consequence – articles 59 to 65
Other consequences of crime – articles 102 to 105 Nature of crime - article 106
General presupposition of crime – articles 11 to 21 Circumstances of crime – articles 51 to 58 Crime of common danger – articles 207 to 214 Other crimes – articles 222 to 228
Culpability in participation - article 33 Complicity - article 32

L

Failure to comply with maintenance obligation - article 225 Non-participation - article 286
Loss of object of crime - article 102 Loss of advantage - article 103
Exceptional or temporary law - article 4 Application of penal law – articles 1 to 10
Application of penal law in time - article 3 Complementary legislation - article 81 Legitimate defense - article 44
Freedom of proof - article 97
Revocation of freedom of proof - article 98 Liberty of assembly and demonstration - article 170 Limitation on application of Timorese law - article 9
M
Prevarication by magistrate or official - article 287 Ill-treatment of incapable person - article 153
Ill-treatment of spouse - article 154 Ill-treatment of minor - article 155 Security measure – articles 93 to 101
Other security measures – articles 100 to 101 Security measure and penalty - article 59 How to choose security measure - article 62 Effect of security measure - article 63 Purpose of security measure - article 61 Limit of security measure - article 60
Prescription of security measure – articles 113 to 116 Concurrence of security measure and penalty depriving liberty - article 65
Measure of professional interdiction - article 100 Internment measure – articles 93 to 99 Duration of internment measure - article 94 Presupposition of internment measure - article 93 Cessation of internment measure - article 95
Substitution of internment measure - article 96 Illicit means of fishing - article 220
Moment when fact is committed - article 5 N
Types of negligence - article 16

Multiple norms in concurrence - article 42 O
Excusing undue obedience - article 50 Obstruction of jurisdictional activity - article 284
Obstruction of supervision of electoral act - article 236 Obstruction of public authority - article 243 Obstruction of candidacy (in election) - article 230
Obstruction of freedom to choose (in election) - article 234 Grave offense to physical integrity - article 146
Negligent offense to physical integrity - article 148 Aggravation of offense to physical integrity - article 147 Simple offense to physical integrity - article 145 Bodily offense with poisonous substance - article 150 Reciprocal bodily offense - article 151
Prevarication by officer of justice – article 287 Omission of assistance - article 227
Aggravated homicide - article 139 Negligent homicide - article 140 Simple homicide - article 138 Terrorist organization - article 131

P

Economic participation - article 299 Participation in riot - article 190 Participation in affray - article 152 Passing of false currency - article 308 Embezzlement - article 295
Embezzlement by use - article 296
Accessory penalty – articles 84 to 92
Prescription of accessory penalty - article 114 Accessory penalty according to general principles - article 84
Execution of penalty or measure depriving liberty - article 64
Fine penalty – articles 75 to 77
Determination of fine penalty - article 92 Duration of fine penalty - article 75
Reduction or exemption of fine penalty - article 77 Determination of penalty – articles 90 to 92
Concrete determination of penalty - article 91
Determination of penalty according to general principles - article 90

Measure of penalty - article 51
Suspension, reduction or exemption of penalty - article 80 Penalty and security measure - article 59
How to choose penalty and security measure - article 62 Effect of penalty and security measure - article 63 Purpose of penalty and security measure - article 61 Limit of penalty and security measure - article 60
Prescription of penalty and security measure – articles 113 to 116
Concurrence of penalty and security measure depriving liberty - article 65
Prison penalty – articles 66 to 74
Duration of prison penalty - article 66 Extinction of prison penalty - article 74
Suspended penalty in juridical cumulation - article 39 Community service penalty – articles 78 to 81 Disturbance of electoral act - article 235 Disturbance of public act - article 323
Disturbance of functioning of constitutional organ - article 205
Illegal fishing - article 219 Weight and measure - article 311
Child pornography - article 176
Period to exercise right to complaint - article 108
Period for prescription of security measure - article 115 Period for prescription - article 110
Period concerning prescription of penalty - article 113 Counting of period - article 111
Prescription – articles 110 to 117 Suspension of prescription - article 116
Prevarication (magistrate or official) – article 287 Prevarication (lawyer or public defender) – article 288 Principle of legality - article 1
Principle of territoriality - article 7 Privilege of injured party's credit - article 105
Prison alternative to fine penalty - article 76 Substitution of prison with fine - article 67 Suspension of prison with duty - article 69 Prevarication by public prosecutor – article 287 Adulterated or deteriorated product - article 214
Profanation of object or place of worship or veneration - article 223
Prohibition from exercising function - article 86 Prohibition of analogy - article 2 Prohibition from driving - article 88

Prohibition from driving and revocation of license to use and possess weapon - article 101
Illicit electoral propaganda - article 233
Prescription of criminal procedure – articles 110 to 112 Child prostitution - article 175
Punishment in concurrence - article 36 R
Kidnapping - article 161
Rule of conduct - article 70 Recidivism - article 53
Regime for modification of suspension - article 72 Refusal of medical assistance - article 228
Refusal of electoral office - article 239 Refusal of cooperation - article 300
Renunciation and desistance from complaint - article 109 Aggravated receiving - article 272 Simple receiving - article 271 Criminal responsibility - article 12
Extinction of criminal responsibility – articles 110 to 122 Civil responsibility due to crime - article 104 Responsibility due to acting in another's name - article 13
Revocation of suspension - article 73 Robbery - article 253

S

Sabotage of national defense - article 198 Sanction in concurrence - article 37 Kidnapping - article 160
Service or collaboration with enemy armed force - article 197 Simulation of crime - article 289
General aggravating circumstance - article 52 General attenuating circumstance - article 55 Circumstance of extraordinary attenuation - article 56 Concurrence of circumstances - article 58
Bribery - article 281
Subtraction of minor - article 226
Suspension of execution of internment - article 99 Suspension of prescription - article 112
Suspension of prison with accompaniment - article 71 Execution of suspension of prison - article 68
Temporary suspension from exercising public function - article 85

T

Attempt - article 23
Attempt in co-participation - article 27 Non-punishable attempt - article 25
Punishability of attempt - article 24 Terrorism - article 132
Torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment - article 167
Aggravation of torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment - article 168
Non-denunciation of torture or cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment - article 169
Community service - article 78
Requirement of community service - article 79 Trafficking in persons - article 163
Trafficking in influence - article 192 Trafficking in human organs - article 165 Treason against the homeland - article 196

U

Outrage to national symbol - article 206
Use of another's identification document - article 306 Usurpation of function - article 195
Usurpation of immovable property - article 261 V
Violation - article 172
Violation of domicile - article 185 Violation of state secret - article 200 Violation of justice secret - article 291
Violation of correspondence or telecommunication - article 187 Violation of secret - article 184
Violation of secret in scrutiny - article 240 Violence following subtraction - article 254

X

Responsibility of military commander or other superior - article 136
