TURKISH CRIMINAL CODE1

TURKISH CRIMINAL CODE1

Law Number Adoption Date
Published in the Official Gazette	: 5237
: 26/9/2004
: Date: 12/10/2004

Number: 25611
Published in Düstur	: Series: 5	Volume: 43
FIRST BOOK
General Provisions

FIRST PART
Fundamental Principles, Definitions and Scope of Application

FIRST CHAPTER
Fundamental Principles and Definitions Purpose of the Criminal Code

Article 1

(1) The purpose of the Criminal Code is to protect individual rights and freedoms, public order and security, the rule of law, public health and the environment, social peace, and to prevent the commission of crimes. In the Code, the fundamental principles of criminal liability and the types of crimes, punishments and security measures are regulated for the realization of this purpose.

Principle of legality in crimes and punishments

Article 2

(1) No one may be punished or subjected to a security measure for an act that the law does not expressly define as a crime. No punishment or security measure other than those prescribed in the law may be imposed.
(2) Crimes and punishments may not be established by regulatory acts of the administration.
(3) Analogy may not be used in the application of provisions of laws containing crimes and punishments. Provisions containing crimes and punishments may not be interpreted broadly in a manner that would lead to analogy.

Principle of justice and equality before the law

Article 3

(1) A person who commits a crime shall be sentenced to a punishment and security measure proportionate to the gravity of the act committed.
(2) In the application of the Criminal Code, no distinction may be made between persons on the basis of race, language, religion, sect, nationality, color, gender, political or other ideas or thoughts, philosophical belief, national or social origin, birth, economic and other social status, and no privilege may be granted to anyone.

1 Regarding the entry into force and manner of application of this Code and references made to the Turkish Criminal Code numbered 765 in various legislation, see the Law numbered 5252 dated 4/11/2004.

Binding nature of the law

Article 4- (1) Ignorance of criminal laws is not an excuse

(2) (Repealed: 29/6/2005 – Law No. 5377/Article 1)

Relationship with special laws

Article 5

(1) The general provisions of this Code shall also apply to crimes in special criminal laws and laws containing criminal provisions.

Definitions

Article 6- (1) In the application of criminal laws;

a)	The term citizen means; a person who was a Turkish citizen at the time of committing the act,
b)	The term child means; a person who has not yet completed eighteen years of age,
c)	The term public official means; a person who participates in the conduct of public activity by way of appointment or election or in any manner permanently, for a term or temporarily,
d)	The term performing judicial duty means; members and judges of high courts, judicial and administrative courts, as well as public prosecutors and lawyers,2
e)	The term nighttime means; the period of time beginning one hour after sunset and continuing until one hour before sunrise,
f)	The term weapon means;
1.	Firearms,
2.	Explosive materials,
3.	All kinds of cutting, piercing or bruising instruments made for use in attack and defense,
4.	Other things suitable for actual use in attack and defense even if not made for the purpose of attack and defense,
5.	Burning, corrosive, injurious, suffocating, poisonous, nuclear, radioactive, chemical, biological substances causing permanent illness,
g)	The term through press and publication means; publications made through all kinds of written, visual, audio and electronic mass media,
h)	The term habitual offender means; a person who commits the basic form of an intentional crime or its qualified forms requiring heavier or lesser punishment more than twice at different times within one year,
i)	The term person who makes crime a profession means; a person who has become accustomed to providing his livelihood, even partially, with gains obtained from crime,
j)	The term criminal organization member means; a person who establishes, manages, joins a criminal organization or commits crimes on behalf of the organization together with others or alone,
is understood.

2 By Article 156 of Decree Law No. 700 dated 2/7/2018, the phrase "and judicial, administrative and military" in this subparagraph was amended to read ", judicial and administrative".

SECOND CHAPTER
Scope of Application of the Law Application in terms of time

Article 7

(1) No one may be punished or subjected to a security measure for an act that was not considered a crime under the law in force at the time it was committed. No one may be punished or subjected to a security measure for an act that is not considered a crime under a law that enters into force after it was committed. If such a punishment or security measure has been imposed, its execution and legal consequences shall automatically cease.
(2)	If the provisions of the law in force at the time the crime was committed and the laws that subsequently enter into force are different, the law more favorable to the offender shall be applied and executed.
(3)	(Amended: 29/6/2005 – Law No. 5377/Article 2) Provisions relating to the execution regime, except those concerning suspension of imprisonment, conditional release and recidivism, shall be applied immediately.
(4)	Temporary or time-limited laws shall continue to be applied to crimes committed during the period they were in force.

Application in terms of place

Article 8

(1) Turkish laws shall apply to crimes committed in Turkey. A crime is considered to have been committed in Turkey if the act was committed partially or wholly in Turkey or if the result occurred in Turkey.
(2) A crime is considered to have been committed in Turkey when it is committed;
a)	In Turkish land and airspace and in Turkish territorial waters,
b)	On the high seas and in the airspace above it, in or by Turkish sea and air vessels,
c)	In or by Turkish naval and air war vessels,
d)	On fixed platforms established on Turkey's continental shelf or in its exclusive economic zone or against them.

Conviction in a foreign country

Article 9

(1) A person who has been convicted in a foreign country for a crime committed in Turkey shall be retried in Turkey.

Crimes related to duty

Article 10

(1) A person who has undertaken an office or duty on behalf of Turkey in a foreign country and commits a crime in connection therewith shall be retried in Turkey even if a conviction has been rendered against him in the foreign country in relation to that act.

Crime committed by a citizen

Article 11

(1) If a Turkish citizen commits in a foreign country, other than the crimes specified in Article 13, a crime that requires imprisonment with a lower limit of not less than one year under Turkish laws, and he is in Turkey, he shall be punished under Turkish laws provided that no conviction has been rendered in the foreign country for that crime and that prosecutability exists in Turkey.

(2) If the crime requires imprisonment with a lower limit of less than one year, prosecution shall depend on the complaint of the injured party or the foreign government. In this case, the complaint must be made within six months from the date the citizen enters Turkey.

Crime committed by a foreigner

Article 12

(1) A foreigner who commits an offence abroad against Turkey, other than the offences specified in Article 13, which requires a minimum sentence of at least one year imprisonment according to Turkish law, and who is present in Turkey, shall be punished according to Turkish law. Prosecution is subject to the request of the Minister of Justice.
(2) Where the offence specified in the above paragraph is committed against a Turkish citizen or a private law legal entity established under Turkish law, and the perpetrator is present in Turkey, the perpetrator shall be punished according to Turkish law upon the complaint of the victim of the offence, provided that no judgment has been rendered in a foreign country for this offence.
(3) If the victim is a foreigner, the perpetrator shall be prosecuted upon the request of the Minister of Justice in the presence of the following conditions:
a) The offence requires a minimum sentence of imprisonment of not less than three years according to Turkish law.
b) There is no extradition agreement or the extradition request has not been accepted by the government of the country where the offence was committed or the state of which the perpetrator is a national.
(4) A foreigner who has been convicted by a foreign court for an offence falling within the scope of the first paragraph, or whose case or sentence has been dropped for any reason, or who has been acquitted, or whose offence has ceased to be prosecutable, shall be retried in Turkey upon the request of the Minister of Justice.
(5) (Added: 18/6/2014-6545/Art. 56) In cases falling within the scope of the first paragraph, prosecution for bribery and influence peddling offences is not subject to the request of the Minister of Justice.

Other offences

Article 13

(1) Where the following offences are committed abroad by a citizen or a foreigner, Turkish law shall apply:
a) Offences under the Second Book, First Part.
b) Offences under the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Chapters under the Second Book, Fourth Part.
c) Torture (

Articles 94, 95)

d) Intentional pollution of the environment (

Article 181)

e) Manufacture and trade of narcotics or stimulants (

Article 188), facilitating the use of narcotics or stimulants (Article 190)

f) Counterfeiting of currency (

Article 197)

, production and trade of instruments for the manufacture of currency and valuable stamps (

Article 200), counterfeiting of seals (Article 202)

g) Prostitution (

Article 227)

h) (Repealed: 26/6/2009 – 5918/Art. 1)
i) Hijacking or detention of maritime, railway or air transport vehicles (

Article 223

, paragraphs 2, 3) or causing damage (

Article 152) to these vehicles

(2) (Added second paragraph: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Art. 3) Prosecution in Turkey for offences falling within the scope of the first paragraph, except those under the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters under the Second Book, Fourth Part, is subject to the request of the Minister of Justice.
(3) Even if a conviction or acquittal decision has been rendered in a foreign country for the offences specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the first paragraph, prosecution shall be conducted in Turkey upon the request of the Minister of Justice.3

Investigation in alternative penalties

Article 14

(1) In the cases specified in Articles 11 and 12, if the application of either imprisonment or judicial fine is considered alternative in the article of law where the offence subject to investigation is located, no investigation or prosecution shall be initiated.

Calculation of the penalty that is a condition for investigation

Article 15

(1) In cases where the amount constitutes a condition for investigation, the penalty shall be calculated taking into account the lower limit of the legal aggravating circumstances and the upper limit of the legal mitigating circumstances put forward during the investigation phase.

Deduction from penalty

Article 16

(1) The time spent in police custody, under observation, in detention or imprisonment in a foreign country for an offence, wherever it was committed, shall be deducted from the penalty to be imposed in Turkey for the same offence.

Deprivation of rights

Article 17

(1) In the cases explained in the above articles, if the judgment rendered by foreign courts, which does not conflict with the Turkish legal order, requires deprivation of a right according to Turkish law, the court shall decide, upon the request of the Public Prosecutor, that the consequences under Turkish law shall be valid.

Extradition

Article 18- (Repealed: 23/4/2016-6706/Art. 36)

3 The number of this paragraph was (2), but since a second paragraph was added after the first paragraph by Article 3 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, it has been sequenced as (3).

Taking foreign law into consideration

Article 19

(1) When conducting a trial in Turkey for offences committed outside Turkey's sovereign territory, the penalty to be imposed according to Turkish law cannot exceed the upper limit of the penalty provided for in the law of the country where the offence was committed.
(2) However, if the offence is committed:
a) Against or to the detriment of Turkey's security,
b) Against a Turkish citizen or to the detriment of a private law legal entity established under Turkish law,
The provision of the above paragraph shall not apply.

SECOND PART
Principles of Criminal Liability

FIRST CHAPTER
Personal Nature of Criminal Liability, Intent and Negligence Personal nature of criminal liability

Article 20

(1) Criminal liability is personal. No one can be held responsible for another person's act.
(2) Criminal sanctions cannot be applied to legal entities. However, security measures of a sanction nature provided for by law in connection with an offence are reserved.

Intent

Article 21

(1) The existence of an offence depends on the existence of intent. Intent is the knowing and willing realization of the elements in the legal definition of the offence.
(2) Where a person commits the act despite foreseeing that the elements in the legal definition of the offence may be realized, there is eventual intent. In this case, a sentence of life imprisonment shall be imposed for offences requiring aggravated life imprisonment, a sentence of imprisonment from twenty to twenty-five years for offences requiring life imprisonment; in other offences, the basic penalty shall be reduced from one-third to one-half.

Negligence

Article 22

(1) Acts committed through negligence shall be punished in cases expressly specified by law.
(2) Negligence is the realization of a consequence specified in the legal definition of an offence through conduct without foreseeing it, due to violation of the duty of care and attention.
(3) Where the consequence occurs despite the person not wanting the consequence they foresaw, there is conscious negligence; in this case, the penalty for the negligent offence shall be increased from one-third to one-half.
(4) The penalty to be imposed for an offence committed through negligence shall be determined according to the fault of the perpetrator.
(5) In offences committed through negligence by more than one person, each person shall be responsible for their own fault. The penalty of each perpetrator shall be determined separately according to their fault.

(6) If the consequence caused by the negligent act has led to the perpetrator becoming a victim to such a degree that the imposition of a further penalty becomes unnecessary solely in terms of the perpetrator's personal and family situation, no penalty shall be imposed; in case of conscious negligence, the penalty to be imposed may be reduced from one-half to one-sixth.

Aggravated offence by consequence

Article 23

(1) Where an act causes the occurrence of a more serious or different consequence than intended, in order for a person to be held responsible for this, they must have acted at least through negligence with respect to this consequence.

SECOND CHAPTER
Grounds that Remove or Reduce Criminal Liability Execution of the law and superior's order

Article 24- (1) No penalty shall be imposed on a person who executes the provision of law.

(2) A person who executes an order given by a competent authority, the execution of which is mandatory by virtue of duty, shall not be responsible.
(3) An order constituting an offence cannot be executed under any circumstances. Otherwise, both the executor and the person who gave the order shall be responsible.
(4) In cases where the review of the lawfulness of the order is prevented by law, the person who gave the order shall be responsible for its execution.

Legitimate defence and necessity

Article 25

(1) No penalty shall be imposed on the perpetrator for acts committed out of the necessity to repel an unlawful attack directed against a right belonging to oneself or another, which has occurred, is occurring or is certain to occur or recur, in a manner proportionate to the attack according to the circumstances at that moment.
(2) No penalty shall be imposed on the perpetrator for acts committed out of the necessity to escape from or to rescue another from a severe and certain danger directed against a right belonging to oneself or another, which one did not knowingly cause and for which there is no other means of protection, provided that there is proportionality between the severity of the danger and the subject matter and means used.

Exercise of rights and consent of the person concerned

Article 26- (1) No penalty shall be imposed on a person who exercises their right

(2) No penalty shall be imposed on anyone for an act committed within the scope of the consent expressed by a person, in relation to a right over which that person has absolute power of disposal.

Exceeding the limits

Article 27

(1) In cases where the limits are exceeded without intent in circumstances that eliminate criminal liability, if the act is also punishable when committed through negligence, a sentence shall be imposed by reducing the penalty prescribed by law for the negligent offence by one-sixth to one-third.

(2) If exceeding the limits in legitimate defence arises from excusable agitation, fear or panic, no penalty shall be imposed on the perpetrator.

Coercion and violence, intimidation and threat

Article 28

(1) No penalty shall be imposed on a person who commits an offence as a result of coercion and violence that they cannot resist or escape from, or as a result of certain and severe intimidation or threat. In such cases, the person who uses coercion and violence, intimidation and threat shall be deemed the perpetrator of the offence.

Unjust provocation

Article 29

(1) A person who commits an offence under the influence of anger or severe distress caused by an unlawful act shall be sentenced to imprisonment from eighteen to twenty-four years instead of aggravated life imprisonment, and from twelve to eighteen years instead of life imprisonment. In other cases, the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced by one-quarter to three-quarters.

Mistake

Article 30

(1) A person who does not know the material elements in the legal definition of the offence during the commission of the act does not act intentionally. Liability for negligence due to this mistake is reserved.
(2) A person who makes a mistake regarding the existence of qualified circumstances of an offence that require more severe or less severe punishment shall benefit from this mistake.
(3) A person who makes an unavoidable mistake regarding the existence of conditions relating to circumstances that eliminate or reduce criminal liability shall benefit from this mistake.
(4) (Additional paragraph: 29/6/2005 – Article 4 of Law No. 5377) A person who makes an unavoidable mistake regarding the fact that the act committed constitutes wrongdoing shall not be punished.

Minority

Article 31

(1) Children who have not completed twelve years of age at the time of committing the act have no criminal liability. No criminal prosecution may be conducted against such persons; however, security measures specific to children may be applied.
(2) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – Article 5 of Law No. 5377) Those who have completed twelve years of age but have not completed fifteen years of age at the time of committing the act have no criminal liability if they are unable to comprehend the legal meaning and consequences of the act committed or if their capacity to direct their behaviour is not sufficiently developed. However, security measures specific to children shall be imposed on such persons. In the presence of the capacity to comprehend the legal meaning and consequences of the act committed and to direct their behaviour in relation to this act, such persons shall be sentenced to imprisonment from twelve to fifteen years if the offence requires aggravated life imprisonment; from nine to eleven years if it requires life imprisonment. Half of other sentences shall be reduced and in this case the imprisonment sentence to be imposed for each act may not exceed seven years.

(3) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – Article 5 of Law No. 5377) Persons who have completed fifteen years of age but have not completed eighteen years of age at the time of committing the act shall be sentenced to imprisonment from eighteen to twenty-four years if the offence requires aggravated life imprisonment; from twelve to fifteen years if it requires life imprisonment. One-third of other sentences shall be reduced and in this case the imprisonment sentence to be imposed for each act may not exceed twelve years.

Mental illness

Article 32

(1) No penalty shall be imposed on a person who, due to mental illness, is unable to comprehend the legal meaning and consequences of the act committed or whose capacity to direct their behaviour in relation to this act is significantly diminished. However, a security measure shall be imposed on such persons.
(2) A person whose capacity to direct their behaviour in relation to the act committed is diminished, although not to the degree specified in the first paragraph, shall be sentenced to twenty-five years of imprisonment instead of aggravated life imprisonment, and twenty years of imprisonment instead of life imprisonment. In other cases, the sentence to be imposed may be reduced by up to one-sixth. The sentence imposed may also be applied, partially or wholly, as a security measure specific to the mentally ill, provided that the duration is the same.

Deaf-muteness

Article 33

(1) The provisions of this Code relating to children who have not completed twelve years of age at the time of committing the act shall also apply to deaf-mutes who have not completed fifteen years of age; the provisions relating to those who have completed twelve years of age but have not completed fifteen years of age shall also apply to deaf-mutes who have completed fifteen years of age but have not completed eighteen years of age; the provisions relating to those who have completed fifteen years of age but have not completed eighteen years of age shall also apply to deaf-mutes who have completed eighteen years of age but have not completed twenty-one years of age.

Temporary causes, being under the influence of alcohol or narcotics

Article 34

(1) No penalty shall be imposed on a person who, due to a temporary cause or under the influence of alcohol or narcotics taken involuntarily, is unable to comprehend the legal meaning and consequences of the act committed or whose capacity to direct their behaviour in relation to this act is significantly diminished.
(2) The provision of the first paragraph shall not apply to a person who commits an offence under the influence of alcohol or narcotics taken voluntarily.

PART THREE
Attempt to Commit an Offence
Attempt to commit an offence

Article 35

(1) If a person begins directly to commit with suitable acts an offence that they intend to commit but is unable to complete it due to reasons beyond their control, they shall be held liable for attempt.

(2) In case of attempt to commit an offence, the perpetrator shall be punished, according to the severity of the harm or danger that has occurred, with imprisonment from thirteen to twenty years instead of aggravated life imprisonment, from nine to fifteen years instead of life imprisonment. In other cases, the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced by one-quarter to three-quarters.

Voluntary abandonment

Article 36

(1) If the perpetrator voluntarily abandons the acts of commission of the offence or prevents the completion of the offence or the occurrence of the result through their own efforts, they shall not be punished for attempt; but if the completed part itself constitutes an offence, they shall be punished only with the penalty for that offence.

PART FOUR
Participation in an Offence
Perpetration

Article 37

(1) Each of the persons who jointly carry out the act specified in the legal definition of the offence shall be liable as a perpetrator.
(2) A person who uses another as an instrument in the commission of the offence shall also be held liable as a perpetrator. The penalty of a person who uses those without capacity for guilt as an instrument in the commission of the offence shall be increased from one-third to one-half.

Instigation

Article 38

(1) A person who instigates another to commit an offence shall be punished with the penalty for the offence committed.
(2) In case of instigation to commit an offence by using influence arising from the relationship between ascendants and descendants, the penalty of the instigator shall be increased from one-third to one-half. In case of instigation of children to commit an offence, the existence of the relationship between ascendants and descendants is not required for the increase of the penalty according to the provision of this paragraph.
(3) If the instigator is not identified, the perpetrator or other accomplice who enables the identification of who they are may be sentenced to imprisonment from twenty to twenty-five years instead of aggravated life imprisonment, from fifteen to twenty years instead of life imprisonment. In other cases, a reduction of one-third may be made in the sentence to be imposed.

Aiding and abetting

Article 39

(1) A person who aids in the commission of a crime shall be sentenced to imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years if the crime committed requires an aggravated life imprisonment sentence; from ten years to fifteen years if it requires a life imprisonment sentence. In other cases, half of the sentence shall be reduced. However, the sentence to be imposed in this case cannot exceed eight years.
(2) In the following cases, a person shall be held responsible as an aider for the crime committed:
a) Encouraging the commission of a crime or strengthening the decision to commit a crime or promising to provide assistance after the commission of the act.

b) Guiding on how to commit the crime or providing the means used in the commission of the act.
c) Facilitating its execution by providing assistance before or during the commission of the crime.

Rule of accessoriness

Article 40

(1) For participation in a crime, the existence of an act committed intentionally and unlawfully is sufficient. Each person participating in the commission of the crime shall be punished according to their own culpable act, without regard to personal reasons preventing the punishment of the other.
(2) In special crimes, only a person possessing the special perpetrator qualification can be a principal. Other persons participating in the commission of these crimes shall be held responsible as instigators or aiders.
(3) In order to be held responsible for participation in a crime, the relevant crime must have reached at least the attempt stage.

Voluntary abandonment in crimes committed with participation

Article 41

(1) In crimes committed with participation, only the accomplice who voluntarily abandons benefits from the provisions on voluntary abandonment.
(2) The provisions on voluntary abandonment shall also apply in cases where the crime:
a) Has not been committed for a reason other than the effort shown by the person who voluntarily abandoned,
b) Has been committed despite all the efforts of the person who voluntarily abandoned.

FIFTH CHAPTER
Concurrence of Crimes
Compound crime

Article 42

(1) A crime that is considered a single act because one constitutes an element or aggravating reason of the other is called a compound crime. In such crimes, the provisions on concurrence shall not apply.

Continuing crime

Article 43

(1) In the event that the same crime is committed more than once against one person at different times within the scope of the execution of a decision to commit a crime, a single sentence shall be imposed. However, this sentence shall be increased from one-fourth to three-fourths. The basic form of a crime and its qualified forms requiring more severe or less severe punishment shall be considered the same crime. (Additional sentence: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 6) This paragraph provision shall also apply to crimes without a specific victim.
(2) In the event that the same crime is committed against more than one person with a single act, the provision of the first paragraph shall apply.
(3) The provisions of this article shall not apply to intentional killing, intentional injury, torture and robbery crimes.4

4 The phrase "sexual assault, sexual abuse of children" in this paragraph was removed from the article text by Article 6 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005.

Ideal concurrence

Article 44

(1) A person who causes the formation of more than one different crime with a single act committed shall be punished for the crime requiring the most severe punishment among them.

THIRD PART
Sanctions

FIRST CHAPTER
Punishments
Punishments

Article 45

(1) Punishments applied as sanctions for crimes are imprisonment and judicial fines.

Imprisonment sentences

Article 46- (1) Imprisonment sentences are as follows

a) Aggravated life imprisonment sentence.
b) Life imprisonment sentence.
c) Fixed-term imprisonment sentence.

Aggravated life imprisonment sentence5

Article 47

(1) An aggravated life imprisonment sentence continues for the life of the convict and is served according to the strict security regime specified in the law and the regulation issued by the President.

Life imprisonment sentence

Article 48- (1) A life imprisonment sentence continues for the life of the convict

Fixed-term imprisonment sentence

Article 49

(1) A fixed-term imprisonment sentence cannot be less than one month or more than twenty years in cases where the law does not specify otherwise.
(2) An imprisonment sentence of one year or less imposed is a short-term imprisonment sentence.

Alternative sanctions to short-term imprisonment sentence

Article 50

(1) A short-term imprisonment sentence, according to the offender's personality, social and economic situation, remorse felt during the trial process and the characteristics of the commission of the crime, may be converted to:
a) A judicial fine,
b) Complete elimination of the damage suffered by the victim or the public through return in kind, restoration to the state before the crime or compensation,

5 By Article 156 of Decree Law No. 700 dated 2/7/2018, the phrase "in the regulation" in this article was changed to "in the regulation issued by the President".

c) Attending an educational institution that also provides accommodation when necessary, for a period of at least two years, in order to enable the acquisition of a profession or craft,
d) Being prohibited from going to certain places or engaging in certain activities for a period from half to one times the sentence imposed,
e) In the event that a crime has been committed by abusing the rights and powers provided or by acting contrary to the duty of care and attention required; withdrawal of the relevant license and permit documents, being prohibited from practicing a certain profession or craft for a period from half to one times the sentence imposed,
f) Being employed in a public service work for a period from half to one times the sentence imposed and on the condition of being voluntary.
(2) In cases where a judicial fine is provided as an alternative to imprisonment in the crime definition, if an imprisonment sentence has been imposed; this sentence shall no longer be converted to a judicial fine.
(3) Provided that the person has not been previously sentenced to imprisonment, an imprisonment sentence of thirty days or less imposed, and an imprisonment sentence of one year or less imposed on those who had not completed eighteen years of age or had completed sixty-five years of age on the date of committing the act, shall be converted to one of the alternative sanctions specified in the first paragraph.
(4) An imprisonment sentence imposed for negligent crimes, even if it is long-term; may be converted to a judicial fine according to subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph if other conditions exist. However, this provision shall not apply in cases of conscious negligence.
(5) In practice, the actual conviction is the judicial fine or measure converted according to the provisions of this article.
(6) If, despite notification by the Public Prosecutor's Office after the judgment becomes final, the requirements of the alternative measure are not commenced within thirty days or are commenced but not continued, the execution judge shall decide on the complete or partial execution of the short-term imprisonment sentence and this decision shall be executed immediately. In this case, the provision of the fifth paragraph shall not apply.67
(7) In the event that the alternative measure imposed cannot be fulfilled for reasons beyond the convict's control, the measure shall be changed by the execution judge.(7)

Suspension of imprisonment sentence

Article 51

(1) The sentence of a person convicted of imprisonment for a period of two years or less for the crime committed may be suspended. The upper limit of this period is three years for persons who had not completed eighteen years of age or had completed sixty-five years of age at the time of committing the act. However, in order for a suspension decision to be given, the person must;

6 By Article 4 of Law No. 5739 dated 26/2/2008, the phrase "sanction" in this paragraph has been amended as "measure" and incorporated into the text.
7 By Article 8 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "court that rendered the judgment" in the sixth paragraph has been amended as "execution judgeship" and the phrase "by the court that rendered the judgment" in the seventh paragraph has been amended as "by the execution judgeship".

a) Not have been previously convicted of imprisonment exceeding three months for an intentional crime,
b) A conviction must be formed in the court that he will not commit a crime again due to the remorse shown in the trial process after committing the crime.

(2) The suspension of the sentence may be made conditional upon the complete remedy of the damage suffered by the victim or the public through restitution in kind, restoration to the state before the crime or compensation. In this case, the sentence continues to be served in the execution institution until the condition is fulfilled. If the condition is fulfilled, the convict is immediately released from the execution institution by the decision of the execution judge.8
(3) A probation period of not less than one year and not more than three years shall be determined for the convict whose sentence has been suspended. The lower limit of this period cannot be less than the sentence period to which he was convicted.
(4) During the probation period;

a) For a convict who does not have a profession or craft, to attend a training program for this purpose,
b) For a convict who has a profession or craft, to be employed for a fee under the supervision of another person practicing the same profession or craft in a public institution or privately,
c) For convicts under eighteen years of age, to attend an educational institution that also has accommodation facilities when necessary, in order to enable them to acquire a profession or craft,
may be decided by the court.

(5) The court may appoint an expert person to guide the convict during the probation period. This person advises the convict on getting rid of bad habits and leading a good life with a sense of responsibility; consults with the officials of the institution where he is being educated or the persons with whom he is employed; prepares reports every three months about the convict's behavior, social adaptation and development in sense of responsibility and submits them to the execution judge.(8)
(6) The court may also decide that the probation period shall pass without determining any obligation or appointing an expert person, taking into account the personality and social situation of the convict.
(7) If the convict commits an intentional crime during the probation period or insists on not complying with the obligations imposed on him despite the warning of the execution judge; it shall be decided by the execution judgeship that the suspended sentence be served partially or completely in the execution institution.9
(8) If the probation period is passed in compliance with the obligations or in good conduct, the sentence shall be deemed to have been executed.

8 By Article 9 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "judge" in the second paragraph has been amended as "execution judge", and the phrase "to the judge" in the fifth paragraph has been amended as "to the execution judge".
9 By Article 9 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "of the judge" in this paragraph has been amended as "of the execution judge" and the phrase "by the execution judgeship" has been added to the same paragraph to follow the phrase "to be served".

Judicial fine

Article 52

(1) A judicial fine consists of the payment to the State Treasury by the convict of the amount calculated by multiplying the number of full days determined as not less than five days and, in cases where there is no provision to the contrary in the law, not more than seven hundred and thirty days, by the amount assessed as the equivalent of one day.
(2) The amount of the judicial fine per day, which is a minimum of twenty and a maximum of one hundred Turkish Liras, shall be assessed taking into account the person's economic and other personal circumstances.
(3) In the judgment, the number of full days taken as basis in determining the judicial fine and the amount assessed as the equivalent of one day shall be shown separately.
(4) The judge, taking into account his economic and personal circumstances, may grant the person a period of not more than one year from the date of finalization of the judgment to pay the judicial fine, or may decide that this fine be paid in certain installments. The installment period cannot exceed two years and the number of installments cannot be less than four. The judgment shall state that if one of the installments is not paid on time, the entire remaining part will be collected and the unpaid judicial fine will be converted into imprisonment.

SECOND PART
Security Measures Disqualification from exercising certain rights1011

Article 53

(1) A person, as a legal consequence of conviction to imprisonment for an intentionally committed crime, shall be deprived of;
a) Undertaking a permanent, fixed-term or temporary public office; within this scope, membership of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey or employment in all civil service positions and services subject to appointment or election provided by the State, provinces, municipalities, villages or institutions and organizations under their supervision and control,
b) The right to vote and to be elected (…)(11),
c) The right of custody; serving in a function pertaining to guardianship or trusteeship,
d) Being a manager or auditor of legal entities such as foundations, associations, trade unions, companies, cooperatives and political parties,
e) Exercising a profession or craft subject to the permission of a public institution or a professional organization having the nature of a public institution, as a self-employed professional or merchant under one's own responsibility.

10 By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 8/10/2015 and numbered E.: 2014/140,
K.: 2015/85; the section "A person, as a legal consequence of conviction to imprisonment for an intentionally committed crime, shall be deprived of;…" in the first paragraph of this article, with respect to the phrase "…the right to be elected…" in subparagraph (b) of the same paragraph, and the phrase "…to imprisonment…" in the same paragraph with respect to the phrase "The right to vote and…" in subparagraph (b), have been annulled.
11 By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 8/10/2015 and numbered E.: 2014/140,
K.: 2015/85; the phrase "…and exercising other political rights" in the first paragraph of this article and the second paragraph of the same article, with respect to the phrase "The right to vote and to be elected…" in subparagraph (b) of the first paragraph, have been annulled.

(2) A person cannot exercise these rights until the execution of the imprisonment sentence to which he has been convicted for the crime committed is completed.
(3) The provisions of the above paragraphs shall not apply with respect to the custody, guardianship and trusteeship powers over his own descendants of a convict whose imprisonment sentence has been suspended or whose sentence has been executed by applying the supervised release measure or who has been conditionally released. It may be decided not to apply the deprivation of rights referred to in subparagraph (e) of the first paragraph with respect to a convict whose imprisonment sentence has been suspended or whose sentence has been executed by applying the supervised release measure or who has been conditionally released.12
(4) The provision of the first paragraph shall not apply to persons whose short-term imprisonment sentence has been suspended or who had not completed eighteen years of age at the time of committing the act.13
(5) In case of conviction to imprisonment for crimes committed by abusing one of the rights and powers listed in the first paragraph, additionally, a prohibition on the exercise of this right and power shall be decided, to take effect after the execution of the sentence, from half to one times the sentence imposed. In case of conviction only to a judicial fine for crimes committed by abusing one of these rights and powers, a prohibition on the exercise of this right and power shall be decided from half to one times the number of days specified in the judgment. The period relating to the prohibition put into execution upon the finalization of the judgment shall begin to run from the complete execution of the judicial fine.
(6) In case of conviction for a negligent crime committed due to violation of the duty of care and attention required by a particular profession or craft or traffic regulations, a prohibition on the exercise of this profession or craft or the withdrawal of the driver's license may be decided for not less than three months and not more than three years. The prohibition and withdrawal shall enter into force upon the finalization of the judgment and the period shall begin to run from the complete execution of the sentence.

Confiscation of objects

Article 54

(1) Provided that they do not belong to third parties in good faith, objects used in the commission of an intentional crime or allocated for the commission of the crime or resulting from the crime shall be confiscated. Objects prepared for use in the commission of the crime shall be confiscated if they are dangerous in terms of public security, public health or public morals. (Additional sentence: 24/11/2016-6763/11 art.) In case there is a limited real right established in favor of third parties in good faith on the object, the confiscation decision shall be given subject to the reservation of this right.
(2) In case the object falling within the scope of the first paragraph is eliminated, disposed of, consumed or confiscation thereof is made impossible in another manner; confiscation of an amount of money equal to the value of this object shall be decided.

12 By Article 10 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "by applying the supervised release measure or whose sentence has been executed or" has been added to the first sentence of this paragraph to follow the phrase "suspended or" and the phrase "or whose sentence has been executed by applying the supervised release measure or who has been conditionally released" has been added to the second sentence to follow the phrase "whose sentence has been suspended". 13 By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 8/10/2015 and numbered E.: 2014/140,
K.: 2015/85; the phrase "Whose short-term imprisonment sentence has been suspended or…" in this paragraph, with respect to the phrase "…the right to be elected…" in the first paragraph of the same article, has been annulled.

(3) When it is understood that the confiscation of the object used in the crime will produce more severe consequences compared to the crime committed and will therefore be contrary to equity, confiscation may not be decided.
(4) Objects whose production, possession, use, transportation, purchase and sale constitute a crime shall be confiscated.
(5) When only certain parts of a thing are required to be confiscated, if it is possible to separate this part without damaging the whole, confiscation of only this part shall be decided.
(6) With respect to an object in which multiple persons are co-owners, confiscation of only the share of the person participating in the crime shall be decided.

Confiscation of gains

Article 55

(1) Confiscation shall be decided of material benefits obtained through the commission of the crime or constituting the subject of the crime or provided for the commission of the crime, and economic gains arising from the evaluation or conversion thereof. For a confiscation decision to be given pursuant to the provision of this paragraph, it is necessary that the material benefit cannot be returned to the victim of the crime.
(2) In cases where the objects or material benefits subject to confiscation cannot be seized or they have not been delivered to the competent authority, confiscation of the values constituting their equivalent shall be decided.
(3) (Added: 26/6/2009 – 5918/2 art.) For the object falling within the scope of this article to be confiscated, it is necessary that the person who subsequently acquired the object cannot benefit from the provisions regarding the protection of good faith of the Turkish Civil Code No. 4721 dated 22/11/2001.

Security measures specific to children

Article 56

(1) What the security measures specific to children are and how they shall be applied are specified in the relevant law.

Security measures specific to the mentally ill

Article 57

(1) A security measure for protection and treatment purposes shall be imposed on a person who was mentally ill at the time of committing the act. Mentally ill persons subject to a security measure shall be placed under protection and treatment in high-security health institutions.
(2) A mentally ill person subject to a security measure may be released by decision of the execution judge upon a report prepared by the health board of the institution in which they are placed stating that their dangerousness to society has been eliminated or significantly reduced.14

14 By Article 4 of Law No. 7328 dated 17/6/2021, the phrases "court or judge" in the second and seventh paragraphs were amended to read "execution judge" and the phrase "court" in the sixth paragraph was amended to read "execution judge", and the phrase "by the execution judgeship" was added to the fifth paragraph of the article to follow the phrase "based on,".

(3) The health board report shall specify, according to the nature of the mental illness and the act committed, whether medical supervision and monitoring of the person is necessary for security purposes, and if so, the duration and intervals thereof.
(4) Medical supervision and monitoring shall be ensured by the Public Prosecutor's Office sending these persons to a health institution with technical equipment and authorized specialists at the duration and intervals indicated in the report.
(5) When it is determined during medical supervision and monitoring that the person's dangerousness to society has increased in terms of their mental illness, a security measure for protection and treatment purposes shall be imposed again by the execution judgeship based on the prepared report. In this case, the procedures specified in the first and subsequent paragraphs shall be repeated.(14)
(6) For a person whose ability to direct their behavior was diminished due to their illness in relation to the act committed, the imprisonment sentence to which they were convicted may also be applied, partially or entirely, as a security measure specific to mentally ill persons by decision of the execution judge, provided that the duration remains the same, upon a board report prepared at the high-security health institution in which they were placed pursuant to the provisions of the first and second paragraphs.(14)
(7) A decision shall be made to place persons who commit crimes and are addicted to alcohol or narcotics or stimulants under treatment in a health institution specific to alcohol or narcotics or stimulant addicts as a security measure. The treatment of these persons shall continue until they are cured of their addiction to alcohol or narcotics or stimulants. These persons may be released by decision of the execution judge upon a report prepared to this effect by the health board of the institution in which they are placed.(14)

Recidivism and specially dangerous offenders

Article 58

(1) Where a new crime is committed after the judgment given for a previously committed crime has become final, the provisions on recidivism shall apply. It is not necessary for the sentence to have been executed for this purpose.
(2) The provisions on recidivism shall not apply to crimes committed after the following periods have elapsed from the date of execution of the sentence for a previously committed crime:
a) Five years from the date of execution of the sentence, in case of conviction to imprisonment for more than five years,
b) Three years from the date of execution of the sentence, in case of conviction to imprisonment of five years or less or to a judicial fine.
(3) In case of recidivism, if the article of law relating to the subsequent crime provides alternatively for imprisonment or a judicial fine, imprisonment shall be imposed.
(4) The provisions on recidivism shall not apply between intentional crimes and negligent crimes, and between purely military crimes and other crimes. Except for the crimes of intentional killing, intentional injury, robbery, fraud, manufacture and trade of narcotics or stimulants, and counterfeiting of money or valuable stamps; judgments given by foreign country courts shall not constitute a basis for recidivism.
(5) The provisions on recidivism shall not apply with respect to crimes committed by persons who had not completed eighteen years of age at the time of committing the act.

(6) A sentence imposed in case of recidivism shall be served according to the execution regime specific to recidivists. In addition, a supervised release measure shall be applied to the recidivist after execution of the sentence.
(7) The conviction judgment shall specify that the execution regime specific to recidivists and the supervised release measure after execution of the sentence shall be applied to the convict.
(8) The execution of the sentence to which recidivists are convicted and the application of the supervised release measure shall be carried out in the manner specified in the law.
(9) A decision shall also be made to apply the execution regime specific to recidivists and the supervised release measure after execution of the sentence to habitual offenders, persons who make crime their profession, or offenders who are members of an organization.

Deportation

Article 59

(Amended: 31/3/2005 – 5328/1 art.)
(1) A foreigner convicted of imprisonment due to a crime committed shall be immediately notified to the Ministry of Interior for evaluation of their situation with respect to deportation proceedings, after a decision is made to execute their sentence by applying a supervised release measure or for their conditional release, and in any event after execution of their sentence is completed.15

Security measures regarding legal persons

Article 60

(1) In case of conviction for intentional crimes committed with the participation of the organs or representatives of a private law legal person operating based on a permit granted by a public institution, through abuse of the authority granted by this permit, and for the benefit of the legal person, a decision shall be made to revoke the permit.
(2) The provisions on confiscation shall also apply to private law legal persons with respect to crimes committed for their benefit.
(3) In cases where application of the provisions of the above paragraphs may produce more severe consequences compared to the act committed, the judge may not impose these measures.
(4) The provisions of this article shall apply in cases specifically indicated by law.

THIRD PART
Determination and Individualization of Punishment Determination of punishment

ARTICLE 61. - (1) The judge, in the concrete case;

a) The manner in which the crime was committed,
b) The instruments used in committing the crime,
c) The time and place where the crime was committed,
d) The importance and value of the subject of the crime,

15 By Article 5 of Law No. 7328 dated 17/6/2021, the phrase "after benefiting from conditional release" in this article was amended to read "after a decision is made for the execution of the sentence by applying a supervised release measure or for conditional release".

e) The severity of the damage or danger that occurred,
f) The severity of the perpetrator's fault based on intent or negligence,
g) The purpose and motive pursued by the perpetrator,
Taking into consideration, determines the basic sentence between the lower and upper limits of the sentence provided for in the legal definition of the crime committed.
(2) Reduction or increase due to the crime being committed with possible intent or conscious negligence shall be made on the sentence determined according to the provision of the first paragraph.
(3) In cases where the matters specified in the first paragraph constitute an element of the crime, they shall not be separately taken into consideration in determining the basic sentence.
(4) In the event that more than one qualified circumstance requiring a heavier or lesser sentence compared to the basic form of a crime is realized; first an increase then a reduction shall be made to the basic sentence.
(5) The final sentence shall be determined by applying, in order, the provisions regarding attempt, participation, chain crime, unjust provocation, minority, mental illness and personal reasons requiring reduction in sentence, as well as discretionary reduction reasons, on the sentence determined according to the above paragraphs.
(6) The duration of imprisonment shall be determined by calculation of days, months and years. One day is twenty-four hours; one month is thirty days. A year is calculated according to the official calendar. Fractions of a day for imprisonment and fractions of one Turkish Lira for judicial fines shall not be taken into account and these sentences shall not be executed.
(7) (Added: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Art. 7) The final sentence determined according to the provisions of this article for a crime requiring a fixed-term imprisonment sentence cannot exceed thirty years.
(8) (Added: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Art. 7) When calculating a judicial fine, increases and reductions aimed at determining and individualizing the sentence according to the provision of this article shall be made on a daily basis. The judicial fine is found by multiplying the determined final days by the amount that the person can pay per day.
(9) (Added: 6/12/2006 – 5560/Art. 1) In crimes where a judicial fine is provided as an alternative sentence, the lower limit of the day unit for this sentence cannot be less than the lower limit of the imprisonment sentence in that crime definition; nor can the upper limit exceed the upper limit of the imprisonment sentence.
(10) Unless expressly written in the law, sentences can neither be increased, nor reduced, nor changed.1617

Discretionary reduction reasons

Article 62

(1) In the presence of discretionary reasons that will mitigate the sentence in favor of the perpetrator, instead of aggravated life imprisonment, life imprisonment; instead of life imprisonment, twenty-five years of imprisonment shall be given. Other sentences shall be reduced by up to one-sixth.18

16 While the number of this paragraph was (7), since seventh and eighth paragraphs were added to the article by Article 1 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 to come after the sixth paragraph, it has been sequenced as (9).
17 While the number of this paragraph was (9), since paragraph numbered (9) was added to the article by Article 1 of Law No. 5560 dated 6/12/2006 to come after the eighth paragraph, it has been sequenced as (10).
18 The phrase "one-fifth" in this paragraph was amended to read "one-sixth" by Article 2 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005 and incorporated into the text.

(2) As discretionary reduction reasons, the perpetrator's past, social relations, behaviors showing remorse after the act and during the trial process, or the possible effects of the sentence on the perpetrator's future (…)19 may be taken into consideration. (Additional sentence: 12/5/2022-7406/Art. 1) However, the perpetrator's formal attitude and behaviors aimed at influencing the court during the hearing shall not be taken into consideration as a discretionary reduction reason. Discretionary reduction reasons shall be indicated in the judgment with their justifications.(19)

Set-off

Article 63

(1) All periods spent due to all circumstances that occurred before the judgment became final and resulted in restriction of personal liberty shall be deducted from the imprisonment sentence imposed. In case a judicial fine is imposed, a deduction shall be made from this sentence, counting one day as one hundred Turkish Liras.

FOURTH PART
Dismissal of Case and Sentence Death of the accused or convict

Article 64

(1) In case of the death of the accused, a decision shall be made to dismiss the public case. However, the case may be continued regarding goods and material benefits subject to confiscation by their nature, and their confiscation may be ruled.
(2) The death of the convict eliminates imprisonment and judicial fines not yet executed. However, the judgment that became final before death regarding confiscation and trial expenses shall be executed.

Amnesty

Article 65

(1) In case of general amnesty, the public case is dismissed, the sentences imposed are eliminated together with all their consequences.
(2) By special amnesty, the serving of the imprisonment sentence in the penal institution may be terminated, or the period to be served in the penal institution may be shortened, or it may be converted to a judicial fine.
(3) Deprivation of rights dependent on the sentence or specified in the judgment continues its effect despite special amnesty.

Statute of limitations for prosecution

Article 66- (1) Except for cases otherwise written in the law, the public case;

a) In crimes requiring aggravated life imprisonment, thirty years,
b) In crimes requiring life imprisonment, twenty-five years,
c) In crimes requiring imprisonment of not less than twenty years, twenty years,
d) In crimes requiring imprisonment of more than five years and less than twenty years, fifteen years,

19 By Article 1 of Law No. 7406 dated 12/5/2022, the phrase "during the process," in this paragraph was amended to read "behaviors showing remorse during the process or", the phrase "such matters" was removed from the article text, and the phrase "with their justifications" was added to the paragraph to come after the phrase "in the judgment".

e) In crimes requiring imprisonment of not more than five years or a judicial fine, eight years,
is dismissed upon expiration.
(2) Regarding those who had completed twelve years of age but had not completed fifteen years of age at the time of committing the act, upon expiration of half of these periods; regarding persons who had completed fifteen years of age but had not completed eighteen years of age, upon expiration of two-thirds thereof, the public case is dismissed.
(3) In determining the statute of limitations period for prosecution, the qualified circumstances of the crime requiring heavier punishment shall also be taken into consideration in light of the evidence in the file.
(4) In determining the periods in the above paragraphs, the upper limit of the sentence for the crime in the law shall be taken into consideration; in crimes requiring alternative sentences, imprisonment shall be taken as the basis for statute of limitations.
(5) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Art. 8) In cases requiring retrial for the same act, the statute of limitations period for the act begins to run anew from the date the court accepts the request in this regard.
(6) The statute of limitations begins to run from the day the crime was committed in completed crimes, from the day the last act was performed in crimes remaining at the attempt stage, from the day the interruption occurred in continuous crimes and from the day the last crime was committed in chain crimes, from the day the child completes eighteen years of age in crimes committed against children by ascendants or persons having authority and influence over them.
(7) In case the crimes written in the Fourth Part of the Second Book of this Code requiring aggravated life imprisonment or life imprisonment or imprisonment of more than ten years are committed abroad, the statute of limitations for prosecution shall not apply.

Suspension or interruption of the statute of limitations period for prosecution

Article 67

(1) In cases where the conduct of an investigation and prosecution is dependent on obtaining permission or a decision or on the resolution of a matter that must be resolved by another authority; the statute of limitations for prosecution is suspended until the permission or decision is obtained or the matter is resolved or, in the case of a perpetrator of a crime who has been decided to be a fugitive in accordance with the law, until this decision is lifted.
(2) In relation to a crime;
a) The taking of a statement from or interrogation of one of the suspects or defendants before the prosecutor,
b) The issuance of an arrest warrant against one of the suspects or defendants,
c) The preparation of an indictment in relation to the crime,
d) The issuance of a conviction decision, even if only against some of the defendants, the statute of limitations for prosecution is interrupted.
(3) When the statute of limitations for prosecution is interrupted, the limitation period begins to run anew. In the event that there is more than one reason interrupting the statute of limitations for prosecution, the limitation period begins to run anew from the date on which the last interrupting reason occurred.

(4) In case of interruption, the statute of limitations period is extended by at most half of the period determined in the Law for the relevant crime.

Statute of limitations for punishment

Article 68

(1) The punishments specified in this article shall not be executed after the following periods have elapsed:
a) Forty years for aggravated life imprisonment sentences.
b) Thirty years for life imprisonment sentences.
c) Twenty-four years for imprisonment sentences of twenty years or more.
d) Twenty years for imprisonment sentences exceeding five years.
e) Ten years for imprisonment sentences up to five years and judicial fines.
(2) For those who had completed twelve years of age but had not completed fifteen years of age at the time of committing the act, the punishment shall not be executed after half of these periods have elapsed; for persons who had completed fifteen years of age but had not completed eighteen years of age, after two-thirds have elapsed.
(3) The statute of limitations shall not apply to aggravated life imprisonment or life imprisonment or imprisonment sentences exceeding ten years imposed for crimes committed abroad as specified in Part Four of Book Two of this Law.
(4) Judgments containing different types of punishments shall not be executed after the period set for the most severe punishment has elapsed.
(5) The statute of limitations for punishment begins to run from the date on which the judgment becomes final or the execution is interrupted in any manner, and the period is calculated on the basis of the remaining amount of punishment.

Statute of limitations for punishment and disqualifications

Article 69

(1) The period of disqualifications attached to the punishment or specified in the judgment continues until the statute of limitations for punishment expires.

Statute of limitations for confiscation

Article 70

(1) A judgment regarding confiscation shall not be executed after twenty years have elapsed from its finalization.

Interruption of the statute of limitations for punishment

Article 71

(1) The service of notice to the convict by the competent authority for the execution of the conviction judgment in accordance with the law or the apprehension of the convict for this purpose interrupts the statute of limitations for punishment.
(2) If a person convicted of a crime commits an intentional crime requiring imprisonment with an upper limit of more than two years, the statute of limitations for punishment is interrupted.

Calculation and application of the statute of limitations

Article 72- (1) The periods of the statute of limitations for prosecution and punishment are determined by calculation of days, months and years.

One day is twenty-four hours; one month is thirty days. A year is calculated according to the official calendar.

(2) The statute of limitations for prosecution and punishment is applied ex officio and the suspect, defendant and convict cannot waive it.

Crimes whose investigation and prosecution are subject to complaint20

Article 73

(1) If the authorized person does not file a complaint within six months regarding a crime whose investigation and prosecution are subject to complaint, no investigation and prosecution may be conducted.
(2) Provided that the statute of limitations period has not expired, this period begins from the day on which the person entitled to complain knew or learned of the act and who the perpetrator was.
(3) If one of several persons entitled to complain allows the six-month period to expire, the rights of the others are not thereby forfeited.
(4) In crimes whose prosecution is subject to complaint, unless otherwise provided by law, the waiver by the person injured by the crime causes the case to be dismissed, and waiver after the finalization of the judgment does not prevent the execution of the punishment.
(5) Waiver of the complaint against one of the defendants who committed the crime in participation also covers the others.
(6) Unless otherwise provided by law, waiver does not affect the defendant who does not accept it.
(7) If the dismissal of the public prosecution resulted from the waiver of the complaint by the person injured by the crime and if at the time of waiver that person also expressly waived personal rights, then no action may be brought in civil court either.
(8) (Repealed: 6/12/2006 – Article 45 of Law No. 5560)

Effect of dismissal of prosecution or punishment

Article 74

(1) General amnesty, special pardon and waiver of complaint do not require the return of confiscated items or paid judicial fines.
(2) The dismissal of the public prosecution does not affect the personal rights action brought for the return of property and compensation for damages suffered.
(3) The dismissal of punishment does not affect judgments relating to personal rights, compensation and trial costs. However, in the case of general amnesty, trial costs may not be claimed either.

Advance payment21

Article 75

(1) Except for crimes within the scope of reconciliation, the perpetrator of crimes that require only a judicial fine or whose upper limit of imprisonment provided in the legal provision does not exceed six months;
a) If the judicial fine is fixed, this amount, if not, its lower limit,
b) The amount to be found at the rate of thirty Turkish Liras per day as the equivalent of the lower limit of the imprisonment sentence,

20 The phrase ", reconciliation" in this heading was removed from the text by Article 2 of Law No. 5560 dated 19/12/2006.
21 By Article 12 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "three" in the first paragraph of this article was changed to "six" and the phrase "twenty" was changed to "thirty".

c) If a judicial fine is also provided together with imprisonment, the amount to be determined according to subparagraph (b) of this paragraph for the imprisonment sentence together with the lower limit of the judicial fine,
Together with investigation costs, if paid within ten days upon notification by the Public Prosecutor's Office, no public prosecution shall be brought against that person. (Additional sentences:17/10/2019- Article 16 of Law No. 7188) Provided that the perpetrator requests within ten days, the Public Prosecutor shall decide that this amount be paid in three equal installments at one-month intervals. In case of failure to pay the installments on time, the advance payment becomes void and the investigation continues. (Additional sentence: 24/11/2016-Article 12 of Law No. 6763) Except for negligent crimes, the advance payment amount to be offered pursuant to this paragraph to a perpetrator who commits a crime subject to advance payment within five years from the date of the decision of no grounds for prosecution or dismissal of the public prosecution based on advance payment shall be increased by half.
(2) In cases where the matter is directly referred to the court pursuant to special law provisions, if the perpetrator pays the amount to be determined according to the provisions of the first paragraph together with trial costs upon notification by the judge, the public prosecution is dismissed.
(3) The above paragraph also applies in cases where a prosecution is brought by the Public Prosecutor's Office without conducting an advance payment procedure for a crime within the scope of the article, or where the nature of the act subject to prosecution changes and transforms into a crime within the scope of the article.
(4) In cases where only one of imprisonment not exceeding six months in its upper limit or a judicial fine may be applied in the legal provision relating to the crime, the amount to be paid is determined on the basis of the judicial fine according to the above paragraphs.22
(5) The non-initiation or elimination of public prosecution pursuant to this article does not affect provisions relating to the claim of personal rights, the return of property and confiscation.
(6) (Added: 24/11/2016-Article 12 of Law No. 6763) The provisions of this article;
a) Contained in this Law;
1. Failure to fulfill the obligation to assist or notify (first paragraph of Article 98),
2. Negligently endangering public safety (

Article 171),

3. Negligent pollution of the environment (first paragraph of Article 182),
4. Improper use of special signs and uniforms (first paragraph of Article 264),
5. Failure to report a crime (first and second paragraphs of Article 278), offences,
b) The offence contained in the first paragraph of Article 108 of the Forestry Law No. 6831 dated 31/8/1956,
c) (Added:17/10/2019-7188/16 art.) The offence contained in the first sentence of the second paragraph of Article 74 of the Law on the Protection of Cultural and Natural Assets No. 2863 dated 21/7/1983,

22 By Article 12 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "three" in this paragraph was amended to read "six".

d) (Added:17/10/2019-7188/16 art.) The offence contained in subparagraph (d) of the first paragraph of Article 32 of the Associations Law No. 5253 dated 4/11/2004,
shall also apply. In the event that offences within the scope of this paragraph are committed again within five years, the provisions on advance payment shall not be applied to the perpetrator for the same offence.
(7) (Added: 24/11/2016-6763/12 art.) Decisions of no grounds for prosecution and decisions of dismissal given upon payment shall be recorded in a system designated for them. These records may only be used for the purpose specified in this article upon request by a public prosecutor, judge or court in connection with an investigation or prosecution.

SECOND BOOK
Special Provisions

FIRST PART
International Crimes

FIRST CHAPTER
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity
Genocide

Article 76

(1) The commission of one of the following acts against members of a national, ethnic, racial or religious group with the intent to destroy that group, in whole or in part, in execution of a plan, constitutes the crime of genocide:
a) Intentional killing.
b) Causing serious bodily or mental harm to persons.
c) Forcing the group to live under conditions that would result in its destruction, in whole or in part.
d) Taking measures aimed at preventing births within the group.
e) Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.
(2) The perpetrator of the crime of genocide shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment. However, with respect to the crimes of intentional killing and intentional injury committed within the scope of genocide, the provisions on real concurrence shall be applied for the number of victims determined.
(3) Security measures shall also be imposed on legal entities for these crimes.
(4) There shall be no statute of limitations for these crimes.

Crimes against humanity

Article 77

(1) The systematic commission of the following acts against a section of society in accordance with a plan for political, philosophical, racial or religious motives constitutes a crime against humanity:
a) Intentional killing.
b) Intentional injury.
c) Torture, ill-treatment or enslavement.

d) Deprivation of personal liberty.
e) Subjecting to scientific experiments.
f) Sexual assault, sexual abuse of children.
g) Forced impregnation.
h) Forcing into prostitution.
(2) Where the act in subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph is committed, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment; where the acts defined in the other subparagraphs are committed, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than eight years. However, with respect to the crimes of intentional killing and intentional injury committed within the scope of subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the first paragraph, the provisions on real concurrence shall be applied for the number of victims determined.
(3) Security measures shall also be imposed on legal entities for these crimes.
(4) There shall be no statute of limitations for these crimes.

Organisation

Article 78

(1) A person who establishes or directs an organisation for the purpose of committing the crimes specified in the above articles shall be punished with imprisonment from ten to fifteen years. Those who are members of these organisations shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five to ten years.
(2) Security measures shall also be imposed on legal entities for these crimes.
(3) There shall be no statute of limitations for these crimes.

SECOND CHAPTER
Migrant Smuggling and Human Trafficking
Migrant smuggling23

Article 79

(1) A person who, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining material benefit, by illegal means;
a) Brings a foreigner into the country or enables him to remain in the country,
b) Enables a Turkish citizen or foreigner to leave the country,
Shall be punished with imprisonment from five to eight years and a judicial fine from one thousand to ten thousand days. (Added sentence: 22/7/2010 - 6008/6 art.) Even if the crime remains at the attempt stage, it shall be punished as if completed.2425
(2) (Added paragraph: 22/7/2010 - 6008/6 art.) Where the crime;
a) Creates a danger to the life of the victims,
b) Is committed by subjecting them to degrading treatment,
the sentence to be imposed shall be increased from one half to two thirds.(23)
(3) (Amended:6/12/2019-7196/56 art.) Where this crime is committed jointly by more than one person,

23 By Article 6 of Law No. 6008 dated 22/7/2010, a new paragraph was added to this article to follow the first paragraph and the other paragraphs were renumbered accordingly.
24 By Article 56 of Law No. 7196 dated 6/12/2019, the phrase "one thousand days" was added to this paragraph to follow the phrase "imprisonment from three to eight years and".
25 By Article 16 of Law No. 7445 dated 28/3/2023, the phrase "three years" in this paragraph was amended to read "five years".

the sentence to be imposed shall be increased up to one half, and where it is committed within the framework of an organisation's activities, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased from one half to one fold.
(4) Where this crime is committed within the framework of the activities of a legal entity, security measures specific to them shall be imposed on the legal entity.(23)

Human trafficking

Article 80

(1) (Amended: 6/12/2006 – 5560/3 art.) A person who brings persons into the country, takes them out of the country, procures, abducts, transports or sends them from one place to another, or harbours them by applying threats, pressure, coercion or violence, abusing influence, deceiving or obtaining their consent by taking advantage of control opportunities over persons or their helplessness, for the purpose of forcing them to work, to provide services, to engage in prostitution or to be subjected to slavery, or to ensure the donation of bodily organs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from eight to twelve years and a judicial fine up to ten thousand days.
(2) Where the acts constituting the crime undertaken for the purposes specified in the first paragraph exist, the consent of the victim shall be invalid.
(3) Where persons who have not completed eighteen years of age are procured, abducted, transported or sent from one place to another, or harboured for the purposes specified in the first paragraph, the perpetrator shall be given the sentences specified in the first paragraph even if none of the instrumental acts of the crime have been resorted to.
(4) Security measures shall also be imposed on legal entities for these crimes.

SECOND PART
Crimes Against Persons

FIRST CHAPTER
Crimes Against Life
Intentional killing

Article 81

(1) A person who intentionally kills a human being shall be punished with life imprisonment.

Qualified circumstances

Article 82- (1) Where the crime of intentional killing is committed;

a) With premeditation,
b) With monstrous feeling or by inflicting torture,
c) By using fire, flooding, destruction, sinking or bombing or by using nuclear, biological or chemical weapons,
d) Against an ascendant or descendant or against a spouse, divorced spouse or sibling,26
e) Against a child or a person who is unable to defend himself physically or mentally,

26 By Article 6 of Law No. 7331 dated 8/7/2021, the phrase "spouse" in this subparagraph was amended to read "spouse, divorced spouse".

f) (Amended:12/5/2022-7406/2 art.) Against a woman,
g) By reason of the public duty performed by the person,
h) For the purpose of concealing a crime, eliminating its evidence or facilitating its commission, or to avoid being caught,27
i) (Added:29/6/2005 - 5377/9 art.) With the resentment felt from being unable to commit a crime,
j) With the motive of blood feud,28
k) With the motive of custom,(27)
The person shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.

Intentional killing by omission

Article 83

(1) In order for a person to be held responsible for the result of death that occurs due to the failure to perform a certain positive act that the person is obliged to perform, the omission of the obligation that caused the occurrence of this result must be equivalent to a positive act.
(2) In order for omissive and positive conduct to be considered equivalent, the person must have;
a. An obligation arising from legal regulations or contract to perform a certain positive act,
b. A situation where a previously performed act creates a dangerous situation regarding the lives of others.
(3) For a person who causes death through the omission of a certain obligation, as a basic punishment, instead of aggravated life imprisonment, imprisonment from twenty years to twenty-five years, instead of life imprisonment, imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years, and in other cases, imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years may be imposed, or no reduction in sentence may be made.

Directing to suicide29

Article 84

(1) A person who incites, encourages, strengthens another person's decision to commit suicide or assists another person's suicide in any way shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(2) If the suicide is realized, the person shall be punished with imprisonment from four years to ten years.
(3) A person who publicly encourages others to commit suicide shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to eight years. (Repealed second sentence: 29/6/2005 – 5377/10 art.)
(4) Those who drive persons whose capacity to perceive the meaning and consequences of their act has not developed or has been

27 Following the phrase "to facilitate" in this subparagraph, the phrase "or to avoid being caught" was added by Article 9 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and incorporated into the text.
28 Since subparagraph (i) was added after subparagraph (h) to this article by Article 9 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, the other subparagraphs have been sequenced accordingly.
29 The title of this article was "Suicide" and was changed to "Directing to suicide" by Article 10 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and incorporated into the text.

eliminated to commit suicide, and those who force persons to commit suicide by using force or threat, shall be held responsible for the crime of intentional killing.

Negligent killing

Article 85

(1) A person who negligently causes the death of a human being shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to six years.
(2) If the act has caused the death of more than one person or the death of one or more persons together with the injury of one or more persons, the person shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to fifteen years.30

SECOND CHAPTER
Crimes Against Bodily Integrity Intentional injury31

Article 86

(1) A person who intentionally causes pain to another person's body or causes the impairment of their health or perception capacity shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) (Additional paragraph: 31/3/2005 – 5328/4 art.) In case the effect of the intentional injury act on the person is slight enough to be remedied by a simple medical intervention, upon the complaint of the victim, imprisonment from four months to one year or judicial fine shall be imposed. (Additional sentence:12/5/2022-7406/3 art.) If the crime is committed against a woman, the lower limit of the sentence cannot be less than six months.
(3) If the crime of intentional injury is committed;
a. Against an ascendant, descendant, spouse, divorced spouse or sibling,32
b. Against a person who is in a state of being unable to defend themselves physically or mentally,
c. Due to the public duty performed by the person,
d. By abusing the influence held by a public official,
e. With a weapon,
f. (Added:14/4/2020-7242/11 art.) With monstrous sentiment,
Without requiring a complaint, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half, and for subparagraph (f) by one fold.33

Aggravated injury due to consequence Article 87- (1) If the intentional injury act causes the victim's;
a. Permanent weakening of the function of one of their senses or organs,
b. Permanent difficulty in speaking,
c. Permanent scar on their face,

30 The phrases "from three years" in this article were changed to "from two years" by Article 3 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005 and incorporated into the text.
31 A second paragraph was added to this article by Article 4 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005, the phrase "imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed." in the second paragraph was changed to "without requiring a complaint, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half.", and the paragraph numbers have been sequenced accordingly.
32 By Article 7 of Law No. 7331 dated 8/7/2021, the phrase "spouse" in this subparagraph was changed to "spouse, divorced spouse".
33 By Article 11 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase ", for subparagraph (f) by one fold" was added to this paragraph after the phrase "by half".

d. A situation endangering their life,
e. Being committed against a pregnant woman and causing her child to be born prematurely,
The sentence determined according to the above article shall be increased by one fold. However, the sentence to be imposed cannot be less than three years in cases falling under the first paragraph, and less than five years in cases falling under the third paragraph.34
(2) If the intentional injury act causes the victim's;
a. Entering into an incurable disease or vegetative state,
b. Loss of function of one of their senses or organs,
c. Loss of their ability to speak or procreate,
d. Permanent alteration of their face,
e. Being committed against a pregnant woman and causing her child to miscarry,
The sentence determined according to the above article shall be increased by two folds. However, the sentence to be imposed cannot be less than five years in cases falling under the first paragraph, and less than eight years in cases falling under the third paragraph.(33)
(3) (Amended: 6/12/2006 – 5560/4 art.) If intentional injury causes bone fracture or dislocation in the body, the sentence determined according to the above article shall be increased up to half, according to the effect of the fracture or dislocation on vital functions.
(4) If death occurs as a result of intentional injury, imprisonment from eight years to twelve years in cases falling under the first paragraph of the above article, and imprisonment from twelve years to eighteen years in cases falling under the third paragraph shall be imposed.3536

Intentional injury committed by omissive conduct37

Article 88

(1) If intentional injury is committed by omissive conduct, the sentence to be imposed may be reduced up to two-thirds. In the application of this provision, the conditions regarding the commission of intentional killing by omissive conduct shall be taken into consideration.

Negligent injury

Article 89

(1) A person who negligently causes pain to another person's body or causes the impairment of their health or perception ability shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year or a judicial fine.
(2) If the act of negligent injury causes the victim to suffer:
a) Permanent weakening of the function of one of their senses or organs,

34 The expressions "second" appearing in these paragraphs were amended as "third" by Article 11 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and incorporated into the text.
35 The expression "second" appearing in this paragraph was amended as "third" by Article 5 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005 and incorporated into the text.
36 By Article 12 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the expression "sixteen" appearing in this paragraph was amended as "eighteen".
37 While the title of this article was "Cases requiring lesser punishment", it was amended as incorporated into the text by Article 6 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005, the first paragraph of the said article was removed from the text, and the second paragraph was sequenced as the first paragraph.

b) Bone fracture in their body,
c) Permanent difficulty in their speech,
d) Permanent scar on their face,
e) A situation endangering their life,
f) Premature birth of a pregnant woman's child,
The penalty determined according to the first paragraph shall be increased by half.
(3) If the act of negligent injury causes the victim to suffer:
a) An incurable illness or entering a vegetative state,
b) Loss of function of one of their senses or organs,
c) Loss of their ability to speak or procreate,
d) Permanent disfigurement of their face,
e) Miscarriage of a pregnant woman's child,
The penalty determined according to the first paragraph shall be increased by one fold.
(4) If the act causes injury to more than one person, imprisonment from six months to three years shall be imposed.
(5) (Amended: 6/12/2006 – 5560/5 art.) The investigation and prosecution of the crime of negligent injury is subject to complaint. However, except for injury falling within the scope of the first paragraph, if the crime is committed with conscious negligence, no complaint is required.

Experimentation on humans

Article 90

(1) A person who conducts a scientific experiment on a human being shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) For a consensual scientific experiment conducted on a human being not to require criminal liability:
a) The necessary permission must have been obtained from the authorized board or authorities regarding the experiment,
b) The experiment must have been conducted primarily in a non-human experimental environment or on a sufficient number of animals,
c) The scientific data obtained as a result of experiments conducted in a non-human experimental environment or on animals must necessitate conducting them on humans in terms of reaching the intended goal,
d) The experiment must not leave a foreseeable harmful and permanent effect on human health,
e) Methods that are painfully incompatible with human dignity must not be applied to the person during the experiment,
f) The aim to be achieved by the experiment must outweigh the burden it imposes on the person and the danger to the person's health,
g) The consent declared based on adequate information about the nature and consequences of the experiment must be in writing and not be contingent upon obtaining any benefit,
is required.
(3) (Amended: 31/3/2005 – 5328/7 art.) For scientific experimentation on children not to require criminal liability, in addition to the conditions required in the second paragraph:

a) The scientific data obtained as a result of the experiments conducted must necessitate conducting them on children in terms of reaching the intended goal,
b) In addition to the consent of the child capable of expressing consent, the written approval of their mother and father or guardian must also be obtained,
c) A pediatric health and diseases specialist must be present on the authorized boards that will grant permission regarding the experiment,
is required.
(4) A person who conducts therapeutic experimentation without consent on a sick human being shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year. However, therapeutic experimentation in accordance with scientific methods conducted on a person with consent, upon understanding that the application of known medical intervention methods will not yield results, does not require criminal liability. The declared consent must be in writing based on adequate information about the nature and consequences of the experimentation, and the treatment must be performed by a specialist physician in a hospital environment.
(5) If the commission of the crime defined in the first paragraph results in the injury or death of the victim, the provisions regarding intentional injury or intentional killing shall apply.
(6) If the crimes defined in this article are committed within the framework of the activities of a legal entity, security measures specific to them shall be imposed on the legal entity.

Organ or tissue trafficking

Article 91

(1) A person who removes an organ from a person without legally valid consent shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to nine years. If the subject of the crime is tissue, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.
(2) A person who removes an organ or tissue from a deceased person unlawfully shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year.
(3) The penalties specified in the first paragraph shall be imposed on a person who purchases, sells, or acts as an intermediary in the sale of organs or tissues.
(4) If the crimes defined in the first and third paragraphs are committed within the framework of the activities of an organization, imprisonment from eight years to fifteen years and a judicial fine up to ten thousand days shall be imposed.
(5) A person who stores, transports or transplants an organ or tissue obtained through unlawful means shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(6) A person who gives or publishes an announcement or advertisement for the procurement of organs or tissues in exchange for a certain benefit shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year.
(7) If the crimes defined in this article are committed within the framework of the activities of a legal entity, security measures specific to them shall be imposed on the legal entity.
(8) If the commission of the crime defined in the first paragraph results in the death of the victim, the provisions regarding intentional killing shall apply.

State of necessity

Article 92

(1) Taking into account the social and economic conditions in which the person who sells their organs or tissues finds themselves, a reduction may be made in the penalty to be imposed on them, or the imposition of a penalty may be waived.

Effective remorse

Article 93

(1) If the person who sells their organs or tissues reports the situation to the relevant authority before it is learned by official authorities and facilitates the apprehension of the offenders, no penalty shall be imposed on them.
(2) If, after this crime is learned, the person who sells their organs or tissues voluntarily serves and assists in the revelation of the crime and the apprehension of other offenders; one-fourth to one-half of the penalty to be imposed on them shall be reduced according to the nature of the assistance.

THIRD PART
Torture and Maltreatment
Torture

Article 94

(1) A public official who engages in conduct against a person that is incompatible with human dignity and that will cause physical or mental suffering, affect their perception or will capacity, or lead to their humiliation shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to twelve years. (Additional sentence:12/5/2022-7406/Art. 4) In case the offence is committed against a woman, the lower limit of the sentence shall not be less than five years.
(2)	In case the offence is committed;
a)	Against a child, a person who is in a condition unable to defend themselves physically or mentally, or a pregnant woman,
b)	Against a lawyer or other public official by reason of their duty,
imprisonment from eight years to fifteen years shall be imposed.
(3)	In case the act is committed in the form of sexual harassment, imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years shall be imposed.
(4)	Other persons who participate in the commission of this offence shall also be punished as public officials.
(5)	In case this offence is committed by omission, no reduction shall be made in the sentence to be imposed for this reason.
(6)	(Added: 11/4/2013-6459/Art. 9) The statute of limitations shall not run for this offence.

Aggravated torture by consequence Article 95- (1) If the acts of torture cause the victim to;
a)	Permanent weakening of the function of one of their senses or organs,
b)	Permanent difficulty in speaking,
c)	Permanent scar on their face,
d)	A condition endangering their life,

e)	In case committed against a pregnant woman, premature birth of her child,
The sentence determined according to the above article shall be increased by half.
(2)	If the acts of torture cause the victim to;
a)	Contract an incurable disease or enter a vegetative state,
b)	Loss of function of one of their senses or organs,
c)	Loss of their ability to speak or to have children,
d)	Permanent change of their face,
e)	In case committed against a pregnant woman, miscarriage of her child,
The sentence determined according to the above article shall be increased by one fold.
(3)	In case the acts of torture cause bone fracture in the body, imprisonment from eight years to fifteen years shall be imposed according to the effect of the fracture on vital functions.
(4)	If death occurs as a result of torture, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Ill-treatment

Article 96

(1) A person who engages in conduct that will cause a person to suffer ill-treatment shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to five years. (Additional sentence:12/5/2022- 7406/Art. 5) In case the offence is committed against a woman, the lower limit of the sentence shall not be less than two years and six months.
(2) In case the acts falling within the scope of the above paragraph are committed;
a)	Against a child, a person who is in a condition unable to defend themselves physically or mentally, or a pregnant woman,
b)	Against an ascendant or descendant, father or mother, or spouse or divorced spouse,38
The person shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

PART FOUR
Violation of the Obligation to Protect, Supervise, Assist or Notify Abandonment

Article 97

(1) A person who abandons a person who is unable to take care of themselves due to their age or illness and who is therefore under an obligation of protection and supervision shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years.
(2) If the victim has contracted a disease, been injured or died due to the abandonment, a sentence shall be imposed according to the provisions on aggravated offences by consequence.

Failure to fulfil the obligation to assist or notify

Article 98

(1) A person who does not assist a person who is unable to take care of themselves due to their age, illness or injury or for any other reason, to the extent that circumstances permit, or does not immediately notify the relevant authorities of the situation shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year or judicial fine.

38 By Article 8 of Law No. 7331 dated 8/7/2021, the phrase "or divorced spouse" has been added to this subparagraph to follow the phrase "spouse".

(2) In case of the death of the person due to failure to fulfil the obligation to assist or notify, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.

PART FIVE
Abortion, Causing Abortion or Sterilisation Causing abortion

Article 99

(1) A person who causes a woman to abort her child without her consent shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years.
(2)	A person who causes a woman whose pregnancy period exceeds ten weeks to abort her child, even if based on consent, where there is no medical necessity, shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years. In this case, the woman who consented to the abortion of her child shall be sentenced to imprisonment up to one year or judicial fine.
(3)	If the act specified in the first paragraph causes harm to the woman's physical or mental health, the person shall be punished with imprisonment from six years to twelve years; in case the act causes the death of the woman, imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years shall be imposed.
(4)	If the act specified in the second paragraph causes harm to the woman's physical or mental health, the person shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to six years; in case the act causes the death of the woman, imprisonment from four years to eight years shall be imposed.
(5)	In case a woman whose pregnancy period has not completed ten weeks has her child aborted by an unauthorised person, even if based on consent; imprisonment from two years to four years shall be imposed. If the other acts defined in the above paragraphs are committed by an unauthorised person, the sentence to be imposed according to these paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(6)	In case a woman becomes pregnant as a result of an offence of which she is the victim, no penalty shall be imposed on the person who terminates the pregnancy, provided that the period does not exceed twenty weeks and the woman consents. However, for this, the pregnancy must be terminated by specialist physicians in a hospital environment.

Abortion

Article 100

(1) In case a woman whose pregnancy period exceeds ten weeks voluntarily aborts her child, imprisonment up to one year or judicial fine shall be imposed.

Sterilisation

Article 101

(1) A person who sterilises a man or woman without their consent shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to six years. If the act is performed by a person who is not authorised to perform sterilisation, the sentence shall be increased by one third.
(2) In case the act of sterilisation is committed by an unauthorised person, even if based on consent, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.

PART SIX
Offences Against Sexual Inviolability
Sexual assault

Article 102

(Amended: 18/6/2014-6545/Art. 58)
(1)	A person who violates the bodily integrity of a person through sexual conduct shall be punished, upon complaint of the victim, with imprisonment from five years to ten years. In case the sexual conduct remains at the level of molestation, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.
(2)	In case the act is committed by inserting an organ or other object into the body, imprisonment of not less than twelve years shall be imposed. In case this act is committed against a spouse, the conduct of investigation and prosecution shall be subject to the complaint of the victim.
(3)	In case the offence is committed;
a)	Against a person who is in a condition unable to defend themselves physically or mentally,
b)	By abusing the influence provided by public duty, guardianship or service relationship,
c)	Against a person within a blood or affinity relationship including the third degree, or by a stepfather, stepmother, stepsibling, adopter or adoptee,
d)	With a weapon or by more than one person together,
e)	By taking advantage of the convenience provided by environments where people are compelled to live together collectively,
the sentences imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(4)	In case the force and violence resorted to for sexual assault causes the aggravated consequences of the offence of intentional injury, the provisions relating to the offence of intentional injury shall also be applied.
(5)	In case the victim enters a vegetative state or dies as a result of the offence, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Sexual abuse of children

Article 103

(Amended: 18/6/2014-6545/59 art.)39
(1) (First and second sentences reorganised: 24/11/2016-6763/13 art.) A person who sexually abuses a child shall be punished with imprisonment from eight years to fifteen years. In case the sexual abuse remains at the level of molestation, imprisonment from three years to eight years shall be imposed. (Additional sentence: 24/11/2016-6763/13 art.) In case the victim has not completed twelve years of age, the sentence to be imposed shall not be less than ten years in case of abuse, and five years in case of molestation. In case the perpetrator of the offence that remained at the level of molestation is a child, investigation and prosecution shall be subject to the complaint of the victim, their parent or guardian. By the term sexual abuse is meant:(38)

39 With respect to the word '…not completed…' in subparagraph (a) of paragraph (1) of this article, the first and second sentences of paragraph (1) were annulled by the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 26/5/2016 and numbered E.: 2015/108, K.: 2016/46, and it was ruled that the Decision shall enter into force six months after the date of its publication in the Official Gazette on 13/7/2016.

a) Any sexual conduct committed against children who have not completed fifteen years of age or who, although having completed it, have not developed the capacity to perceive the legal meaning and consequences of the act,
b) Sexual conduct committed against other children only on the basis of force, threat, deception or another reason affecting the will,
is understood.
(2) (Reorganisation: 24/11/2016-6763/13 art.) In case the sexual abuse is committed by insertion of an organ or other object into the body, imprisonment of not less than sixteen years shall be imposed. In case the victim has not completed twelve years of age, the sentence to be imposed shall not be less than eighteen years.
(3) In case the offence is committed;
a) By more than one person together,
b) By taking advantage of the facility provided by environments where people are compelled to live together collectively,
c) Against a person in a relationship of blood or affinity including the third degree, or by a stepfather, stepmother, stepsibling or adopter,
d) By a guardian, educator, teacher, caretaker, foster family or a person providing health services or having an obligation of protection, care or supervision,
e) By abusing the influence provided by public office or service relationship, the sentence to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(4) In case the sexual abuse is committed against the children in subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph by force or threat, or against the children in subparagraph (b) by using a weapon, the sentence to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(5) In case the force and violence resorted to for sexual abuse causes the aggravated consequences of the offence of intentional injury, the provisions relating to the offence of intentional injury shall also be applied.
(6) In case the offence results in the victim entering a vegetative state or death, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Sexual intercourse with a minor

Article 104

(1) A person who has sexual intercourse with a child who has completed fifteen years of age, without force, threat and deception, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment from two years to five years.40
(2) (Annulled: By the Constitutional Court's decision dated 23/11/2005 and numbered E: 2005/103, K: 2005/89; Reorganisation: 18/6/2014-6545/60 art.) In case the offence is committed by a person with whom there is a prohibition of marriage with the victim, imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years shall be imposed without requiring a complaint.
(3) (Additional: 18/6/2014-6545/60 art.) In case the offence is committed by a person who undertakes the pre-adoption care of the child to be adopted or who has an obligation of protection, care and supervision within the framework of a foster family relationship, a sentence shall be imposed according to the second paragraph without requiring a complaint.

40 By article 60 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "from six months to two" in this paragraph was amended as "from two years to five".

Sexual harassment

Article 105

(1) A person who harasses someone for sexual purposes shall, upon the victim's complaint, be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to two years or to a judicial fine; in case the act is committed against a child, to imprisonment from six months to three years.41
(2) (Amended: 18/6/2014-6545/61 art.) In case the offence is committed;
a) By taking advantage of the facility provided by public office or service relationship or family relationship,
b) By persons who are guardians, educators, teachers, caretakers, foster families or health service providers or who have an obligation of protection, care or supervision,
c) By taking advantage of the facility provided by working in the same workplace,
d) By taking advantage of the facility provided by postal or electronic communication means,
e) By exhibition,
the sentence to be imposed according to the above paragraph shall be increased by half. If, as a result of this act, the victim has been compelled to leave their job, school or family, the sentence to be imposed shall not be less than one year.

SEVENTH CHAPTER
Offences Against Liberty
Threat

Article 106

(1) A person who threatens another person by stating that they will carry out an attack against their own or their relative's life, bodily or sexual integrity shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years. (Additional sentence:12/5/2022-7406/6 art.) In case this offence is committed against a woman, the lower limit of the sentence shall not be less than nine months. In case of a threat by stating that they will cause great damage to their property or will do other harm, imprisonment up to six months or a judicial fine shall be imposed upon the victim's complaint.
(2) In case the threat is committed;
a) With a weapon,
b) By the person rendering themselves unrecognisable, by unsigned letter or with special signs,
c) By more than one person together,
d) By taking advantage of the intimidating power created by existing or assumed criminal organisations, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed on the perpetrator.
(3) In case the offences of intentional killing, intentional injury or damage to property are committed for the purpose of threat, a sentence shall also be imposed for these offences.

41 By article 61 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "shall be imposed" in this paragraph was amended as ", "in case the act is committed against a child, to imprisonment from six months to three years shall be imposed".

Blackmail

Article 107

(1) A person who, by stating that they will or will not do something they are entitled to or obliged to do, compels someone to do or not do something contrary to law or which they are not obliged to do, or to provide unjust benefit, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years and a judicial fine up to five thousand days.
(2) (Additional: 29/6/2005 – 5377/14 art.) In case a threat is made that matters of a nature to harm a person's honour or dignity will be disclosed or imputed, with the aim of providing benefit to oneself or another, a sentence shall also be imposed according to the first paragraph.

Force

Article 108

(1) In case force is used against a person to make them do or not do something or to allow them to do it, the sentence to be imposed for the offence of intentional injury shall be increased from one third to one half.

Deprivation of liberty

Article 109

(1) A person who unlawfully deprives someone of their freedom to go to a place or to remain in a place shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years.
(2) If the person uses force, threat or fraud in order to commit the act or while committing it, imprisonment from two years to seven years shall be imposed.
(3) If this offence is committed;
a) With a weapon,
b) By more than one person together,
c) By reason of the public duty performed by the person,
d) By abusing the influence provided by public duty,
e) Against an ascendant, descendant or spouse or divorced spouse,42
f) Against a child or a person who is unable to defend themselves physically or mentally,
The penalty to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by one fold.
(4) If this offence causes a significant economic loss to the victim, a judicial fine of up to one thousand days shall also be imposed.
(5) If the offence is committed for sexual purposes, the penalties to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(6) In the event that aggravated forms of the offence of intentional injury due to its consequence occur for the purpose of or during the commission of this offence, the provisions relating to the offence of intentional injury shall also be applied.

42 By Article 9 of Law No. 7331 dated 8/7/2021, the phrase "or divorced spouse" has been added to this subparagraph to follow the phrase "spouse".

Effective remorse

Article 110

(1) If a person who commits the offence defined in the above article voluntarily releases the victim in a safe place without harm to the victim's person before an investigation is initiated for this offence, up to two-thirds of the penalty shall be reduced.

Application of security measures regarding legal entities

Article 111

(1) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities that have obtained unlawful benefit as a result of the commission of the offences of threat, blackmail, force or deprivation of liberty.

Obstruction of the right to education and instruction43 Article 112- (Amended: 2/3/2014-6529/12 art.)
(1) By using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct;
a) Any education and instruction activities established by the State or carried out based on permission given by public authorities,
b) A person's exercise of their right to education and instruction,
c) Entry into or remaining in buildings where students reside collectively or their annexes,
In the event of obstruction, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to five years.

Obstruction of the right to benefit from public services44 Article 113- (Amended: 2/3/2014-6529/13 art.)
(1) By using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct;
a) The conduct of a public activity,
b) Benefiting from services provided in public institutions or public professional organizations or services offered based on permission given by public authorities,
In the event of obstruction, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to five years.
(2) (Added:12/5/2022-7406/7 art.) If the subject of the offence is a health service, the penalty to be given shall be increased up to one-sixth.

Obstruction of the exercise of political rights Article 114- (1) Against a person;
a) To force them to become or not to become a member of a political party, to participate or not to participate in the activities of the political party, to resign from the political party or from their position in the political party administration,

43 This article heading was "Obstruction of education and instruction" and has been amended as incorporated into the text by Article 12 of Law No. 6529 dated 2/3/2014.
44 This article heading was "Obstruction of the activities of public institutions or public professional organizations" and has been amended as incorporated into the text by Article 13 of Law No. 6529 dated 2/3/2014.

b) Not to be a candidate for a public office reached by election or to resign from the office to which they were elected,
A person who uses force or threat for the purpose of coercion shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) In the event that the activities of a political party are obstructed by using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.

Preventing the exercise of freedom of belief, thought and opinion

Article 115

(1) A person who forces someone to disclose or change their religious, political, social, philosophical beliefs, thoughts and opinions by using force or threat, or prevents them from disclosing or disseminating them, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) (Amended: 2/3/2014-6529/14 art.) In the event that the fulfillment of the requirements of religious belief or the performance of religious worship or ceremonies individually or collectively is prevented by using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to penalty according to the first paragraph.
(3) (Added: 2/3/2014-6529/14 art.) A person who interferes with someone's preferences regarding their lifestyle arising from their beliefs, thoughts or opinions by using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct, or forces them to change these, shall be given penalty according to the first paragraph provision.

Violation of inviolability of dwelling

Article 116

(1) A person who enters a person's dwelling or the annexes of their dwelling against their consent, or who does not leave after entering with consent, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years upon complaint of the victim.
(2) (Amended: 31/3/2005 – 5328/8 art.) In the event that acts falling within the scope of the first paragraph are committed in workplaces and their annexes other than places where entry is customary without requiring explicit consent, imprisonment from six months to one year or a judicial fine shall be imposed upon complaint of the victim.
(3) (Amended: 31/3/2005 – 5328/8 art.) If there is consent from one of the family members in a marriage union or from one of these persons in the case of joint use of the dwelling or workplace by more than one person, the provisions of the above paragraphs shall not apply. However, for this, the declaration of consent must be directed towards a legitimate purpose.
(4) In the event that the act is committed by using force or threat or at night time, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.

Violation of freedom of business and work

Article 117

(1) A person who violates the freedom of business and work by using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct shall be given imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine upon complaint of the victim.

(2) A person who exploits the helplessness, lack of support and dependency of a person or persons to make them work free of charge or for a wage clearly disproportionately low compared to the service provided, or subjects a person in this situation to working and accommodation conditions incompatible with human dignity, shall be given imprisonment from six months to three years or a judicial fine of not less than one hundred days.
(3) A person who procures or dispatches or transports from one place to another a person in order to bring them into the situations specified in the above paragraph shall also be given the same penalty.
(4) A person who forces workers or employers to reduce or increase wages or to accept agreements under conditions other than those previously accepted by using force or threat, or causes a work to stop, end or the stoppage to continue, shall be given imprisonment from six months to three years.

Obstruction of the exercise of trade union rights

Article 118

(1) A person who uses force or threat against a person for the purpose of forcing them to become or not to become a member of a trade union, to participate or not to participate in the activities of the trade union, to resign from the trade union or from their position in the trade union administration, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) In the event that the activities of a trade union are obstructed by using force or threat or by another unlawful conduct, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.

Common provision

Article 119

(1) If the crimes of obstructing education and instruction, obstructing the activities of public institutions or professional organizations having the nature of public institutions, obstructing the exercise of political rights, obstructing the exercise of freedom of belief, thought and opinion, violation of the inviolability of domicile and violation of freedom of work and labor are committed;
a) With a weapon,
b) By the person rendering himself unrecognizable, by unsigned letter or with special signs,
c) By more than one person together,
d) By taking advantage of the intimidating power created by existing or assumed criminal organizations,
e) By abusing the influence provided by public office, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.
(2) If the aggravated forms of the crime of intentional injury due to the result occur during the commission of these crimes, the provisions regarding the crime of intentional injury shall also be applied.

Unlawful search

Article 120

(1) A public official who unlawfully searches a person's body or belongings shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to one year.

Obstructing the exercise of the right to petition

Article 121

(1) If a petition submitted by a person to competent public authorities to exercise a certain right is not accepted without a legal reason, the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment for up to six months.

Hatred and discrimination45

Article 122

(Amended: 2/3/2014-6529/15 art.)
(1) Due to hatred arising from differences in language, race, nationality, color, gender, disability, political thought, philosophical belief, religion or sect;
a) Preventing a person from purchasing, transferring or renting a movable or immovable property offered to the public,
b) Preventing a person from benefiting from a certain service offered to the public,
c) Preventing a person from being employed,
d) Preventing a person from engaging in an ordinary economic activity,
the person who prevents shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.

Disturbing the peace and tranquility of persons

Article 123

(1) If a person is persistently subjected to telephone calls, noise or other unlawful conduct with the sole purpose of disturbing their peace and tranquility, the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to one year upon complaint of the victim.

Persistent pursuit

ARTICLE 123/A- (Added:12/5/2022-7406/8 art.)

(1) A person who persistently causes serious distress to a person or causes them to fear for the safety of themselves or one of their relatives by physically following them or attempting to make contact using communication and telecommunication tools, information systems or third parties shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) If the crime is committed;
a) Against a child or a spouse from whom a separation decision has been made or who has been divorced,
b) Causing the victim to change their school, workplace, residence or to leave their school or job,
c) By the offender against whom a restraining order or an order not to approach the residence, school or workplace has been issued,
the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.
(3) The investigation and prosecution of the crime regulated in this article is subject to complaint.

45 This article heading was "Discrimination" and was amended as incorporated into the text by Article 15 of Law No. 6529 dated 2/3/2014.

Obstructing communication

Article 124

(1) If communication between persons is unlawfully obstructed, imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine shall be imposed.
(2) A person who unlawfully obstructs communication between public institutions shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to five years.
(3) If the broadcast of any press and broadcasting organ is obstructed in an unlawful manner, a penalty shall be imposed according to the provision of the second paragraph.

EIGHTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against Honor
Insult

Article 125

(1) A person who imputes to a person a concrete act or fact that may injure their honor, dignity and reputation (...)46 or who attacks a person's honor, dignity and reputation by insulting them shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years or a judicial fine. For an insult in the absence of the victim to be punishable, the act must be committed by communicating with at least three persons.
(2) If the act is committed by means of an audio, written or visual message addressed to the victim, the penalty specified in the above paragraph shall be imposed.
(3) If the crime of insult is committed;
a) Against a public official due to their duty,
b) Due to expressing, changing, attempting to disseminate their religious, political, social, philosophical beliefs, thoughts and opinions, or acting in accordance with the commands and prohibitions of the religion to which they belong,
c) By mentioning values considered sacred according to the religion to which the person belongs, the lower limit of the penalty shall not be less than one year.
(4) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/15 art.) If the insult is committed publicly, the penalty shall be increased by one sixth.
(5) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/15 art.) If public officials working as a board are insulted due to their duties, the crime shall be deemed to have been committed against the members constituting the board. However, in this case, the provisions regarding chain crime shall be applied.

Determination of the victim

Article 126

(1) Even if the name of the victim is not clearly stated or the imputation is implicitly glossed over in the commission of the crime of insult, if there is a situation in which there is no hesitation in its nature and that it is directed at the victim's person, both the name shall be deemed to have been stated and the insult shall be deemed to have been disclosed.

46 The phrase "or making attributions" that was here has been removed from the article text by Article 15 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005.

Proof of imputation

Article 127

(1) If the imputed act constituting a crime has been proven, the person shall not be punished. If a final conviction decision is issued against the person insulted due to this crime, the imputation shall be deemed proven. In other cases, acceptance of the request to prove the imputation depends only on the existence of a public interest in determining whether the imputed act is true or not, or on the complainant's consent to proof.
(2) If a person is insulted by mentioning their proven act, a penalty shall be imposed.

Immunity of claim and defense

Article 128

(1) If concrete imputations or negative evaluations are made regarding persons within the scope of written or oral applications, claims and defenses made before judicial authorities or administrative authorities, no penalty shall be imposed. However, for this, the imputations and evaluations must be based on real and concrete facts and be related to the dispute.

Insult due to wrongful act or mutual insult

Article 129

(1) If the crime of insult is committed as a reaction to a wrongful act, the penalty to be imposed may be reduced by up to one third, or the imposition of a penalty may be waived.
(2) If this crime is committed as a reaction to the crime of intentional injury, the person shall not be punished.
(3) If the crime of insult is committed mutually, depending on the nature of the incident, the penalty to be imposed on both or one of the parties may be reduced by up to one third, or the imposition of a penalty may be waived.

Insult to a person's memory

Article 130

(1) A person who insults the memory of a person after their death by communicating with at least three persons shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years or a judicial fine. The penalty shall be increased by one sixth if the insult is committed publicly.
(2) A person who takes the corpse or bones of a deceased person partially or completely or commits insulting acts regarding the corpse or bones shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years.

Condition for investigation and prosecution

Article 131

(1) Except for insults committed against a public official due to their duty; the investigation and prosecution of the crime of insult is subject to the complaint of the victim.
(2) If the victim dies before making a complaint, or if the crime is committed against the memory of a deceased person; a complaint may be made by the deceased's ascendants and descendants up to the second degree, spouse or siblings.

NINTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against Private Life and the Secret Sphere of Life Violation of the confidentiality of communication47

Article 132

(1) A person who violates the confidentiality of communication between persons shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years. If this violation of confidentiality is committed by recording the communication contents, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.(46)
(2) A person who unlawfully discloses the contents of communication between persons shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.(46)
(3) A person who publicly discloses unlawfully the contents of communications made with him or her without the consent of the other party shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years. (Additional sentence: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 79) In case these disclosed data are published through press and broadcasting, the same penalty shall be imposed.(46)
(4) (Repealed: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 79)

Listening to and recording conversations between persons48

Article 133

(1) A person who listens to non-public conversations between persons with a device without the consent of any of the parties or records them with a sound recording device shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.(47)
(2) A person who records a non-public conversation in which he or she participates with a sound recording device without the consent of the other speakers shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine.(47)
(3) (Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 80) A person who unlawfully discloses data obtained by recording non-public conversations between persons shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years and a judicial fine of up to four thousand days. In case these disclosed data are published through press and broadcasting, the same penalty shall be imposed.

Violation of the privacy of private life49

Article 134

(1) A person who violates the privacy of private life of persons shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years. If the privacy is violated by recording images or sounds, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.(48)

47 By Article 79 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012, in the first paragraph of this article, the phrase "imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine" was amended as "imprisonment from one year to three years" and the phrase "imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed" was amended as "the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold"; in the second paragraph, the phrase "imprisonment from one year to three years" was amended as "imprisonment from two years to five years"; in the third paragraph, the phrase "imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine" was amended as "imprisonment from one year to three years", and the phrase "unlawfully" was added to the paragraph to follow the phrase "without consent".
48 By Article 80 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012, in the first paragraph of this article, the phrase "imprisonment from two months to six months" was amended as "imprisonment from two years to five years"; in the second paragraph, the phrase "imprisonment up to six months" was amended as "imprisonment from six months to two years".
49 By Article 81 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012, in the first paragraph of this article, the phrase "imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine" was amended as "imprisonment from one year to three years" and the phrase "the lower limit of the penalty cannot be less than one year" was amended as "the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold".

(2) (Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 81) A person who unlawfully discloses images or sounds relating to the private life of persons shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years. In case these disclosed data are published through press and broadcasting, the same penalty shall be imposed.

Recording of personal data

Article 135

(1) A person who records personal data unlawfully shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.50
(2) If the personal data relates to persons' political, philosophical or religious views, racial origins; unlawfully to their moral tendencies, sexual lives, health conditions or trade union affiliations, the penalty to be imposed pursuant to the first paragraph shall be increased by half.51

Unlawfully giving or obtaining data

Article 136

(1) A person who unlawfully gives, disseminates or obtains personal data to another person shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years.52
(2) (Added: 17/10/2019-7188/Article 17) If the subject matter of the offense is statements and images recorded pursuant to the fifth and sixth paragraphs of Article 236 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.

Qualified circumstances

Article 137- (1) If the offenses defined in the above articles are committed;

a) By a public official and by abusing the authority granted by his or her duty,
b) By taking advantage of the facilities provided by a certain profession or craft, The penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.

Failure to destroy data

Article 138

(1) Those who are obliged to destroy data in the system despite the expiration of the periods determined by laws shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to two years if they fail to perform their duties.53
(2) (Added: 21/2/2014-6526/Article 5) If the subject matter of the offense is data that must be removed or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.

50 By Article 3 of Law No. 6526 dated 21/2/2014, the phrase "from six months" in this paragraph was amended as "from one year".
51 By Article 30 of Law No. 6698 dated 24/3/2016, in this paragraph, the phrase "Persons'" was amended as "If the personal data relates to persons'"; the phrase "information as personal data shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph" was amended as "the penalty to be imposed pursuant to the first paragraph shall be increased by half".
52 By Article 4 of Law No. 6526 dated 21/2/2014, the phrase "from one year" in this paragraph was amended as "from two years".
53 By Article 5 of Law No. 6526 dated 21/2/2014, the phrase "imprisonment from six months to one year" in this paragraph was amended as "imprisonment from one year to two years".

Complaint

Article 139

(1) Except for recording of personal data, unlawfully giving or obtaining data and failure to destroy data, the investigation and prosecution of the offenses included in this chapter are subject to complaint.

Application of security measures against legal persons

Article 140

(1) Security measures specific to legal persons shall be imposed against legal persons due to the commission of the offenses defined in the above articles.

TENTH CHAPTER
Offenses Against Property
Theft

Article 141

(1) A person who takes a movable property belonging to another person from its location without the consent of its possessor with the intent to provide a benefit to himself or herself or to another person shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) (Repealed: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 105)

Qualified theft54

Article 142- (1) If the crime of theft is committed;

a) Against property located in public institutions and organizations, regardless of ownership, or in places dedicated to worship, or allocated for public benefit or service,
b) (Repealed: 18/6/2014-6545/62 art.)
c) Against property located in a means of transportation made available for public use or at their designated arrival or departure points,
d) Against property prepared for the purpose of preventing or mitigating the damage that a disaster or general calamity may cause,
e) Against property left in the open due to custom or allocation or use,
f) (Repealed: 2/7/2012-6352/82 art.)
In case of commission, imprisonment from three years to seven years shall be imposed.(53)
(2) If the crime is committed;
a) By taking advantage of a person's inability to protect their property or their death,
b) By snatching property carried in hand or on the person, or with special skill,
c) By taking advantage of the fear or chaos created by a natural disaster or social events,
d) By opening a lock with a key held unlawfully or a counterfeit key or another tool, or by preventing its locking,(53)
e) Through the use of information systems,

54 By Article 62 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "two to five" in the first paragraph of this article was amended to read "three to seven", the phrase "or preventing its locking" was added to subparagraph (d) of the second paragraph after the phrase "opening a lock", the phrase "Located in shelters, in herds or in open places" in subparagraph (g) was removed from the article text, and the phrase "three to seven" in the same paragraph was amended to read "five to ten".

f) By taking measures not to be recognized or by assuming an official capacity without authorization,
g) (…)(53) against large or small livestock,(53)
h) (Added: 18/6/2014-6545/62 art.) Against property that, although left in a place accessible to everyone, has been secured by locking or kept under protection within a building or its annexes,
In case of commission, imprisonment from five years to ten years shall be imposed. If the crime is committed in the manner specified in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph against a person who is unable to defend themselves physically or mentally, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased up to one-third.55
(3) If the crime is committed against energy in liquid or gas form and in facilities for their transmission, processing or storage, imprisonment from five years to twelve years shall be imposed. If this act is committed within the framework of an organization's activity, the sentence shall be increased by half and a judicial fine of up to ten thousand days shall be imposed.56
(4) (Added: 6/12/2006 – 5560/6 art.) If the crime of violation of inviolability of domicile or damage to property is committed for the purpose of committing the crime of theft, no complaint shall be required for investigation and prosecution for these crimes.
(5) (Added: 18/6/2014-6545/62 art.) If the commission of the crime of theft results in the disruption, even temporarily, of public service in the field of communication, energy or railway or air transportation, the sentence to be imposed according to the provisions of the above paragraphs shall be increased from one-half to two times.

Commission of the crime at night

Article 143

(1) If the crime of theft is committed at night, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half.57

Circumstances requiring lesser punishment Article 144- (1) If the crime of theft is committed;
a) Against property jointly owned or owned in common,
b) For the purpose of collecting a debt based on a legal relationship,
Upon complaint, the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two months to one year or a judicial fine.

Low value of the property

Article 145

(1) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/16 art.) Due to the low value of the property constituting the subject of the crime of theft, a reduction may be made in the sentence to be imposed, and taking into account the manner and characteristics of the commission of the crime, imposition of punishment may also be waived.

55 By Article 62 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "three to seven" in this paragraph was amended to read "five to ten".
56 By Article 82 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012, the phrase "to the punishment according to the second paragraph" in this paragraph was amended to read "imprisonment from five years to twelve years", and the phrase "imprisonment up to fifteen years" was amended to read "the sentence shall be increased by half".
57 By Article 63 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "up to one-third" in this paragraph was amended to read "by half".

Theft for use

Article 146

(1) If the crime of theft is committed for the purpose of temporarily using the property and returning it to its possessor, upon complaint, the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced up to half. However, this provision shall not apply if the property has been used to commit a crime.

State of necessity

Article 147

(1) If the crime of theft is committed to meet a serious and urgent need, depending on the circumstances of the case, a reduction may be made in the sentence to be imposed, or imposition of punishment may be waived.

Robbery

Article 148

(1) A person who compels another person to deliver property or not to resist the taking of property by threatening to carry out an attack on the life, bodily or sexual integrity of that person or their relatives, or by threatening to cause great harm to their property, or by using force, shall be punished with imprisonment from six years to ten years.
(2) The same punishment shall be imposed if the victim is compelled by the use of force or threat to give a document that can place themselves or another person under debt or a document declaring that an existing document has become invalid, not to resist the taking of such a document, to sign a paper that could later be made into such a document, or to destroy an existing document or not to resist its destruction.
(3) Rendering the victim unable to know or defend themselves by any means shall also be considered force in the crime of robbery.

Aggravated robbery

Article 149- (1) If the crime of robbery is committed;

a) With a weapon,
b) By rendering oneself unrecognizable,
c) By more than one person together,
d) (Amended: 18/6/2014-6545/64 art.) By blocking the road or in a residence, workplace or their annexes,
e) Against a person who is unable to defend themselves physically or mentally,
f) By taking advantage of the intimidating power created by existing or assumed criminal organizations,
g) For the purpose of benefiting a criminal organization,
h) At night,
In case of commission, the offender shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.
(2) If the aggravated consequences of the crime of intentional injury occur during the commission of the crime of robbery, the provisions relating to the crime of intentional injury shall also be applied separately.

Circumstance requiring lesser punishment

Article 150

(1) If a person uses threat or force for the purpose of collecting a debt based on a legal relationship, only the provisions relating to the crime of threat or intentional injury shall be applied.
(2) Due to the low value of the property constituting the subject of the crime of robbery, the sentence to be imposed may be reduced from one-third to one-half.58

Damage to property

Article 151

(1) A person who partially or completely demolishes, destroys, annihilates, damages, renders unusable or pollutes another person's movable or immovable property shall be punished, upon complaint of the victim, with imprisonment from four months to three years or a judicial fine.
(2) (Repealed: 9/7/2021-7332/Article 17)

Qualified cases of damaging property59 Article 152- (1) Where the offense of damaging property is committed;
a) Against places, buildings, facilities or other property belonging to public institutions and organizations, allocated to public service or reserved for public use,
b) Against any kind of property or facility allocated for protection against fire, flood and overflow, accident and other disasters,
c) Against any kind of planted tree, sapling or vine shoot, wherever located, except for places with State forest status,
d) Against facilities serving irrigation, provision of drinking water or protection from disasters,
e) Against buildings, facilities or property owned by or in the use of employers or workers or employer or worker unions or confederations in cases of strike or lockout,
f) Against buildings, facilities or property owned by or in the use of political parties, professional organizations with public institution status and their umbrella organizations,
g) To the detriment of a public official for the purpose of revenge due to their duty, even if it has ended,
The perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to four years.(58)
(2) Where the offense of damaging property is committed;
a) By burning, using incendiary or explosive substances,
b) By causing landslide, avalanche, flood or overflow,
c) By exposing to radiation, using nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased up to one fold.(58)

58 The phrase "shall be reduced" in this paragraph has been amended as "may be reduced" by Article 17 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and incorporated into the text.
59 By Article 65 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "six" in the first paragraph of this article has been amended as "four", and the phrase "two" in the second paragraph has been amended as "one".

(3) (Added: 18/6/2014-6545/Article 65) Where the commission of the offense of damaging property results in disruption, even if temporary, of public service in the field of communication, energy or railway or air transportation, the sentence to be imposed according to the provisions of the above paragraphs shall be increased from one half to two fold.

Damaging places of worship and cemeteries

Article 153

(1) A person who damages places of worship, their annexes, property therein, graves, structures on them, facilities in cemeteries, structures built for the protection of cemeteries by demolishing, damaging or breaking them shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to four years.
(2) A person who pollutes the places and structures specified in the first paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year or a judicial fine.
(3) Where the acts in the first and second paragraphs are committed with the intent to insult the segment of society adopting the relevant religious belief, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by one third.

Trespass on property without right

Article 154

(1) (Amended: 25/2/2009-5841/Article 1) A person who, without being based on any right, occupies in whole or in part immovable property or its annexes belonging to another as if they were the owner, or changes or destroys their boundaries, or prevents the right holder from benefiting from them even partially, shall be sentenced, upon complaint of the injured party, to imprisonment from six months to three years and a judicial fine of up to one thousand days.
(2) A person who, knowing that they belong to the village legal entity or have been traditionally left for the common use of villagers, seizes in part or in whole immovable property such as pastures, threshing floors, roads and wetlands, makes dispositions over them or ploughs and sows them, shall be subject to the penalties specified in the first paragraph.
(3) A person who changes the course of waters belonging to the public or private persons shall be subject to the penalties specified in the first paragraph.

Breach of trust

Article 155

(1) A person who, over property belonging to another, the possession of which has been transferred to them for safekeeping or use in a specific manner, makes a disposition outside the purpose of the transfer of possession for their own or another's benefit, or denies this fact of transfer, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment from six months to two years and a judicial fine.60
(2) Where the offense is committed with respect to property entrusted and delivered as a requirement of a profession and craft, trade or service relationship, or the authority to manage another's property arising from any reason whatsoever, imprisonment from one year to seven years and a judicial fine of up to three thousand days shall be imposed.

60 By Article 18 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, the phrase "for safekeeping or" has been added to follow the phrase "belonging to another," in this paragraph and incorporated into the text.

Using an instrument without consideration

Article 156

(1) A person who uses an instrument that has remained without consideration shall be sentenced, upon complaint, to imprisonment from six months to two years and a judicial fine.

Fraud

Article 157

(1) A person who, by fraudulent conduct, deceives someone and thereby obtains a benefit for themselves or another to the detriment of that person or another shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days.

Qualified fraud

Article 158- (1) Where the offense of fraud is committed;

a) By exploiting religious beliefs and feelings,
b) By taking advantage of the dangerous situation or difficult circumstances in which the person finds themselves,
c) By taking advantage of the weakness of the person's perception capacity,
d) By using public institutions and organizations, public professional organizations, political party, foundation or association legal entities as instruments,
e) To the detriment of public institutions and organizations,
f) By using information systems, banks or credit institutions as instruments,
g) By taking advantage of the facility provided by press and broadcasting media,
h) By persons who are merchants or company managers or acting on behalf of a company during their commercial activities; by cooperative managers within the scope of the cooperative's activity,
i) By persons engaged in a liberal profession, by abusing the trust placed in them due to their profession,
j) With the aim of obtaining the opening of a credit that should not be allocated by banks or other credit institutions,
k) With the aim of obtaining insurance benefits,
l) (Added: 24/11/2016-6763/Article 14) By the person introducing themselves as a public official or an employee of banks, insurance or credit institutions or stating that they are related to these institutions and organizations,
Imprisonment from three years to ten years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days shall be imposed. (Added sentence: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 19; Amended: 3/4/2013-6456/Article 40) However, in the cases listed in subparagraphs (e), (f), (j), (k) and (l), the lower limit of imprisonment cannot be less than four years, and the amount of the judicial fine cannot be less than twice the benefit obtained from the offense.61
(2) A person who obtains a benefit from another by deceiving them by stating that they have a relationship with public officials, that they are respected by them, and promising that a certain matter will be handled, shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph.

61 By Article 14 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "from two years to seven years" in this paragraph has been amended as "from three years to ten years", the phrase "(j) and (k)" has been amended as "(j), (k) and (l)", and the phrase "from three years" has been amended as "from four years".

(3) (Added paragraph: 24/11/2016-6763/Article 14) Where the offenses contained in this article and Article 157 are committed jointly by three or more persons, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half; where they are committed within the framework of the activity of an organization established to commit offenses, the sentence to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.

Circumstance requiring lesser punishment

Article 159

(1) Where fraud is committed for the purpose of collecting a debt based on a legal relationship, imprisonment from six months to one year or a judicial fine shall be imposed upon complaint.

Disposition over lost or mistakenly obtained property

Article 160

(1) A person who, without returning it or notifying the competent authorities, exercises ownership-like control over property that has left the possession of its owner due to being lost or that has been obtained as a result of mistake, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment for up to one year or a judicial fine.

Fraudulent bankruptcy

Article 161

(1) A person who engages in fraudulent transactions aimed at reducing their assets shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to eight years if a bankruptcy decision has been made before or after these fraudulent transactions. For the existence of fraudulent bankruptcy;
a) The concealment, hiding or causing a decrease in the value of assets that are in the nature of security for the creditors' claims,
b) The concealment or destruction of commercial books, records or documents in order to prevent the disclosure of transactions aimed at concealing assets,
c) The preparation of documents in a manner that would cause an increase in debts as if such a relationship existed, even though there is in fact no claim and debt relationship,
d) Showing the assets as less than they actually are through false accounting records or the preparation of false balance sheets,
are required.

Negligent bankruptcy

Article 162

(1) A person who causes bankruptcy due to failure to exercise the care and diligence required by being a merchant shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to one year if a bankruptcy decision has been made.

Unauthorized benefit

Article 163

(1) A person who benefits from a service offered through automatic machines and which can be used if payment is made, without making payment, shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to six months or a judicial fine.

(2) A person who benefits from telephone lines and their frequencies or from encrypted or unencrypted broadcasts made by electromagnetic waves without the consent of the owner or possessor shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine.
(3) (Added: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 83) In case of consumption of electricity, water or natural gas that can be used on a subscription basis, without the consent of the owner and in a manner that prevents the determination of the amount of consumption, the person shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.

False information about companies or cooperatives

Article 164

(1) If those who hold the capacity of founder, partner, manager, director or representative of a company or cooperative, or members of the board of directors or supervisory board, or liquidator, provide or cause to be provided materially false information of a nature that may cause harm to interested parties in their public statements or in reports or proposals they submit to the general assembly, they shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years or a judicial fine of up to one thousand days.

Purchase or acceptance of stolen goods Article 165 - (Amended: 26/6/2009 – 5918/Article 3)
(1) A person who, without participating in the commission of a crime, sells, transfers, purchases or accepts property or other assets obtained through the commission of a crime shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years and a judicial fine of up to ten thousand days.

Failure to provide information

Article 166

(1) A person who, despite learning that property obtained based on a legal relationship was in fact obtained by committing a crime or as a result of committing a crime, fails to notify the authorities competent to prosecute the crime without delay, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to six months or a judicial fine.

Personal ground for exemption from punishment or personal ground requiring reduction of punishment Article 167- (1) If the crimes contained in this chapter, except for robbery and aggravated robbery, are committed to the detriment of;
a) One of the spouses who have not been granted a separation decision,
b) One of the ascendants or descendants or relatives by marriage of this degree, or the adopter or adoptee,
c) One of the siblings living together in the same residence,
No punishment shall be imposed on the relevant relative.
(2) If these crimes are committed to the detriment of one of the spouses who have been granted a separation decision, one of the siblings not living together in the same residence, uncles, maternal uncles, paternal aunts, maternal aunts, nephews or nieces or second-degree relatives by marriage living together in the same residence; the punishment to be given to the relevant relative, upon complaint, shall be reduced by half.

Effective remorse

Article 168

(Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 20)
(1) If, after the crimes of theft, damage to property, breach of trust, fraud, fraudulent bankruptcy, negligent bankruptcy (…)62 are completed but before prosecution is initiated against them, the perpetrator, instigator or aider shows remorse personally and completely remedies the damage suffered by the victim by returning it in kind or through compensation, up to two-thirds of the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced.(61)
(2) If effective remorse is shown after prosecution has begun but before a judgment is rendered, up to half of the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced.
(3) For a person who shows effective remorse for the crime of robbery, up to half of the sentence to be imposed in cases falling under the first paragraph, and up to one-third in cases falling under the second paragraph, shall be reduced.
(4) In case of partial return or compensation, the consent of the victim is additionally required for the provisions of effective remorse to be applicable.
(5) (Added: 2/7/2012 – 6352/Article 84) In the crime of unauthorized benefit, if the perpetrator, instigator or aider shows remorse and completely compensates the damage suffered by the victim, the public or the private law legal entity before the investigation is completed, no public prosecution shall be initiated; if the damage is completely compensated until a judgment is rendered, the sentence to be imposed shall be reduced by up to one-third. However, a person cannot benefit from the provision of this paragraph more than twice.

Application of security measures against legal entities

Article 169

(1) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed against legal entities for whose benefit unlawful advantage has been obtained through the commission of the crimes of theft, breach of trust and fraud.

THIRD PART
Crimes Against Society

FIRST CHAPTER
Crimes Creating General Danger Intentionally endangering general security

Article 170

(1) A person who, in a manner that would be dangerous for the life, health or property of persons or in a manner that could create fear, anxiety or panic in persons;
a) Starts a fire,
b) Causes a building collapse, landslide, avalanche, flood or overflow,
c) Fires a weapon or uses explosive materials,
shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years.
(2) A person who causes danger of fire, building collapse, landslide, avalanche, flood or overflow shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year or a judicial fine.

62 By Article 84 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012, the phrase "and unauthorized benefit" in this paragraph has been removed from the text of the article.

Negligently endangering general security Article 171- (1) A person who negligently causes;
a) A fire,
b) A building collapse, landslide, avalanche, flood or overflow,
shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year if the act is dangerous for the life, health or property of others.

Emitting radiation

Article 172

(1) A person who subjects another person to radiation with the purpose of impairing their health and in a manner capable of achieving this purpose shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to fifteen years.
(2) If the act in the first paragraph has been committed against an indefinite number of persons, imprisonment of not less than five years shall be imposed.
(3) A person who emits radiation or affects the process of splitting atomic nuclei in a manner capable of causing significant damage to the life, health or property of another person shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(4) A person who causes radiation emission or the process of splitting atomic nuclei during the operation of a laboratory or facility in violation of the obligation of necessary care and diligence shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years if the act is capable of causing significant damage to the life, health or property of another person.

Causing an explosion with atomic energy

Article 173

(1) A person who causes an explosion by releasing atomic energy and thereby creates a significant danger to the life, health or property of another person shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years.
(2) If the act defined in the above paragraph is committed through negligence, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.

Unauthorised possession or transfer of dangerous substances63

Article 174

(1) A person who, without obtaining the necessary permission from the competent authorities, manufactures, imports or exports explosive, flammable, corrosive, injurious, suffocating, poisonous, permanently disease-causing nuclear, radioactive, chemical, biological substances, transports them from one place to another within the country, stores, sells, purchases or processes them shall be punished with imprisonment from four years to eight years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days. A person who, without the permission of the competent authorities, imports, exports, offers for sale, gives to others, transports, stores, purchases, accepts or possesses the materials and equipment necessary for the purpose of manufacturing, processing or using substances falling within the scope of this paragraph shall also be punished with the same penalty.(62)

63 By Article 15 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, in the first paragraph of this article, the phrase "three years" was amended to "four years", the phrase "exports the materials and equipment necessary for the manufacture, processing or use of substances" was amended to "imports, exports, offers for sale, gives to others, transports, stores, purchases, accepts or possesses the materials and equipment necessary for the purpose of manufacturing, processing or using substances", and in the second paragraph the phrase "by half" was amended to "twofold".

(2) If these acts are committed within the framework of the activity of an organisation established for the purpose of committing crimes, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased twofold.(62)
(3) A person who purchases, accepts or possesses explosive substances of insignificant type and quantity shall be sentenced to imprisonment for up to one year, taking into account the purpose of use.

Violation of the duty of care and supervision over a mentally ill person

Article 175

(1) A person who neglects the duty of care and supervision over a mentally ill person in a manner that may be dangerous to the life, health or property of others shall be punished with imprisonment for up to six months or a judicial fine.

Failure to comply with safety rules relating to construction or demolition

Article 176

(1) A person who fails to take the necessary measures for human life or bodily integrity during construction or demolition activity shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year or a judicial fine.

Releasing an animal in a manner that may create danger

Article 177

(1) A person who releases an animal under their supervision in a manner that may be dangerous to the life or health of others or who shows negligence in bringing them under control shall be punished with imprisonment for up to six months or a judicial fine.

Failure to place signs and barriers

Article 178

(1) A person who fails to place the necessary signs or barriers to prevent danger arising from work being carried out or objects left in places where everyone passes, removes signs or barriers that have been placed, or changes their location shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to six months or a judicial fine.

Endangering traffic safety

Article 179

(1) A person who causes a danger to the life, health or property of others by changing, rendering unusable, removing from their location any signs placed to ensure the safe flow of land, sea, air or railway transport, giving false signals, placing something on passage, arrival, departure or landing routes, or interfering with the technical operating system shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to six years.
(2) A person who operates and manages land, sea, air or railway transport vehicles in a manner that may be dangerous to the life, health or property of persons shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years.64
(3) A person who operates a vehicle despite being under the influence of alcohol or drugs or otherwise unable to operate a vehicle safely due to another reason shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph.

64 By Article 16 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "from three months" was added to this paragraph to follow the phrase "a person who manages,".

Endangering traffic safety through negligence

Article 180

(1) A person who negligently causes a danger to the life, health or property of persons in sea, air or railway transport shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to three years.

SECOND PART
Crimes Against the Environment Intentional pollution of the environment

Article 181

(1) A person who intentionally discharges waste or residues into the soil, water or air in a manner contrary to the technical procedures determined by the relevant laws and in a manner that will harm the environment shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) A person who brings waste or residues into the country without permission shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(3) If the waste or residues show permanent characteristics in the soil, water or air, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased twofold.
(4) If the acts defined in the first and second paragraphs are committed in relation to waste or residues having characteristics capable of causing diseases that are difficult to treat in humans or animals, impairing reproductive capacity, or changing the natural characteristics of animals or plants, imprisonment for not less than five years and a judicial fine of up to one thousand days shall be imposed.
(5) For the acts in the second, third and fourth paragraphs of this article, security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities.

Pollution of the environment through negligence

Article 182

(1) A person who negligently causes waste or residues to be discharged into the soil, water or air in a manner that will harm the environment shall be punished with a judicial fine. If such waste or residues leave a permanent effect on the soil, water or air, imprisonment from two months to one year shall be imposed.
(2) A person who negligently causes waste or residues having characteristics capable of causing diseases that are difficult to treat in humans or animals, impairing reproductive capacity, or changing the natural characteristics of animals or plants to be discharged into the soil, water or air shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to five years.

Causing noise

Article 183

(1) A person who, contrary to the obligations determined by the relevant laws, causes noise in a manner capable of harming the health of another person shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to two years or a judicial fine.

Causing zoning pollution

Article 184

(1) A person who constructs or has constructed a building without obtaining a building permit or contrary to the permit shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to five years.
(2) A person who permits the connection of electricity, water or telephone to construction sites established for constructions started without a building permit shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph.
(3) A person who permits the conduct of any industrial activity in buildings for which a building use permit has not been obtained shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(4) Except for the third paragraph, the provisions of this article shall only apply within municipal boundaries or in places subject to special zoning regime.
(5) If a person brings the building they constructed or had constructed without a permit or contrary to the permit into conformity with the zoning plan and permit, no public prosecution shall be initiated pursuant to the provisions of the first and second paragraphs, an initiated public prosecution shall be dismissed, and the penalty imposed shall be eliminated with all its consequences.
(6) (Added: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 21) The provisions of the second and third paragraphs shall not apply to buildings constructed before 12 October 2004.

THIRD PART
Crimes Against Public Health Adding poisonous substances

Article 185

(1) A person who endangers the life and health of persons by adding poison to drinking water or to any kind of food or things to be eaten or drunk or used or consumed, or by spoiling them in other ways, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to fifteen years.
(2) If the acts specified in the above paragraph are committed in violation of the obligation of care and attention, imprisonment from three months to one year shall be imposed.

Trade in spoiled or altered food or medicines

Article 186

(1) A person who sells, supplies, or possesses any kind of food or drink or medicines that have been spoiled or altered in a manner that would endanger the life and health of persons shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years and a judicial fine of up to one thousand five hundred days.
(2) If this crime is committed within the scope of the exercise of a profession or craft carried out based on official permission, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one third.

Manufacturing or selling medicines in a manner that would endanger the life and health of persons Article 187- (1) A person who produces or sells medicines in a manner that would endanger the life and health of persons shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years and a judicial fine.
(2) If this crime is committed by a physician or pharmacist or within the scope of the exercise of a profession or craft carried out based on official permission, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one third.

Manufacture and trade of narcotic or stimulant substances6566

Article 188

(1) A person who manufactures, imports or exports narcotic or stimulant substances without a license or contrary to the license shall be punished with imprisonment from twenty years to thirty years and a judicial fine from two thousand days to twenty thousand days.(64)(65)
(2) Since the act of exporting narcotic or stimulant substances is qualified as import with respect to the other country, the executed portion of the sentence imposed as a result of the trial conducted in that country shall be deducted from the sentence imposed as a result of the trial to be conducted in Turkey for the export of narcotic or stimulant substances.
(3) A person who sells, offers for sale, gives to others, dispatches, transports, stores, purchases, accepts, or possesses narcotic or stimulant substances without a license or contrary to the license within the country shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than ten years and a judicial fine from one thousand days to twenty thousand days.(64)67 (Additional sentence: 18/6/2014 – 6545/66 art.) However, if the person to whom the narcotic or stimulant substance is given or sold is a child, the imprisonment to be imposed on the person who gives or sells shall not be less than fifteen years.(65)
(4) (Amended: 27/3/2015-6638/11 art.) a) The narcotic or stimulant substances specified in the above paragraphs being heroin, cocaine, morphine, bazmorphine, synthetic cannabinoid and its derivatives, synthetic cathinone and its derivatives, synthetic opioid and its derivatives or amphetamine and its derivatives,68
b) The acts in the third paragraph being committed in public places or places open to the public within a distance of less than two hundred meters from the boundaries of buildings and facilities where people gather collectively for treatment, education, military and social purposes such as schools, dormitories, hospitals, barracks or places of worship, and their perimeter walls, wire fences or similar barriers or markings, if any,
the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(5) (Amended: 18/6/2014 – 6545/66 art.) If the crimes specified in the above paragraphs are committed jointly by three or more persons, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half, and if committed within the framework of the activity of an organization established to commit crimes, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.
(6) The provisions of the above paragraphs shall also apply to any substance that produces a narcotic or stimulant effect, the production of which is subject to the permission of official authorities or the sale of which is subject to a prescription issued by an authorized physician. (Additional sentence: 29/6/2005 – 5377/22 art.) However, the penalty to be imposed may be reduced by up to half.
(7) A person who imports into the country, manufactures, sells, purchases, dispatches, transports, stores or exports a substance that does not produce a narcotic or stimulant effect but is used in the production of narcotic or stimulant substances and whose import or manufacture is subject to the permission of official authorities shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than eight years and a judicial fine from one thousand days to twenty thousand days.697071
(8) If the crimes defined in this article are committed by a physician, dentist, pharmacist, chemist, veterinarian, health officer, laboratory technician, midwife, nurse, dental technician, caregiver, health service provider, person engaged in chemistry or pharmaceutical trade, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.

Application of security measures regarding legal entities

Article 189

(1) If the crimes of manufacture and trade of narcotic or stimulant substances are committed within the framework of the activity of a legal entity, security measures specific to them shall be imposed on the legal entity.

Facilitating the use of narcotic or stimulant substances72

Article 190- (1) In order to facilitate the use of narcotic or stimulant substances;

a) Providing special premises, equipment or materials,
b) Taking measures to make it difficult to apprehend users,
c) Providing information to others about methods of use,
The person shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years and a judicial fine from one thousand days to ten thousand days.(70)73
(2) A person who publicly encourages the use of narcotic or stimulant substances or makes publications of this nature shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years and a judicial fine from one thousand days to ten thousand days.747576

69 By Article 22 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, the phrase "consigning," was added to come before the phrase "transporting" appearing in these paragraphs and has been incorporated into the text.
70 By Article 66 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrase "not less than ten years" appearing in the first paragraph of this article was amended to read "from twenty years to thirty years", the phrase "from five years to fifteen years" appearing in the third paragraph was amended to read "not less than ten years" and the phrase "four" appearing in the seventh paragraph was amended to read "eight".
71 By Article 137 of Decree Law No. 694 dated 15/8/2017, the phrase "one thousand days" was added to come after the phrase "not less than eight years imprisonment and" appearing in this paragraph, and this provision was subsequently adopted as is by Article 132 of Law No. 7078 dated 1/2/2018 and became law.
72 By Article 67 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrases "from two years to five" appearing in the first and second paragraphs of this article were amended to read "from five years to ten".
73 By Article 138 of Decree Law No. 694 dated 15/8/2017, the phrase "and a judicial fine from one thousand days to ten thousand days" was added to come after the phrase "imprisonment up to ten years" appearing in this paragraph, and this provision was subsequently adopted as is by Article 133 of Law No. 7078 dated 1/2/2018 and became law.
74 By Article 67 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrases "from two years to five" appearing in the first and second paragraphs of this article were amended to read "from five years to ten".

(3) Where the offences defined in this article are committed by a physician, dentist, pharmacist, chemist, veterinarian, health officer, laboratory technician, midwife, nurse, dental technician, caregiver, person providing health services, person engaged in chemistry or pharmaceutical trade, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.(72)

Purchasing, accepting or possessing narcotic or stimulant substances for use or using narcotic or stimulant substances77

Article 191

(Amended: 18/6/2014 – 6545/68 art.)
(1) A person who purchases, accepts or possesses narcotic or stimulant substances for use or uses narcotic or stimulant substances shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(2) In an investigation initiated for this offence, a decision shall be made to defer the initiation of a public prosecution against the suspect for a period of five years, without seeking the conditions set forth in Article 171 of the Code of Criminal Procedure No. 5271 dated 4/12/2004. In this case, the public prosecutor warns the suspect about the consequences that may arise for him if he fails to comply with the obligations imposed upon him or violates the prohibitions during the deferral period. (Additional sentence:28/3/2023-7445/18 art.) The deferral decision shall also be notified to law enforcement units.
(3) (Amended:28/3/2023-7445/18 art.) During the deferral period, a probation measure shall be applied to the suspect for a minimum period of one year. This period may be extended for a maximum of two more years in six-month periods upon the proposal of the probation directorate or ex officio by decision of the public prosecutor. The person subject to a probation measure may be subjected to treatment during the probation period if deemed necessary. The public prosecutor shall decide to refer the suspect to the relevant institution at least twice a year to determine whether he has used narcotic or stimulant substances during the deferral period.
(4) If, during the deferral period, the person;
a) Persists in failing to comply with the obligations imposed upon him or the requirements of the treatment applied,
b) Purchases, accepts or possesses narcotic or stimulant substances again for use,
c) Uses narcotic or stimulant substances, a public prosecution shall be initiated against him.
(5) If, during the deferral period, the person purchases, accepts or possesses narcotic or stimulant substances again for use or uses narcotic or stimulant substances, this shall be deemed a violation pursuant to the fourth paragraph and shall not be made the subject of a separate investigation and prosecution.

75 By Article 23 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, the second paragraph of this article was amended as the third paragraph, and the third paragraph was amended as the second paragraph.
76 By Article 138 of Decree Law No. 694 dated 15/8/2017, the phrase "and a judicial fine from one thousand days to ten thousand days" was added to come after the phrase "imprisonment up to ten years" appearing in this paragraph, and this provision was subsequently adopted as is by Article 133 of Law No. 7078 dated 1/2/2018 and became law.
77 The heading of this article was "Purchasing, accepting or possessing narcotic or stimulant substances for use" and was amended as incorporated into the text by Article 68 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014.

(6) After the initiation of a public prosecution pursuant to the fourth paragraph, in investigations initiated with the allegation that the offence defined in the first paragraph has been committed again, a decision to defer the initiation of a public prosecution pursuant to the second paragraph cannot be made.
(7) If the suspect does not act contrary to the obligations specified in the fourth paragraph and does not violate the prohibitions during the deferral period, a decision of no grounds for prosecution shall be rendered in respect of him.
(8) Where, during the prosecution phase for;
a) The offence of manufacture and trade of narcotic or stimulant substances defined in Article 188 of this Code,
b) The offence of facilitating the use of narcotic or stimulant substances defined in Article 190,
it is understood that the offence falls exclusively within the scope of this article, a decision to defer the announcement of judgment shall be rendered in respect of the accused within the framework of the provisions of this article.
(9) In cases where there is no contrary provision in this article, the provisions of Article 171 of the Code of Criminal Procedure regarding the deferral of initiation of a public prosecution or Article 231 regarding the deferral of the announcement of judgment shall apply.
(10) (Additional: 27/3/2015-6638/12 art.) Where the acts in the first paragraph are committed in public places or places open to the public within a distance of two hundred meters from buildings and facilities where people gather collectively for treatment, education, military and social purposes such as schools, dormitories, hospitals, barracks or places of worship, and if any, from the boundaries determined by perimeter walls, wire fences or similar barriers or markings, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.

Effective remorse

Article 192

(1) A person who has participated in the crimes of manufacturing and trafficking of narcotic or stimulant substances, if they report to the competent authority the other accomplices and the places where the narcotic or stimulant substances are stored or manufactured before being informed by the official authorities, shall not be sentenced to punishment if the information provided ensures the capture of the accomplices or the seizure of the narcotic or stimulant substances.
(2) A person who purchases, accepts or possesses narcotic or stimulant substances for use, if they report to the competent authority from whom, where and when they obtained this substance before being informed by the official authorities and facilitates the capture of the offenders or the seizure of the narcotic or stimulant substances, shall not be sentenced to punishment.
(3) The penalty to be imposed on a person who voluntarily serves and assists in the discovery of the crime and the capture of the perpetrator or other accomplices after these crimes have been reported shall be reduced by one quarter to one half according to the nature of the assistance.
(4) If a person who uses narcotic or stimulant substances applies to official authorities or health institutions requesting treatment before an investigation is initiated against them for purchasing, accepting or possessing narcotic or stimulant substances for use, they shall not be sentenced to punishment. (Additional sentence: 24/11/2016-6763/Article 16) In this case, the obligation of public officials and health professionals to report the crime pursuant to Articles 279 and 280 shall not arise.78

Manufacturing and trafficking of poisonous substances

Article 193

(1) A person who unlawfully produces, possesses, sells or transports a substance containing poison and whose production, possession or sale is subject to permission shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to one year.

Supply of substances dangerous to health

Article 194

(1) A person who gives or offers for consumption substances that may pose a danger to health to children, mentally ill persons or volatile substance users shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to one year.

Acting contrary to measures regarding contagious diseases

Article 195

(1) A person who fails to comply with measures taken by competent authorities for the quarantine of a place where a person suffering from or having died from one of the contagious diseases is located shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to one year.

Irregular burial of the dead

Article 196

(1) A person who buries or causes to be buried a dead body in places other than those designated for burial of the dead shall be punished with imprisonment up to six months.

PART FOUR
Crimes Against Public Trust
Counterfeiting of currency

Article 197

(1) A person who produces, brings into the country, transports, keeps or puts into circulation currency that is legally in circulation in the country or in foreign countries as counterfeit shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to twelve years and a judicial fine up to ten thousand days.
(2) A person who knowingly accepts counterfeit currency shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years and a judicial fine.
(3) A person who puts into circulation currency that they accepted without knowing it was counterfeit, knowing this quality, shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year.

Values considered equal to currency

Article 198

(1) Bonds, shares, debentures and coupons issued by the State and written to bearer, notes, debentures and documents issued by authorized institutions and legally in circulation, and national commemorative gold coins are considered currency.

78 By Article 17 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "or health institutions" was added to this paragraph to follow the phrase "authorities".

Counterfeiting of valuable stamps

Article 199

(1) A person who produces, brings into the country, transports, keeps or puts into circulation a valuable stamp as counterfeit shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to five years and a judicial fine.
(2) A person who knowingly accepts a valuable stamp produced as counterfeit shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year and a judicial fine.
(3) A person who puts into circulation a valuable stamp that they accepted without knowing it was counterfeit, knowing this quality, shall be punished with imprisonment from one month to six months.
(4) Stamped papers, revenue and postage stamps, and stamps used to certify that a certain amount of tax or fee has been paid are considered valuable stamps.

Instruments for making currency and valuable stamps

Article 200

(1) A person who unlawfully produces, brings into the country, sells, transfers, purchases, accepts or keeps tools or materials used in the production of currency and valuable stamps shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to four years and a judicial fine.

Effective remorse

Article 201

(1) A person who produces, brings into the country, transports, keeps or accepts counterfeit currency or valuable stamps, if they report to the competent authority the other accomplices and the places where the counterfeit currency or valuable stamps are produced or stored before putting this currency or valuable stamps into circulation and before being informed by the official authorities, shall not be sentenced to punishment if the information provided ensures the capture of the accomplices and the seizure of the counterfeit currency or valuable stamps.
(2) A person who unlawfully produces, brings into the country, sells, transfers, purchases, accepts or keeps tools and materials used in the production of counterfeit currency or valuable stamps, if they report to the relevant authority the other accomplices and the places where this material is produced or stored before being informed by the official authorities, shall not be sentenced to punishment if the information provided ensures the capture of the accomplices and the seizure of this material.

Counterfeiting of seals

Article 202

(1) A person who produces or uses as counterfeit the seal used by the Presidency, the Presidency of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and the Prime Ministry shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to eight years.
(2) A person who produces or uses as counterfeit an authenticating or certifying seal used by public institutions and organizations or professional organizations with the status of public institutions shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to six years.

Breaking seals

Article 203

(1) A person who removes a seal placed to ensure the safekeeping of something or the preservation of its existence as is pursuant to law or the order of competent authorities, or acts contrary to its purpose of placement, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years or a judicial fine.

Forgery of official documents

Article 204

(1) A person who prepares an official document as counterfeit, alters a genuine official document in a manner to deceive others, or uses a counterfeit official document shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.
(2) A public official who prepares as counterfeit an official document that they are authorized to prepare by virtue of their duty, alters a genuine document in a manner to deceive others, prepares a document contrary to the truth, or uses a counterfeit official document shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to eight years.
(3) If the official document is of the nature of a document that is valid until its forgery is established by force of law, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.

Destroying, eliminating or concealing an official document

Article 205

(1) A person who destroys, eliminates or conceals a genuine official document shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years. If the crime is committed by a public official, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.

False statement in the preparation of an official document

Article 206

(1) A person who makes a false statement to a public official who has the authority to prepare an official document shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years or a judicial fine.

Forgery of private documents

Article 207

(1) A person who prepares a private document as counterfeit or alters a genuine private document in a manner to deceive others and uses it shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) A person who uses a counterfeit private document knowing this quality shall also be punished according to the above paragraph.

Destroying, eliminating or concealing a private document

Article 208

(1) A person who destroys, annihilates or conceals a genuine private document shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.

Misuse of a signature in blank

Article 209

(1) A person who fills in a signed and partially or completely blank paper delivered to him to be filled in and used in a certain manner, in a way different from the reason for its delivery, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment from three months to one year.
(2) A person who unlawfully obtains or possesses a signed and partially or completely blank paper and fills it in in a manner producing legal consequences shall be punished according to the provisions on forgery of documents.

Documents having the effect of official documents

Article 210

(1) Where the subject matter of the crime of forgery of a private document is a bill of exchange written to order or to bearer, a document representing goods, a share certificate, a bond or a will, the provisions relating to the crime of forgery of official documents shall apply.
(2) A physician, dentist, pharmacist, midwife, nurse or other health professional who prepares a document contrary to the truth shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year. Where the prepared document provides an unlawful benefit to a person or is of a nature to produce a result to the detriment of the public or persons, a penalty shall be imposed according to the provisions on forgery of official documents.

Circumstance requiring lesser punishment

Article 211

(1) Where the crime of forgery of documents is committed for the purpose of proving a claim based on a legal relationship or documenting a real situation, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced by half.

Joinder

Article 212

(1) Where a forged official or private document is used during the commission of another crime, separate penalties shall be imposed for both forgery and the relevant crime.

FIFTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against Public Peace
Threatening with the aim of creating fear and panic among the public

Article 213

(1) A person who makes public threats with respect to life, health, bodily integrity or sexual inviolability or property with the aim of creating anxiety, fear and panic among the public shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years.
(2) Where the crime is committed with a weapon, the penalty to be imposed may be increased up to half according to the nature of the weapon used.

Incitement to commit a crime

Article 214

(1) A person who publicly incites to commit a crime shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) A person who incites one part of the population to kill each other by arming them against another part shall be punished with imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty-four years.
(3) Where the crimes that are the subject of incitement are committed, the person who incites shall be punished as an instigator of these crimes.

Praising a crime and a criminal79

Article 215

(1) A person who publicly praises a crime that has been committed or a person for a crime he has committed shall be punished with imprisonment up to two years where this gives rise to a clear and imminent danger in terms of public order.

79 By Article 10 of Law No. 6459 dated 11/4/2013, the phrase "where this gives rise to a clear and imminent danger in terms of public order," was added to follow the phrase "person who publicly praises a crime that has been committed or a person for a crime he has committed," in this article.

Inciting the public to hatred and hostility or degrading

Article 216

(1) A person who publicly incites a section of the population having different characteristics in terms of social class, race, religion, sect or region to hatred and hostility against another section, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years where this gives rise to a clear and imminent danger in terms of public security.
(2) A person who publicly degrades a section of the population based on differences of social class, race, religion, sect, gender or region shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to one year.
(3) A person who publicly degrades the religious values adopted by a section of the population shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to one year where the act is capable of disturbing public peace.

Incitement to disobey the laws

Article 217

(1) A person who publicly incites the public to disobey the laws shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years or a judicial fine where the incitement is capable of disturbing public peace.

Publicly disseminating misleading information

Article 217/A- (Supplemented: 13/10/2022-7418/Article 29)

(1) A person who publicly disseminates information contrary to the truth concerning the internal and external security of the country, public order and general health, in a manner capable of disturbing public peace, solely with the motive of creating anxiety, fear or panic among the public, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) Where the perpetrator commits the crime by concealing his real identity or within the framework of an organization's activities, the penalty imposed according to the first paragraph shall be increased by half.

Common provision

Article 218

(1) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 25) Where the crimes defined in the above articles are committed through the press and broadcasting, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased up to half. However, expressions of opinion made for the purpose of criticism and not exceeding the limits of reporting news do not constitute a crime.

Misuse of religious services during duty

Article 219

(1) If one of the religious leaders such as imam, preacher, priest, rabbi publicly criticizes and disparages the government administration and State laws and government actions while performing his duty, he shall be punished with imprisonment from one month to one year and a judicial fine or one of these may be imposed.
(2) If one of the persons indicated in the above paragraph, taking advantage of this capacity, criticizes and disparages the administration of the government and the laws and regulations and orders and the duties and powers belonging to one of the departments or incites and encourages the public to disobey the laws or government orders or the officer against the requirements of his official duty, he shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to two years and a judicial fine and to be prohibited permanently or temporarily from actually performing that duty and receiving its benefits and allowances.

(3) The penalty written in the above paragraph shall also be imposed on religious leaders and officials who, taking advantage of their own capacities, compel and persuade a person to engage in acts and words contrary to rights acquired according to law.
(4) If one of these persons, taking advantage of his religious capacity, commits a crime other than the acts written in the first paragraph, he shall be convicted with the penalty written in the law for that crime on the condition that one-sixth is increased.
(5) Provided that if the law has already taken this capacity into consideration, there is no place for increasing the penalty.

Establishing an organization for the purpose of committing crimes

Article 220

(1) Those who establish or manage an organisation for the purpose of committing acts that the law deems to be crimes shall be punished with imprisonment from four years to eight years, provided that the organisation is suitable for committing the intended crimes in terms of its structure, the number of members it possesses, and its means and equipment. However, for the existence of the organisation, the number of members must be at least three persons.80
(2) Those who become members of an organisation established for the purpose of committing crimes shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years.(78)
(3) Where the organisation is armed, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased from one-quarter to one-half.
(4) Where a crime is committed within the framework of the organisation's activities, a penalty shall also be imposed for these crimes.
(5) Organisation managers shall also be punished as principals for all crimes committed within the framework of the organisation's activities.
(6) (Amended: 2/7/2012 – 6352/85 art.) A person who, while not being a member of the organisation, commits a crime on behalf of the organisation shall also be punished for the crime of being a member of the organisation. The penalty to be imposed for the crime of being a member of the organisation may be reduced by up to one-half.(Additional sentence: 11/4/2013-6459/11 art.) This paragraph provision shall only be applied in respect of armed organisations.81
(7) (Amended: 2/7/2012 – 6352/85 art.) A person who, while not being part of the hierarchical structure within the organisation, knowingly and willingly assists the organisation shall be punished as an organisation member. The penalty to be imposed for organisation membership may be reduced by up to one-third according to the nature of the assistance provided.
(8) A person who engages in propaganda for the organisation in a manner that legitimises or praises the organisation's methods involving force, violence or threat, or encourages recourse to these methods, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years. Where this crime is committed through the press and broadcasting, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.82

80 By Article 13 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "from two years to six years" in the first paragraph was amended to "from four years to eight years" and the phrase "from one year to three years" in the second paragraph was amended to "from two years to four years".
81 By the Decision of the Constitutional Court dated 26/10/2023 and numbered E.: 2023/132; K.: 2023/183, the first, second and third sentences of this paragraph were annulled. It was ruled that it would enter into force four months after the publication of the Decision in the Official Gazette (8/4/2024).
82 By Article 11 of Law No. 6459 dated 11/4/2013, the phrase "or its purpose" in this paragraph was amended to "in a manner that legitimises or praises the organisation's methods involving force, violence or threat, or encourages recourse to these methods".

Effective remorse

Article 221

(1) No penalty shall be imposed on founders or managers who disband the organisation or ensure the disbanding of the organisation through the information they provide, before an investigation is initiated for the crime of establishing an organisation for the purpose of committing crimes and before a crime is committed in line with the organisation's purpose.
(2) Where an organisation member voluntarily notifies the relevant authorities that he or she has left the organisation without participating in the commission of any crime within the framework of the organisation's activities, no penalty shall be imposed on him or her.
(3) Where an organisation member who is apprehended without participating in the commission of any crime within the framework of the organisation's activities provides information suitable for ensuring the disbanding of the organisation or the apprehension of its members by expressing remorse, no penalty shall be imposed on him or her.
(4) Where a person who establishes or manages an organisation for the purpose of committing crimes, or is a member of the organisation, or who, while not being a member, commits a crime on behalf of the organisation or knowingly and willingly assists the organisation, voluntarily surrenders and provides information regarding the structure of the organisation and the crimes committed within the framework of its activities, no penalty shall be imposed on him or her for the crime of establishing, managing or being a member of the organisation. Where the person provides this information after being apprehended, a reduction from one-third to three-quarters shall be made in the penalty to be imposed on him or her for this crime.83
(5) A supervised release measure shall be imposed for a period of one year on persons who benefit from effective remorse. The period of the supervised release measure may be extended up to three years.
(6) (Additional: 6/12/2006 – 5560/8 art.) The effective remorse provisions in this article shall not be applied more than once in respect of a person.

Hat and Turkish letters

Article 222- (Repealed: 2/3/2014-6529/16 art.)

PART SIX
Crimes Against Means of Transport or Fixed Platforms Hijacking or seizure of means of transport

Article 223

(1) A person who, by using force or threat or by another unlawful act, prevents a land transport vehicle from moving, stops this vehicle while it is in motion, or takes it to a place other than where it is going, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) Where the subject of the crime is a sea or railway transport vehicle, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.
(3) A person who, by using force or threat or by another unlawful act, prevents an air transport vehicle from moving or takes this vehicle to a place other than where it is going, shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years.

83 By Article 26 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005, the phrase "or who, while not being a member, commits a crime on behalf of the organisation or knowingly and willingly assists the organisation" was added to come after the phrase "is a member of the organisation" in this paragraph.

(4) A penalty shall also be imposed for the restriction of the liberty of persons during the commission of these crimes.
(5) Where aggravated forms of the crime of intentional injury due to the result occur during the commission of these crimes, the provisions relating to the crime of intentional injury shall also be applied.

Seizure of fixed platforms on the continental shelf or in the exclusive economic zone Article 224- (1) A person who seizes, captures or takes control of a fixed
platform established on the continental shelf or in the exclusive economic zone by using force or threat or by another unlawful act shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to fifteen years.
(2) A penalty shall also be imposed for the restriction of the liberty of persons during the commission of this crime.
(3) Where aggravated forms of the crime of intentional injury due to the result occur during the commission of this crime, the provisions relating to the crime of intentional injury shall also be applied.

PART SEVEN
Crimes Against Public Morality
Obscene acts

Article 225

(1) A person who engages in sexual intercourse publicly or engages in exhibitionism shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to one year.

Obscenity

Article 226

(1) a) A person who gives products containing obscene images, writings or words to a child or shows, reads, has read or has listened to their content,
b) Shows their content in places where children can enter or see or publicly, displays them in a visible manner, reads, has read, says, has said,
c) Offers these products for sale or rent in a manner that their content can be known,
d) Offers for sale, sells or rents these products outside of shopping places designated for their sale,
e) Gives or distributes these products free of charge alongside or in connection with other goods or services sales,
f) Advertises these products,
Shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years and judicial fine.
(2) A person who publishes or intermediates the publication of obscene images, writings or words through press and broadcasting shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years and judicial fine up to five thousand days.
(3) A person who uses children, representative child images or persons appearing as children in the production of products containing obscene images, writings or words shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years and judicial fine up to five thousand days. A person who brings these products into the country,

reproduces, offers for sale, sells, transports, stores, exports, possesses or makes available for use by others shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years and judicial fine up to five thousand days.84
(4) A person who produces, brings into the country, offers for sale, sells, transports, stores, makes available for use by others or possesses products containing writings, sounds or images related to sexual behaviors performed using violence, with animals, on a dead human body or in unnatural ways shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to four years and judicial fine up to five thousand days.
(5) A person who publishes or intermediates the publication of the content of products in the third and fourth paragraphs through press and broadcasting or enables children to see, hear or read them shall be punished with imprisonment from six years to ten years and judicial fine up to five thousand days.
(6) For these crimes, security measures specific to legal entities shall be ruled.
(7) The provisions of this article shall not apply to scientific works; and except for the third paragraph and on condition that access by children is prevented, to works having artistic and literary value.

Prostitution

Article 227

(1) A person who encourages a child to prostitution, facilitates its way, procures or shelters for this purpose or intermediates the child's prostitution shall be punished with imprisonment from four years to ten years and judicial fine up to five thousand days. Preparatory acts directed towards the commission of this crime shall also be punished as completed crime.
(2) A person who encourages someone to prostitution, facilitates its way or intermediates for prostitution or provides a place shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years and judicial fine up to three thousand days. Providing livelihood partially or completely by benefiting from the earnings of the person driven to prostitution shall be considered encouragement to prostitution.
(3) (Repealed: 6/12/2006 – 5560/45 art.; Re-regulation: 24/11/2016-6763/18 art.) A person who gives, distributes or broadcasts products containing images, writings and words prepared for the purpose of facilitating prostitution or intermediating for prostitution shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years and judicial fine from two hundred days to two thousand days.
(4) The penalty to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased from one half to two times for a person who drives someone to prostitution or ensures that they engage in prostitution by using force or threat, by fraud or by taking advantage of their desperation.
(5) In case the crimes defined in the above paragraphs are committed by spouse, ascendant, ascendant by marriage, sibling, adopter, guardian, educator, teacher, caretaker, other persons having protection and supervision obligation or by abusing the influence provided by public duty or service relationship,

the penalty to be given shall be increased by half.
(6) In case these crimes are committed within the framework of an organization established for the purpose of committing crimes, the penalty to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(7) For these crimes, security measures specific to legal entities shall be ruled.
(8) The person driven to prostitution may be subjected to treatment or psychological therapy.85

Providing place and opportunity for gambling

Article 228

(1) A person who provides place and opportunity for gambling shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years and judicial fine not less than two hundred days.86
(2) In case place and opportunity are provided for children to gamble, the penalty to be given shall be increased by one fold.
(3) (Added: 15/8/2017-KHK-694/139 art.; Adopted as is: 1/2/2018-7078/134 art.) In case the crime is committed through the use of information systems, imprisonment from three years to five years and judicial fine from one thousand days to ten thousand days shall be ruled.
(4) (Added: 15/8/2017-KHK-694/139 art.; Adopted as is: 1/2/2018-7078/134 art.) In case the crime is committed within the framework of an organization's activity, the penalty to be given shall be increased by half.
(5) For this crime, security measures specific to legal entities shall be ruled.87
(6) In the application of the Penal Code, gambling means games conducted for the purpose of gain and where profit and loss depend on chance.(84)

Begging

Article 229

(1) A person who uses children, persons in a condition unable to manage themselves physically or mentally as instruments in begging shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) In case this crime is committed by blood or affinal relatives including the third degree or by spouse, the penalty to be given shall be increased by half.
(3) In case this crime is committed within the framework of organizational activity, the penalty to be given shall be increased by one fold.

85 The phrase "shall be subjected to treatment or therapy." in this paragraph has been amended as "may be subjected to treatment or psychological therapy." by Article 9 of Law No. 5560 dated 6/12/2006 and incorporated into the text.
86 By Article 19 of Law No. 6763 dated 24/11/2016, the phrase "imprisonment up to one year and" in this paragraph has been amended as "imprisonment from one year to three years and not less than two hundred days".
87 By Article 139 of Decree Law No. 694 dated 15/8/2017, paragraphs numbered (3), (4) were added to Article 228 to come after the second paragraph and other paragraphs were sequenced accordingly, then this provision was adopted as is by Article 134 of Law No. 7078 dated 1/2/2018 and became law.

EIGHTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against Family Order Multiple marriage, fraudulent marriage, religious ceremony

Article 230

(1) A person who, despite being married, performs a marriage procedure with another shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) A person who, although not married themselves, performs a marriage procedure with a person whom they know to be married shall also be punished according to the above paragraph provision.
(3) A person who performs a marriage procedure with another by concealing their true identity shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year.
(4) For the crimes defined in the above paragraphs, the statute of limitations shall begin to run from the date the annulment decision of the marriage becomes final.
(5) (Annulled: Constitutional Court's Decision dated 27/5/2015 and numbered E.: 2014/36,
K.: 2015/51.)
(6) (Annulled: Constitutional Court's Decision dated 27/5/2015 and numbered E.: 2014/36,
K.: 2015/51.)

Changing the lineage of a child

Article 231

(1) A person who changes or conceals the lineage of a child shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) A person who, by acting contrary to the duty of care, causes a child in a health institution to be mixed up with another child shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year.

Maltreatment

Article 232

(1) A person who mistreats one of the persons with whom they live together in the same dwelling shall be punished with imprisonment from two months to one year.
(2) A person who abuses the disciplinary authority arising from the right of upbringing they possess over a person under their administration or whom they are obliged to raise, educate, care for, protect or teach a profession or craft shall be given imprisonment of up to one year.

Violation of obligation arising from family law

Article 233

(1) A person who fails to fulfill the obligation of care, education or support arising from family law shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment of up to one year.
(2) A person who abandons their spouse whom they know to be pregnant or an unmarried woman with whom they live continuously and whom they know to have become pregnant by them in a helpless situation shall be given imprisonment from three months to one year.
(3) A mother or father who seriously endangers the morals, safety and health of their children due to lack of material and moral care as a result of habitual drunkenness, use of narcotic or stimulant substances or dishonorable attitudes and behaviors, even if their custody rights have been removed, shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year.

Abduction and detention of child

Article 234

(1) In the event that a mother or father whose custody authority has been removed or a blood relative including the third degree abducts or detains a child who has not completed sixteen years of age from the side of the guardian, trustee or the person under whose care and supervision they are, without using force or threat, imprisonment from three months to one year shall be imposed.
(2) If the act is committed by using force or threat or if the child has not yet completed twelve years of age, the penalty shall be increased by one fold.
(3) (Added: 6/12/2006 – 5560/10 art.) A person who keeps with them, even with their consent, a child who has left home without the knowledge or consent of their legal representative, without informing their family or the competent authorities of the situation, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment from three months to one year.

NINTH CHAPTER
Crimes Related to Economy, Industry and Commerce Rigging a tender

Article 235

(1) (Amended: 11/4/2013-6459/12 art.) A person who rigs tenders related to the purchase or sale of goods or services or rentals made on behalf of public institutions or organizations or construction tenders shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years.
(2) A tender is deemed to have been rigged in the following cases:
a) By fraudulent conduct;
1. Preventing persons who have the eligibility or conditions to participate in the tender from participating in the tender or in the transactions in the tender process,
2. Enabling persons who do not have the eligibility or conditions to participate in the tender to participate in the tender,
3. Excluding the goods offered from evaluation on the grounds that they do not possess the qualifications specified in their specifications, although they do possess them,
4. Taking into evaluation the goods offered on the grounds that they possess the qualifications specified in their specifications, although they do not possess them.
b) Enabling others to access information related to bids that must be kept confidential according to tender legislation or specifications.
c) Preventing persons who have the eligibility or conditions to participate in the tender from participating in the tender or in the transactions in the tender process by using force or threat or by other unlawful conduct.
d) Persons who wish to participate or participate in the tender making open or secret agreements among themselves to influence the tender conditions and especially the price.
(3) (Amended: 11/4/2013-6459/12 art.) If the crime of rigging a tender;
a) Is committed by using force or threat, the lower limit of the basic penalty cannot be less than five years. However, if the qualified forms of the crime of intentional injury or threat requiring heavier penalty are realized, a penalty shall also be imposed for these crimes.
b) As a result of its commission, no damage has occurred with respect to the relevant public institution or organization, except for the cases specified in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed on the perpetrator.
(4) Officials who obtain benefit by reason of rigging a tender shall also be punished separately according to the relevant crime provision for this reason.
(5) The provisions of the above paragraphs shall also be applied in the event of rigging auctions or tenders made through public institutions or organizations or the purchase or sale of goods or services or rentals made on behalf of professional organizations having the nature of public institutions, companies established with the participation of public institutions or organizations or professional organizations having the nature of public institutions, foundations operating within them, associations or cooperatives working for the public benefit.

Rigging the performance of an obligation

Article 236

(1) A person who rigs the performance of an obligation undertaken towards public institutions or organizations, professional organizations having the nature of public institutions, companies established with their participation, foundations operating within them, associations or cooperatives working for the public benefit shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years.
(2) In the event that the following acts are committed fraudulently, the performance of the obligation is deemed to have been rigged:
a) Delivery or acceptance of goods other than the goods whose description is specified in the tender decision or contract.
b) Delivery or acceptance of goods in a quantity less than that specified in the tender decision or contract.
c) Acceptance as if the obligation has been performed on time, although it has not been performed within the period specified in the tender decision or contract.
d) Acceptance of the work or the materials used in construction tenders although they do not comply with the conditions, quantity or qualifications determined in the specifications or contract.
e) Acceptance as if the obligation of a service nature has been given, although it has not been given or has been given incompletely according to the conditions specified in the tender decision or contract.
(3) Officials who obtain benefit by reason of rigging the performance of an obligation shall also be punished separately according to the relevant crime provision for this reason.

Influencing prices88

Article 237

(1) A person who spreads false news or rumors or resorts to other fraudulent means in a manner and with the intention of causing an increase or decrease in workers' wages or the values of foodstuffs or goods shall be given imprisonment from one year to three years and judicial fine.
(2) If as a result of the act the values of foodstuffs or goods or workers' wages increase or decrease, the penalty shall be increased by half.
(3) If the perpetrator is a licensed broker or stock exchange broker, the penalty shall additionally be increased by half.

Causing the absence of things necessary for the public

Article 238

(1) A person who causes the disappearance or significant reduction of goods or foodstuffs necessary for public institutions and organizations or public service or the prevention of a general disaster by failing to fulfill the work they have undertaken shall be given imprisonment from one year to three years and judicial fine of up to one thousand days.

88 By Article 19 of Law No. 7413 dated 23/6/2022, in the first paragraph of this article, the phrase "from three months to two years" was amended to "from one year to three years", in the second paragraph the phrase "one third" was amended to "half" and in the third paragraph the phrase "one eighth" was amended to "half".

Disclosure of information or documents of the nature of trade secret, banking secret or customer secret

Article 239

(1) A person who, by reason of their capacity or duty, profession or craft, gives or discloses information or documents of the nature of trade secret, banking secret or customer secret to unauthorized persons, shall be punished, upon complaint, with imprisonment from one year to three years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days. If this information or documents are given to or disclosed to unauthorized persons by persons who obtained them by unlawful means, a penalty shall also be imposed according to this paragraph.
(2) The provisions of the first paragraph shall also apply to information concerning scientific discoveries and inventions or industrial applications.
(3) If these secrets are disclosed to a foreigner not residing in Turkey or to their officials, the penalty to be imposed on the perpetrator shall be increased by one third. In this case, the condition of complaint shall not be required.
(4) A person who compels someone to disclose information or documents falling within the scope of this article by using force or threat shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years.

Refraining from the sale of goods or services89

Article 240

(1) A person who causes an urgent need to arise for the public by refraining from selling a certain good or service shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.

Usury

Article 241

(1) A person who lends money to another for the purpose of obtaining profit shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to six years and a judicial fine from five hundred days to five thousand days.90
(2) (Added:14/4/2020-7242/14 art.) If the offense is committed within the framework of an organization's activity, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.

Application of security measures regarding legal entities

Article 242

(1) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities for whose benefit unlawful advantage has been obtained through the commission of offenses contained in this chapter.

TENTH CHAPTER
Offenses in the Field of Information Technology
Entering an information system

Article 243

(1) A person who unlawfully enters all or part of an information system or continues to remain there shall be given imprisonment of up to one year or a judicial fine.91

89 By Article 20 of Law No. 7413 dated 23/6/2022, the phrase "from six months to two years" in this article was amended as "from one year to three years".
90 By Article 14 of Law No. 7242 dated 14/4/2020, the phrase "imprisonment of up to five years and" in this paragraph was amended as "imprisonment of up to six years and from five hundred days".
91 By Article 30 of Law No. 6698 dated 24/3/2016, the phrase "and" in this paragraph was amended as "or".

(2) If the acts defined in the above paragraph are committed against systems that can be used for a fee, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced by up to half.
(3) If the data contained in the system is destroyed or altered as a result of this act, imprisonment from six months to two years shall be imposed.
(4) (Added: 24/3/2016-6698/30 art.) A person who unlawfully monitors data transfers occurring within an information system or between information systems by technical means without entering the system shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.

Obstructing, disrupting the system, destroying or altering data

Article 244

(1) A person who obstructs or disrupts the operation of an information system shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to five years.
(2) A person who corrupts, destroys, alters or renders inaccessible data in an information system, places data in the system, or sends existing data to another place shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years.
(3) If these acts are committed on an information system belonging to a bank or credit institution or to a public institution or organization, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(4) If the commission of the acts defined in the above paragraphs results in the person obtaining an unlawful benefit for themselves or another and does not constitute another offense, imprisonment from two years to six years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days shall be imposed.

Misuse of bank or credit cards Article 245 – (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/27 art.)
(1) A person who obtains or possesses a bank or credit card belonging to another by whatever means and provides benefit to themselves or another by using or having it used without the consent of the cardholder or the person to whom the card should be given shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to six years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days.
(2) A person who produces, sells, transfers, purchases or accepts counterfeit bank or credit cards by linking them to bank accounts belonging to others shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years and a judicial fine of up to ten thousand days.
(3) A person who provides benefit to themselves or another by using a bank or credit card that has been counterfeited or on which forgery has been committed shall be punished with imprisonment from four years to eight years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days, provided that the act does not constitute another offense requiring a heavier penalty.
(4) If the offense contained in the first paragraph is committed to the detriment of:
a) One of the spouses against whom no separation decision has been made,
b) One of the ascendants or descendants or relatives by marriage of this degree or the adopter or adoptee,
c) One of the siblings living together in the same dwelling,
no penalty shall be imposed on the relevant relative.

(5) (Added: 6/12/2006 – 5560/11 art.) With regard to acts falling within the scope of the first paragraph, the provisions on effective remorse relating to offenses against property in this Code shall apply.

Prohibited devices or programs

Article 245

/A- (Added: 24/3/2016-6698/30 art.)
(1) Where a device, computer program, password or other security code is made or created exclusively for the commission of offenses contained in this Chapter or other offenses that can be committed by using information systems as an instrument, a person who manufactures, imports, dispatches, transports, stores, accepts, sells, offers for sale, purchases, gives to others or possesses them shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days.

Application of security measures regarding legal entities

Article 246

(1) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities for whose benefit unlawful advantage has been obtained through the commission of offenses contained in this chapter.

FOURTH PART
Offenses Against the Nation and the State and Final Provisions

FIRST CHAPTER
Offenses Against the Reliability and Functioning of Public Administration
Embezzlement

Article 247

(1) A public official who embezzles for themselves or another property of which possession has been transferred to them by reason of their duty or which they are obliged to protect and supervise shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to twelve years.
(2) If the offense is committed with fraudulent conduct aimed at ensuring that the embezzlement is not revealed, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(3) If the offense of embezzlement is committed with the intention of returning the property after using it temporarily, the penalty to be imposed may be reduced by up to half.

Effective remorse

Article 248

(1) If the embezzled property is returned in kind or the damage suffered is fully compensated before the investigation begins, two thirds of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced.
(2) If the embezzled property is voluntarily returned in kind or the damage suffered is fully compensated before the prosecution begins, half of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced. If effective remorse occurs before the judgment, one third of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced.

Circumstance requiring lesser penalty

Article 249

(1) Due to the insignificance of the value of the property constituting the subject of the offense of embezzlement, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced from one third to half.

Extortion

Madde 250

(1) (Değişik: 2/7/2012-6352/86 md.) A public official who coerces a person into providing or promising a benefit to himself or another by abusing the influence afforded by his duty shall be punished by imprisonment from five years to ten years. Where a person, in the face of the unlawful attitudes and conduct of the public official, feels compelled to provide a benefit to the public official or to a person he directs, with the apprehension that his lawful business will not be conducted properly, or at all, or at least not in a timely manner, the existence of coercion shall be accepted.
(2) A public official who persuades a person into providing or promising a benefit to himself or another through fraudulent conduct carried out by abusing the trust afforded by his duty shall be punished by imprisonment from three years to five years.
(3) Where the offence defined in the second paragraph has been committed by taking advantage of the person's mistake, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.
(4) (Ek: 2/7/2012-6352/86 md.) Taking into account the value of the benefit extorted and the economic situation of the victim, the penalty to be imposed under the above paragraphs may be reduced by up to one half.

Denetim görevinin ihmali

Madde 251

(1) A public official charged with supervision who deliberately turns a blind eye to the commission of the offence of embezzlement or extortion shall be held liable as a joint perpetrator of the offence committed.
(2) A public official who, by neglecting his duty of supervision, enables the commission of the offence of embezzlement or extortion shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to three years.

Rüşvet

Madde 252

(Değişik: 2/7/2012-6352/87 md.)
(1) A person who provides a benefit, directly or through intermediaries, to a public official or to another person he designates, in order that he perform or refrain from performing an act related to the performance of his duty, shall be punished by imprisonment from four years to twelve years.
(2) A public official who obtains a benefit, directly or through intermediaries, for himself or for another person he designates, in order that he perform or refrain from performing an act related to the performance of his duty, shall also be punished by the penalty specified in the first paragraph.
(3) Where an agreement on bribery has been reached, a penalty shall be imposed as if the offence were completed.
(4) Where the public official makes a demand for a bribe but it is not accepted by the person, or where the person makes an offer or promise to provide a benefit to the public official but it is not accepted by the public official, the penalty to be imposed on the perpetrator under the provisions of the first and second paragraphs shall be reduced by half.

(5) A person who acts as an intermediary in conveying the bribe offer or demand, securing the bribery agreement or providing the bribe shall be punished as a joint perpetrator, regardless of whether he holds the status of a public official.
(6) A third person to whom a benefit is indirectly provided in the bribery relationship, or an authorized person of a legal entity who accepts the benefit, shall be punished as a joint perpetrator, regardless of whether he holds the status of a public official.
(7) Where the person who accepts or demands a bribe or reaches an agreement in this regard is a person performing judicial duties, an arbitrator, an expert witness, a notary or a certified public accountant, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased from one third to one half.
(8) The provisions of this article shall also apply where a benefit is provided, offered or promised, directly or through intermediaries, to persons acting on behalf of:
a) Professional organizations having the status of a public institution,
b) Companies established with the participation of public institutions or organizations or professional organizations having the status of a public institution,
c) Foundations operating within the structure of public institutions or organizations or professional organizations having the status of a public institution,
d) Associations working for the public benefit,
e) Cooperatives,
f) Publicly held joint stock companies,
regardless of whether they hold the status of a public official, for the purpose of performing or refraining from performing an act related to the performance of their duties; where such benefit is demanded or accepted by these persons; where intermediation is provided to them; or where a benefit is provided to another person by reason of this relationship.
(9) The provisions of this article shall also apply where a benefit is provided, offered or promised, directly or through intermediaries, or where it is demanded or accepted by:
a) Public officials elected or appointed in a foreign state,
b) Judges, jury members or other officials serving in international or supranational courts or in foreign state courts,
c) Members of international or supranational parliaments,
d) Persons carrying out a public activity for a foreign country, including public institutions or public enterprises,
e) Citizen or foreign arbitrators appointed within the framework of arbitration proceedings resorted to for the resolution of a legal dispute,
f) Officials or representatives of international or supranational organizations established on the basis of an international agreement,
for the purpose of performing or refraining from performing an act related to the performance of their duties, or for the purpose of obtaining or maintaining a business or an unlawful benefit by reason of international commercial transactions.
(10) Where a bribery offence falling within the scope of the ninth paragraph is committed abroad by a foreigner, but is committed for the purpose of performing or refraining from performing a dispute or transaction to which a party is:

a) Turkey,
b) A public institution in Turkey,
c) A private law legal entity established under Turkish law,
d) A Turkish citizen,
an investigation and prosecution shall be conducted ex officio in Turkey against the persons who give, offer or promise a bribe; who accept, demand, or accept the offer or promise of a bribe; who act as intermediaries to them; or to whom a benefit is provided by reason of the bribery relationship, if they are found in Turkey.

Tüzel kişiler hakkında güvenlik tedbiri uygulanması

Madde 253

(1) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities for whose benefit an unlawful advantage has been obtained through the commission of the offence of bribery.

Etkin pişmanlık

Madde 254

(1) (Değişik: 2/7/2012-6352/88 md.) Where the person who accepts a bribe delivers the object of the bribe in its original form to the authorities competent to investigate, before the situation is learned by official authorities, no penalty shall be imposed on him for the offence of bribery. Where a public official who has reached an agreement with another person regarding accepting a bribe reports the situation to the competent authorities before the situation is learned by official authorities, no penalty shall be imposed on him for this offence either.
(2) (Değişik: 2/7/2012-6352/88 md.) Where a person who gives a bribe or reaches an agreement with a public official in this regard notifies the competent authorities of the situation out of remorse, before the situation is learned by official authorities, no penalty shall be imposed on him for the offence of bribery.
(3) (Değişik: 2/7/2012-6352/88 md.) Where other persons participating in the offence of bribery notify the competent authorities of the situation out of remorse, before the situation is learned by official authorities, no penalty shall be imposed on them for this offence.
(4) (Ek: 26/6/2009 – 5918/4 md.) The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons who give bribes to foreign public officials.

Nüfuz ticareti92

Article 255

(Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 89)
(1) A person who, by claiming to have influence over a public official, directly or through intermediaries, provides benefit to himself or another for the purpose of undertaking to have an unlawful matter accomplished, shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days. If the person is a public official, the imprisonment sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half. A person who provides benefit in return for having his matter accomplished or in expectation of its accomplishment shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.

92 This article heading was "Obtaining benefit for a matter for which one is not authorized", and was amended as incorporated into the text by Article 89 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012.

(2) Even if an agreement is reached regarding the provision of benefit, a penalty shall be imposed as if the offense were completed.
(3) In cases where a benefit is demanded for the purpose specified in the first paragraph but is not accepted, or where a benefit is offered or promised but is not accepted, the penalty to be imposed according to the first paragraph provision shall be reduced by half.
(4) A person who acts as an intermediary in the offense of influence peddling shall be punished as a joint principal with the penalty specified in the first paragraph.
(5) Third-party natural persons or officials of legal persons who accept benefits who are indirectly provided benefit in the influence peddling relationship shall be punished as joint principals with the penalty specified in the first paragraph.
(6) In cases where undertaking to have the matter accomplished constitutes an independent offense, persons shall additionally be punished for this offense.
(7) The provisions of this article shall also apply in cases where influence peddling is conducted over the persons enumerated in the ninth paragraph of Article 252. Regarding these persons, if they are in Turkey, investigation and prosecution shall be conducted ex officio regardless of whether they are citizens or foreigners.

Exceeding the limit regarding the authority to use force

Article 256

(1) Where a public official with authority to use force uses force against persons beyond the measure required by his duty while performing his duty, the provisions regarding the offense of intentional injury shall apply.

Abuse of office93

Article 257

(1) A public official who, apart from cases separately defined as offenses in the law, by acting contrary to the requirements of his duty, causes victimization of persons or harm to the public or provides an unlawful benefit to persons, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) A public official who, apart from cases separately defined as offenses in the law, by showing negligence or delay in performing the requirements of his duty, causes victimization of persons or harm to the public or provides an unlawful benefit to persons, shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to one year.
(3) (Repealed: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 105)

93 By Article 1 of Law No. 6086 dated 8/12/2010, the expressions "gain" in the first and second paragraphs of this article were changed to "benefit", the expression "from one year to three years" in the first paragraph was changed to "from six months to two years", the expression "from six months to two years" in the second paragraph was changed to "from three months to one year", and the expression "according to the first paragraph provision" in the third paragraph was changed to "with imprisonment from one year to three years and a judicial fine of up to five thousand days" and incorporated into the text.

Disclosure of official secrets

Article 258

(1) A public official who discloses or publishes documents, decisions and orders and other notifications given to him by reason of his duty or of which he gained knowledge for the same reason and which must remain confidential, or who in any manner facilitates others' acquisition of knowledge thereof, shall be given imprisonment from one year to four years.
(2) A person who commits the acts specified in the first paragraph after his public official status has ended shall also be given the same penalty.

Trading by a public official

Article 259

(1) A public official who, by taking advantage of the influence provided by the duty he performs, attempts to sell goods or services to another person, shall be punished with imprisonment of up to six months or a judicial fine.

Abandonment or non-performance of public duty

Article 260

(1) Each of the public officials who unlawfully and collectively abandon their duties, do not come to their duties, do not perform their duties partially or completely even temporarily, or slow down their duties, shall be given imprisonment from three months to one year. If the number of public officials does not exceed three, no penalty shall be imposed.
(2) In cases where public officials temporarily and briefly stop work or slow down in a manner that will not disrupt service, in relation to their professional and social rights, a reduction may be made in the penalty to be imposed or no penalty may be imposed.

Irregular disposition over persons' property

Article 261

(1) A public official who, knowing that it is contrary to the conditions determined in the relevant laws, forcibly disposes of persons' movable or immovable property, even if by paying compensation, shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years, provided that the act does not constitute an offense requiring a heavier penalty.

Irregular assumption of public duty

Article 262

(1) A person who attempts to perform a public duty contrary to laws and regulations or who continues the duty although an order to leave has been communicated to him shall be given imprisonment from three months to two years.

Educational institution contrary to law

Article 263 – (Repealed – 17/4/2013-6460/Article 13)

Irregular use of special insignia and uniforms

Article 264

(1) A person who, without authorization, publicly and in a manner to mislead others, wears the official uniform of a rank or public duty or profession, or who wears decorations or medals to which he is not entitled, shall be given imprisonment from three months to one year.

(2) If an offense is committed by taking advantage of the facilities and opportunities that the uniform will provide, only for this act the penalties specified in the above paragraph shall be imposed with an increase of one-third.

Resisting to prevent performance of duty

Article 265

(1) A person who uses force or threat against a public official for the purpose of preventing him from performing his duty shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to three years.
(2) If the offense is committed against persons performing judicial duties, imprisonment from two years to four years shall be imposed.
(3) If the offense is committed by the person rendering himself unrecognizable or by more than one person together, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one-third.
(4) If the offense is committed with a weapon or by taking advantage of the intimidating power created by existing or supposed criminal organizations, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(5) If the aggravated forms of the offense of intentional injury due to the result occur during the commission of this offense, the provisions regarding the offense of intentional injury shall additionally apply.

Using tools and equipment belonging to public duty in an offense

Article 266

(1) Regarding a public official who uses tools and equipment he holds as required by his duty during the commission of an offense, if the public official status is not essentially taken into account in the definition of the relevant offense, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one-third.

SECOND PART
Offenses Against the Judiciary
False accusation

Article 267

(1) A person who, by reporting or filing a complaint with the competent authorities or through the press and media, imputes an unlawful act to someone in order to cause an investigation or prosecution to be initiated against them or to cause an administrative sanction to be applied, knowing that they did not commit it, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to four years.
(2) If the defamation is committed by fabricating the material evidence and proof of the act, the penalty shall be increased by half.
(3) If a protective measure other than detention or arrest has been applied against the victim due to this act, where an acquittal decision or a decision of no grounds for prosecution has been rendered on the grounds that they did not commit the imputed act, the penalty to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(4) If the victim, in respect of whom an acquittal decision or a decision of no grounds for prosecution has been rendered on the grounds that they did not commit the imputed act, has been detained or arrested due to this act; the defamer shall also be held responsible as an indirect perpetrator according to the provisions concerning the offense of deprivation of liberty.

(5) In case of the victim's conviction to aggravated life imprisonment or life imprisonment, imprisonment from twenty years to thirty years; (…)94 shall be imposed.(91)
(6) If the execution of the imprisonment sentence to which the victim has been convicted has commenced, the penalty to be given according to the fifth paragraph shall be increased by half.
(7) (Annulled: By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 17/11/2011 and numbered E.: 2010/115,
K.: 2011/154.)95
(8) The statute of limitations for prosecution for the offense of defamation begins from the date on which it is established that the victim did not commit the act.
(9) The conviction decision given for the offense of defamation committed through the press and media shall be announced through the same or equivalent press and media organ. The announcement costs shall be collected from the convict.

Use of another person's identity or identity information

Article 268

(1) A person who uses another person's identity or identity information in order to prevent an investigation and prosecution being conducted against themselves due to the offense they committed shall be punished according to the provisions concerning the offense of defamation.96

Effective remorse

Article 269

(1) If the defamer withdraws from their defamation before a judicial or administrative investigation is initiated against the victim, four-fifths of the penalty to be given for the offense of defamation shall be reduced.
(2) In case of withdrawal from defamation before prosecution is initiated against the victim, three-fourths of the penalty to be given for the offense of defamation shall be reduced.
(3) If effective remorse:
a) Occurs before the judgment against the victim, two-thirds of the penalty to be given,
b) Occurs after the victim's conviction, half of the penalty to be given,
c) Occurs after the execution of the imposed sentence has commenced, one-third of the penalty to be given, may be reduced.
(4) With respect to the act requiring the application of an exclusively administrative sanction that constitutes the subject of the defamation:
a) If effective remorse is shown before a decision on the administrative sanction is made, half of the penalty to be given,
b) If effective remorse is shown after the administrative sanction is applied, one-third of the penalty to be given,
may be reduced.

94 The section of this paragraph reading "…imprisonment for a term, imprisonment for two-thirds of the sentence imposed…" was annulled by the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 10/4/2013 and numbered E.: 2013/14,
K.: 2013/56.
95 The said Decision entered into force one year after the date of 17/3/2012 when it was published in the Official Gazette.
96 The phrase "this person" appearing in this paragraph was amended to read "another person" by Article 30 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and has been incorporated into the text.

(5) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/31 art.) In order to benefit from the provisions of effective remorse for defamation committed through the press and media, this must be published by the same method.

Assuming guilt for an offense

Article 270

(1) A person who informs the competent authorities, contrary to the truth, that they committed an offense or participated in an offense shall be given imprisonment up to two years. If this offense is committed for the purpose of saving an ascendant, descendant, spouse or sibling from punishment; three-fourths of the penalty to be given may be reduced or may be completely eliminated.

Fabricating an offense

Article 271

(1) A person who reports an offense they know was not committed to the competent authorities as if it had been committed, or who fabricates evidence or indications of an offense that was not committed in a manner to cause an investigation to be conducted, shall be given imprisonment up to three years.

False testimony

Article 272

(1) A person who testifies falsely before a person or board authorized to hear witnesses within the scope of an investigation initiated due to an unlawful act shall be given imprisonment from four months to one year.
(2) A person who testifies falsely in the presence of a court or before a person or board legally authorized to hear witnesses by administering an oath shall be given imprisonment from one year to three years.
(3) A person who gives false testimony within the scope of an investigation or prosecution of an offense requiring imprisonment of more than three years shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to four years.
(4) If a protective measure other than detention and arrest has been applied in relation to the person against whom testimony was given, provided that an acquittal decision or a decision of no grounds for prosecution has been rendered on the grounds that they did not commit the imputed act, the penalty to be given according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.
(5) In case of detention or arrest of the person against whom testimony was given; provided that an acquittal decision or a decision of no grounds for prosecution has been rendered on the grounds that they did not commit the imputed act; the person who gave false testimony shall also be held responsible as an indirect perpetrator according to the provisions concerning the offense of deprivation of liberty.
(6) In case of the conviction of the person against whom testimony was given to aggravated life imprisonment or life imprisonment, imprisonment from twenty years to thirty years; (…)97 shall be imposed.(94)

97 By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 14/1/2015 and numbered E:2014/116, K:2015/4, the phrase "…imprisonment for a term, imprisonment for two-thirds of the sentence imposed…" appearing in this subparagraph was annulled, and the said Decision entered into force six months after the date of 29/4/2015 when it was published in the Official Gazette.

(7) If the execution of the imprisonment sentence to which the person against whom testimony was given has been convicted has commenced, the penalty to be given according to the sixth paragraph shall be increased by half.
(8) If a judicial or administrative sanction other than imprisonment has been applied against the person against whom testimony was given; the person who gave false testimony shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years.

Personal grounds for exemption from punishment or reduction of penalty Article 273- (1) If a person:
a) Gives false testimony regarding a matter that may cause themselves, their ascendant, descendant, spouse or sibling to be subjected to investigation and prosecution,
b) Testifies falsely without being reminded of this right, despite having the right to refrain from testifying,
A reduction may be made in the penalty to be given, or punishment may be waived.
(2) The provision of the first paragraph shall not apply in cases of false testimony given within the scope of private law disputes.

Effective remorse

Article 274

(1) If the truth is told before a decision of a nature to result in a restriction or deprivation of rights is made or before judgment against the person against whom testimony was given, no penalty shall be imposed.
(2) If the truth is told after a decision of a nature to result in a restriction or deprivation of rights is made against the person against whom testimony was given but before judgment, from two-thirds to half of the penalty to be given may be reduced.
(3) If the truth is told before the conviction decision rendered against the person against whom testimony was given becomes final, from half to one-third of the penalty to be given may be reduced.

False oath

Article 275

(1) A plaintiff or defendant who commits perjury in civil cases shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years.
(2) If the truth is told before a judgment is rendered on the case, no penalty shall be imposed.
(3) If the truth is told before the execution or finalization of the judgment, half of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced.

False expert opinion or interpretation98

Article 276

(1) In case an expert appointed by judicial authorities or persons or bodies authorized by law to conduct investigations into crimes or to hear witnesses under oath provides an opinion contrary to the truth, imprisonment from three years to seven years shall be imposed.

98 By Article 41 of Law No. 6754 dated 3/11/2016, the phrase "from one year to three years" in the first paragraph of this article was amended to read "from three years to seven years".

(2) In case an interpreter appointed by the persons or bodies specified in the first paragraph translates statements or documents contrary to the truth, the provision of the first paragraph shall apply.

Attempt to influence a person performing judicial duties, an expert or a witness99 Article 277- (Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/90art.)
(1) In a pending case, a person who unlawfully attempts to influence a person performing judicial duties, an expert or a witness in order to prevent the emergence of the truth or to create an injustice, so that they render a decision or perform an act or make a statement that will produce a result in favor of or against one of the parties to the case, (…)(97) the accused, the intervening party or the victim, shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to four years. (Additional sentence: 18/6/2014-6545/69 art.) If the attempt does not exceed the degree of favoritism, the penalty to be imposed shall be from six months to two years.(97)
(2) In case the act constituting the offense in the first paragraph also constitutes another offense, the penalty to be imposed according to the provisions of ideal concurrence shall be increased by up to half.

Failure to report a crime

Article 278

(Annulled: By the Decision of the Constitutional Court dated 30/6/2011 and numbered E.:2010/52,
K.:2011/113.; Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/91 art.)
(1) A person who fails to report a crime being committed to the competent authorities shall be punished with imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) A person who fails to report to the competent authorities a crime that has been committed but whose consequences can still be limited shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph.
(3) If the victim is a child who has not completed fifteen years of age, a person who is physically or mentally disabled, or a person who is unable to defend herself due to pregnancy, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased by half.101
(4) No penalty shall be imposed on persons who may refrain from testifying. However, provisions regarding criminal liability due to the existence of an obligation to prevent the crime are reserved.

Failure of a public official to report a crime

Article 279

(1) A public official who learns in connection with his duty that a crime requiring investigation and prosecution in the name of the public has been committed and neglects to notify the competent authorities or shows delay in this matter shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.

99 This article heading was "Influencing a person performing judicial duties" and was amended as incorporated into the text by Article 90 of Law No. 6352 dated 2/7/2012.
100 By Article 69 of Law No. 6545 dated 18/6/2014, the phrases "or in an ongoing investigation," and "suspect or" in this paragraph were removed from the article text.
101 By Article 1 of Law No. 6462 dated 25/4/2013, the phrase "özürlü" in this paragraph was amended to read "engelli".

(2) If the crime is committed by a person performing judicial law enforcement duties, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraph shall be increased by half.

Failure of health professionals to report a crime

Article 280

(1) A health professional who, despite encountering an indication that a crime has been committed while performing his duty, fails to notify the competent authorities or shows delay in this matter shall be punished with imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) The term health professional means physicians, dentists, pharmacists, midwives, nurses and other persons providing health services.

Destroying, concealing or altering evidence of a crime

Article 281

(1) A person who, with the aim of preventing the emergence of the truth, destroys, erases, conceals, alters or corrupts evidence of a crime shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to five years. No penalty shall be imposed on a person according to the provision of this paragraph in relation to a crime he himself committed or participated in its commission.
(2) If this crime is committed by a public official in connection with his duty, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(3) Four-fifths of the penalty to be imposed for the crime defined in this article shall be reduced for a person who delivers the concealed evidence to the court before a judgment is rendered due to the crime to which it relates.

Laundering property values derived from crime102

Article 282

(1) (Amended: 26/6/2009 – 5918/5 art.) A person who takes property values derived from a crime requiring a minimum imprisonment sentence of six months or more out of the country, or subjects them to various transactions with the intent to conceal their illicit source or to create the impression that they were obtained by legitimate means, shall be punished with imprisonment from three years to seven years and a judicial fine of up to twenty thousand days.
(2) (Added: 26/6/2009 – 5918/5 art.) A person who, without participating in the commission of the crime in the first paragraph, purchases, accepts, possesses or uses the property value constituting the subject of this crime, knowing this characteristic, shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years.(99)
(3) If this crime is committed by a public official or by a person with a certain profession during the practice of this profession, the imprisonment sentence to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(4) If this crime is committed within the framework of the activity of an organization established to commit crimes, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.
(5) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities due to the commission of this crime.

102 By Article 5 of Law No. 5918 dated 26/6/2009, a second paragraph was added to follow the first paragraph and the other paragraphs were sequenced accordingly.

(6) No penalty shall be imposed for the crime defined in this article on a person who, before prosecution begins for this crime, ensures the seizure of the property values that are the subject of the crime or facilitates their seizure by informing the competent authorities of their location.

Harboring a criminal

Article 283

(1) A person who provides means for a person who has committed a crime to escape investigation, apprehension, arrest or execution of the sentence shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to five years.
(2) If this crime is committed by a public official in connection with his duty, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(3) If this crime is committed by an ascendant, descendant, spouse, sibling or other accomplice, no penalty shall be imposed.

Failure to report a detainee, convict or evidence of a crime

Article 284

(1) A person who, despite knowing the location of a person for whom an arrest warrant has been issued or a convict, fails to notify the competent authorities shall be punished with imprisonment for up to one year.
(2) A person who, despite knowing the location where evidence and traces of a crime that has been committed are hidden by others, fails to notify the competent authorities shall be punished according to the provision of the above paragraph.
(3) If these crimes are committed by a public official in connection with his duty, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(4) If these crimes are committed by an ascendant, descendant, spouse or sibling, no penalty shall be imposed.

Violation of confidentiality

Article 285

(1) (Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 92)
(1) A person who publicly violates the confidentiality of an investigation shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years or a judicial fine. For this crime to be committed;
a) The disclosure of the content of an act performed during the investigation stage must violate the right to benefit from the presumption of innocence or the confidentiality of communication or the confidentiality of private life,
b) The disclosure regarding the content of an act performed during the investigation stage must be capable of preventing the revelation of the material truth,
is required.
(2) A person who violates the confidentiality of decisions taken during the investigation stage that must be kept secret from the parties to the investigation and acts performed as a consequence thereof shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years or a judicial fine.

(3) A person who publicly violates the confidentiality of statements or images in a hearing that is required by law to be held in closed session or decided to be held in closed session shall be punished according to the provision of the first paragraph. However, for this crime to be committed, publicity is not required in terms of violation of a confidentiality decision taken regarding the protection of a witness.
(4) If the crimes defined in the above paragraphs are committed by a public official by taking advantage of the facilities provided by their duty, the penalty shall be increased up to one half.
(5) If images of persons are published in a manner that would lead to their perception as guilty during the investigation and prosecution stage, imprisonment from six months to two years shall be imposed.
(6) Making investigation and prosecution proceedings the subject of news without exceeding the limits of reporting does not constitute a crime.

Recording of sounds or images

Article 286

(1) A person who unauthorizedly records or transmits sounds or images during investigation and prosecution proceedings shall be punished with imprisonment up to six months.

Genital examination

Article 287

(1) A perpetrator who sends a person for genital examination or performs this examination without the decision of an authorized judge or prosecutor shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to one year.
(2) The provision of the above paragraph does not apply to examinations performed in accordance with the provisions stipulated in laws and regulations for the purpose of protecting public health due to contagious diseases.103

Attempt to influence fair trial Article 288- (Amended: 2/7/2012-6352/Article 93)
(1) A person who makes a public oral or written statement with the aim of unlawfully influencing a person performing judicial duties, an expert or a witness to make an unlawful decision or perform an act or make a false statement in a case being heard or an investigation being conducted shall be punished with a judicial fine of not less than fifty days.

Abuse of custody duty

Article 289

(1) A person who disposes of property that has been officially delivered to them for custody and is pledged or seized or confiscated for any reason, for purposes other than delivery, shall be punished with imprisonment from three months to two years and a judicial fine up to three thousand days. If the person is the owner of this property, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced by half.

103 By Article 156 of Decree Law No. 700 dated 2/7/2018, the phrase "regulations" in this paragraph was changed to "executive regulations".

(2) Four-fifths of the penalties to be imposed on a person who returns the property constituting the subject of the crime defined in the first paragraph before prosecution begins or, if this is not possible, pays its value shall be reduced.
(3) A person who causes the loss or deterioration of pledged or seized property or property confiscated for any reason that has been officially delivered to them for custody due to acting contrary to their duty of care and diligence shall be punished with a judicial fine.
(4) A person who uses property confiscated within the scope of an investigation or prosecution related to a crime for purposes other than its intended purpose shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year.

Seizure and deterioration of officially delivered property

Article 290

(1) A person who reseizes immovable property that has been delivered to rightful owners by court order shall be given imprisonment from three months to one year.
(2) If movable property that has been officially delivered to another person for custody and is pledged or seized or confiscated for any reason is taken from this person without their consent, the provisions regarding theft shall apply; if taken by force, the provisions regarding robbery shall apply; if taken by deception, the provisions regarding fraud shall apply; if destroyed, the provisions regarding damage to property shall apply. If the person is the owner of this property, from one half to three-quarters of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced.

Entering a penal institution or detention house in place of another

Article 291

(1) A person who enters a penal institution or detention house by putting themselves in place of a convict or detainee shall be given imprisonment from six months to two years.

Escape of convict or detainee

Article 292

(1) A detainee or convict who escapes from a detention house, penal institution or from the hands of officials under whose supervision they are shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to one year.
(2) If this crime is committed by using force or threat, imprisonment from one year to three years shall be imposed.
(3) If this crime is committed while armed or jointly by more than one detainee or convict, the penalty to be imposed according to the above paragraphs shall be increased up to double.
(4) If aggravated forms of the crime of intentional injury due to consequence or the crime of intentional killing occur during the commission of this crime, or if damage is caused to property, a penalty shall also be imposed according to the provisions regarding these crimes.
(5) The provisions written in this article also apply to convicts employed outside penal institutions and those whose imprisonment has been converted from a judicial fine.
(6) (Repealed: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 33)

Effective remorse

Article 293

(1) (...)104 If a detainee or convict shows effective remorse after escaping and surrenders voluntarily, from five-sixths to one-sixth of the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced, taking into account the period elapsed from the day of escape to the day surrender is realized. However, if the escape period exceeds six months, no reduction in penalty shall be made.(101)

Providing opportunity to escape

Article 294

(1) A person who enables the escape of a person taken into custody or a detainee shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) A person who enables the escape of a convict shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years according to the duration of the imprisonment to be served. However, if the convict's sentence is;
a) Life imprisonment, from five years to eight years,
b) Aggravated life imprisonment, from eight years to twelve years, Imprisonment shall be imposed.
(3) If these crimes are committed by using force or threat, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one-third.
(4) If the number of persons whose escape is enabled is more than one, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased from one-third to double, taking this number into account.
(5) If these crimes are committed by persons assigned with the custody or transfer of the person taken into custody, detainee or convict, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one-third.
(6) If these crimes are committed by an ascendant, descendant, spouse or sibling, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced by one-third.
(7) If aggravated forms of the crime of intentional injury due to consequence or the crime of intentional killing occur during the commission of these crimes, or if damage is caused to property, a penalty shall also be imposed according to the provisions regarding these crimes.
(8) If a person taken into custody, a detainee or convict escapes by taking advantage of the person assigned with their custody or transfer acting contrary to their duty of care and diligence, imprisonment from six months to three years shall be imposed.

Abuse of duty by guard

Article 295

(1) If persons charged with the custody or transport of a detained person, arrested person or convict act contrary to the requirements of their duties, the provisions concerning the offense of abuse of office shall apply.
(2) If a person charged with custody or transport permits a detained person, arrested person or convict to temporarily leave the place where they are held, contrary to the requirements of their duty; they shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(3) If the detained person, arrested person or convict escapes by taking advantage of this opportunity, the provisions concerning the offense of intentionally providing opportunity for escape shall apply.

104 The phrase "detained person," which appeared here, was removed from the text of the article by Article 34 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005.

Insurrection of convicts or arrested persons

Article 296

(1) In case of collective insurrection by convicts or arrested persons, each of them shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to three years. If the number of convicts or arrested persons does not exceed three, no punishment shall be imposed for this offense.
(2) If other offenses are committed during the insurrection, punishment shall also be imposed according to the provisions concerning those offenses.

Bringing prohibited items into a penal institution or detention facility

Article 297

(1) A person who brings into or possesses in a penal institution or detention facility weapons, narcotics or stimulants or electronic communication devices shall be punished with imprisonment from two years to five years. If the procurement or possession of the items constituting the subject matter of this offense constitutes a separate offense; the penalty to be determined according to the provisions on ideal concurrence shall be increased by half.
(2) (Annulled: By the Constitutional Court's Decision dated 7/7/2011 and numbered E.:2010/69, K.:2011/116.; Re-regulation: 24/11/2016-6763/Article 20) Outside the scope of the first paragraph;
a) All kinds of tools and materials facilitating escape,
b) All kinds of offensive and defensive weapons and materials suitable for starting fires,
c) All kinds of beverages containing alcohol,
d) Items and materials enabling gambling,
e) Without prejudice to the offenses defined in Article 188, prescription-only medicines,
f) Except those taken for examination by the institution administration, publications, posters, banners, pictures, symbols, signs, documents and similar materials prohibited by courts or representing criminal organizations, and organizational communication tools,
g) Except those permitted by competent authorities, devices suitable for recording sound and images,
a person who brings into, possesses in or uses in a penal institution or detention facility
shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(3) If the offenses defined in the first and second paragraphs are committed by persons charged with the custody of convicts or arrested persons, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one fold.
(4) If a convict or arrested person who possesses or uses items constituting the subject matter of the offenses defined in the first and second paragraphs provides information about from whom and by what means they obtained them, the penalty to be imposed shall be reduced by half.

Preventing the exercise of rights and nutrition

Article 298

(1) Those who in any manner prevent convicts and arrested persons in penal institutions and detention facilities from communicating, meeting with their visitors, participating in education and sports, vocational training and workshop activities and other social and cultural activities within the framework of rehabilitation and education programs, being examined and treated by the institution physician, appointing a legal counsel or lawyer, meeting with them, going to courts or Chief Public Prosecutor's Offices, meeting with institution officials, those released from leaving the institution, those who incite convicts and arrested persons to these acts, those who give instructions in this direction, those who prevent any other kind of meeting and contact opportunity that the legislation grants to convicts and arrested persons, shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) Those who prevent the nutrition of convicts and arrested persons shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to four years. Inciting or persuading convicts and arrested persons to go on hunger strike or death fast or giving them instructions in this direction shall also be considered as preventing nutrition.
(3) If one of the aggravated forms of the offense of intentional injury due to consequence or death has occurred as a result of preventing nutrition, punishment shall also be imposed according to the provisions concerning the offenses of intentional injury or intentional killing.

THIRD PART
Offenses Against the Symbols of State Sovereignty and the Dignity of Its Organs Insult to the President

Article 299

(1) A person who insults the President shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to four years.
(2) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 35) If the offense is committed publicly, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one sixth.
(3) Prosecution for this offense is subject to the permission of the Minister of Justice.

Degrading the symbols of state sovereignty

Article 300

(1) A person who degrades the Turkish Flag by tearing, burning or otherwise and publicly shall be punished with imprisonment from one year to three years. This provision shall apply to all kinds of signs bearing the characteristics of the white crescent and star red flag determined in the Constitution and used as a symbol of sovereignty of the Republic of Turkey.
(2) A person who publicly degrades the National Anthem shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.
(3) If the offenses defined in this article are committed by a Turkish citizen in a foreign country, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by one third.

Degrading the Turkish Nation, the State of the Republic of Turkey, the institutions and organs of the State105

Article 301

(Amended: 30/4/2008-5759/Article 1)
(1) A person who publicly degrades the Turkish Nation, the State of the Republic of Turkey, the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the judicial organs of the State shall be punished with imprisonment from six months to two years.

105 By Article 1 of Law No. 5759 dated 30/4/2008, this article heading was changed from "Degrading Turkishness, the Republic, the institutions and organs of the State" to the form incorporated in the text.

(2) A person who publicly degrades the military or security organizations of the State shall be punished according to the provision of the first paragraph.
(3) Expression of thoughts made for the purpose of criticism does not constitute an offense.
(4) Conducting an investigation for this offense is subject to the permission of the Minister of Justice.

FOURTH PART
Offenses Against the Security of the State Disrupting the unity and territorial integrity of the State

Article 302

(1) (Amended: 29/6/2005 – 5377/Article 36) A person who commits an act aimed at placing all or part of the State territory under the sovereignty of a foreign state or weakening the independence of the State or disrupting its unity or separating a part of the territories under the sovereignty of the State from the State administration shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.
(2) If other offenses are committed during the commission of this offense, punishment shall also be imposed according to the relevant provisions for those offenses.
(3) Security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities in connection with the commission of the offenses defined in this article.

Collaborating with the enemy

Article 303

(1) A citizen who accepts service in the army of a state at war with the State of the Republic of Turkey, who enters into armed struggle against the State of the Republic of Turkey on the side of the enemy state, shall be punished with life imprisonment.
(2) A citizen who assumes any command duty in the enemy state army shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.
(3) If other offenses are committed during the commission of the offenses defined in the first and second paragraphs, punishment shall also be imposed according to the relevant provisions for those offenses.
(4) A citizen who is in the territory of the enemy state during wartime and is obliged to be taken into service in the army of that state shall not be punished for this reason.

Incitement to war against the State

Article 304

(1) A person who incites foreign state authorities to wage war against or engage in hostile acts against the State of the Republic of Turkey, or who cooperates with foreign state authorities for this purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment from ten to twenty years. (Repealed second sentence: 29/6/2005 – Law No. 5377/Art. 37)
(2) In the application of this article, direct or indirect support of organizations established to commit crimes against the security of the State of the Republic of Turkey shall be considered a hostile act.
(3) In respect of the commission of the crime defined in this article, security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities.

Obtaining benefit to engage in activities against fundamental national interests106

Article 305

(1) (Amended paragraph: 29/6/2005 – Law No. 5377/Art. 38) A citizen or a foreigner in Turkey who obtains material benefit directly or indirectly from foreign persons or organizations for himself or for another, with the purpose of committing acts against fundamental national interests or for this reason, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three to ten years and a judicial fine of up to ten thousand days. The same penalty shall be imposed on the person who provides or promises the benefit.
(2) (Amended paragraph: 29/6/2005 – Law No. 5377/Art. 38) If the act is committed during wartime, the penalty to be imposed shall be increased by half.
(3) If the crime is committed outside a state of war, prosecution for this reason shall be subject to the permission of the Minister of Justice.
(4) The term fundamental national interests means independence, territorial integrity, national security and the fundamental characteristics of the Republic as specified in the Constitution.

Recruiting soldiers against a foreign state

Article 306

(1) A person who, without authorization, recruits soldiers against a foreign state or engages in other hostile acts in a manner that places the State of Turkey in danger of war, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five to twelve years.
(2) If war occurs as a result of the act, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to life imprisonment.
(3) If the act is only of a nature to disrupt political relations with the foreign state or to place the State of Turkey or Turkish citizens in danger of retaliation, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two to eight years.
(4) If political relations are severed or retaliation occurs, imprisonment from three to ten years shall be imposed.
(5) Prosecution of the crime specified in this article shall be subject to the permission of the Minister of Justice.
(6) The provisions of this article shall not apply to legitimate defense-oriented resistance movements against foreign state forces occupying all or part of the country's territory in an actual state of war.

Destruction of military installations and agreement for the benefit of enemy military operations

Article 307

(1) A person who partially or completely destroys, or renders unusable even temporarily, land, sea and air transportation vehicles, roads, establishments, depots and other military installations belonging to or placed in the service of the State's armed forces, even if they have not yet been completed, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six to twelve years.
(2) If the crime:
a) Has been committed in the interest of a state at war with Turkey,

106 The title of this article was "Acting against fundamental national interests" and was amended to "Obtaining benefit to engage in activities against fundamental national interests" by Article 38 of Law No. 5377 dated 29/6/2005 and incorporated into the text.

b) Has endangered the State's war preparations or war power and capability or military operations,
aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.
(3) If the destruction or rendering unusable has occurred as a result of the negligence of the person holding or obliged to protect and supervise the building, installation or property specified in the first paragraph, or if the commission of the crime has been facilitated for this reason, this person shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one to five years.
(4) A person who, in wartime, to the detriment of the State of Turkey, makes an agreement with a foreigner with the purpose of facilitating enemy military operations or harming the military operations of the State of Turkey, or who commits acts aimed at producing the same results even without an agreement, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.
(5) If, as a result of the act defined in the fourth paragraph, enemy military operations have actually been facilitated or the military operations of the Turkish State have been harmed, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.
(6) The foreigner who makes an agreement with the person committing the crimes specified in paragraphs four and five shall also be given the same penalty.
(7) The provisions of this article shall also apply if the acts specified in the above paragraphs are committed in Turkey to the detriment of a state with which the State of Turkey has an alliance or participation for war.

Material and financial assistance to an enemy state

Article 308

(1) A citizen who gives, reciprocally or unilaterally, directly or indirectly, any kind of goods that can be used against the State of the Republic of Turkey in war to the state with which the State of the Republic of Turkey is at war, shall be punished with imprisonment from five to fifteen years. This provision shall also apply to a foreigner residing in Turkey.
(2) The same penalty shall be given to a citizen or a foreigner residing in Turkey who participates in borrowings made for the benefit of the enemy state in wartime or in payments for whatever reason, or who facilitates transactions related to them.
(3) Apart from the cases specified in the first paragraph, even if it began before the war, a citizen or a foreigner residing in Turkey who trades directly or indirectly with citizens of the enemy state or other persons residing in the territory of the enemy state, wherever they may be, to the detriment of the State of Turkey or in a manner that will have a positive effect on the war power of the enemy state, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two to five years and a judicial fine of up to ten thousand days.
(4) The provisions of this article shall also apply if the acts specified in the above paragraphs are committed for the benefit of a state with which there is an alliance or participation for war with the enemy state.

PART FIVE
Crimes Against the Constitutional Order and the Functioning of This Order Violation of the Constitution

Article 309

(1) Those who attempt to abolish the order envisaged by the Constitution of the Republic of Turkey, or to introduce another order in place of this order, or to prevent the actual implementation of this order by using force and violence, shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.
(2) If other crimes are committed during the commission of this crime, a penalty shall also be imposed separately for these crimes according to the relevant provisions.
(3) In respect of the commission of the crimes defined in this article, security measures specific to legal entities shall be imposed on legal entities.

Assassination and actual assault on the President

Article 310

(1) A person who commits an assassination against the President shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment. If this act is attempted, a penalty shall be imposed as if the crime were completed.
(2) A person who commits other actual assaults against the President shall be sentenced to the penalty related to the relevant crime increased by half. However, the penalty to be given in this manner cannot be less than five years.

Crime against the legislative body

Article 311

(1) Those who attempt to abolish the Grand National Assembly of Turkey or to prevent the Grand National Assembly of Turkey from performing its duties partially or completely by using force and violence shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.
(2) If other crimes are committed during the commission of this crime, a penalty shall also be imposed separately for these crimes according to the relevant provisions.

Crime against the Government

Article 312

(1) A person who attempts to abolish the Government of the Republic of Turkey or to prevent it from performing its duties partially or completely by using force and violence shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.
(2) If other crimes are committed during the commission of this crime, a penalty shall also be imposed separately for these crimes according to the relevant provisions.

Armed insurrection against the Government of the Republic of Turkey

Article 313

(1) A person who incites the people to armed insurrection against the Government of the Republic of Turkey shall be sentenced to imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years. If the insurrection is realized, the person who incited it shall be sentenced to imprisonment from twenty years to twenty-five years.
(2) A person who leads an armed insurrection against the Government of the Republic of Turkey shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment. Other persons who participate in the insurrection shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six years to ten years.

(3) If the crimes defined in the first and second paragraphs are committed by taking advantage of the facilities provided by the State being in a state of war, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.
(4) If other crimes are committed during the commission of the crimes defined in the first and second paragraphs, punishment shall also be imposed for these crimes according to the relevant provisions.

Armed organization

Article 314

(1) A person who establishes or leads an armed organization for the purpose of committing the crimes contained in the fourth and fifth chapters of this part shall be punished with imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.
(2) Those who are members of the organization defined in the first paragraph shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years.
(3) Other provisions relating to the crime of establishing an organization for the purpose of committing crimes shall be applied as they are in respect of this crime.

Providing weapons

Article 315

(1) A person who, knowing their purposes, provides, transports or stores weapons to these organizations by manufacturing, purchasing or bringing them into the country for use in the activities of the organizations defined in the above article shall be punished with imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.

Agreement to commit a crime

Article 316

(1) If two or more persons agree in a manner determined by material facts to commit any of the crimes contained in the fourth and fifth chapters of this part by suitable means, imprisonment from three years to twelve years shall be imposed according to the degree of severity of the crimes.
(2) Those who withdraw from this alliance before the intended crime is committed or before an investigation is initiated due to the agreement shall not be punished.

SIXTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against National Defense Usurpation of military commands

Article 317

(1) Those who, although they are not legally authorized or have not been appointed by the State, take command of a military unit or navy or warship or war air fleet or a fortress or fortified position or a military base or facility, a port or city shall be sentenced to life imprisonment.
(2) Those who are commanders of the places indicated above by being legally authorized or being assigned by the State, and who do not comply with the orders given by the competent authorities to abandon the command, shall also be given the same punishment.

Discouraging the people from military service

Article 318

(1) (Amended: 11/4/2013-6459/Article 13) Those who encourage or suggest in a manner that will cause those performing military service to desert or will dissuade those who will participate in military service from performing this service shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to two years.
(2) If the act is committed through the press and broadcasting, the punishment shall be increased by half.

Inciting soldiers to disobedience

Article 319

(1) Those who direct and incite soldiers or other persons working under military administration to disobedience to the laws or to break their oaths or to violate military discipline or their duties relating to military service, and those who praise or say they approve of actions contrary to laws, oaths or discipline or other duties in front of soldiers shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) If the act is committed publicly, imprisonment from two years to five years shall be imposed.
(3) If the act is committed during wartime, the punishment shall be increased by one fold.

Enlisting soldiers for foreign service, being enlisted

Article 320

(1) A person who, without the permission of the Government, enlists soldiers from among citizens or arms citizens to work in the service of a foreigner or foreign State or in their favor within the Country shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to six years.
(2) If there are soldiers or those of military age among those enlisted as soldiers or armed, the punishment shall be increased by one third.
(3) A person who accepts the service in the first paragraph shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.

Non-compliance with orders during wartime

Article 321

(1) A person who knowingly acts contrary to the orders or decisions of the competent authorities and bodies of the State during wartime shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to six years.

Obligations during wartime

Article 322

(1) During wartime, a person who does not fulfill partially or completely the obligations in the contract they have made to do business or provide goods with the State or a public institution or an organization performing public services or providing public needs for the needs of the armed forces of the State or the people shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to ten years and judicial fine up to ten thousand days.
(2) If the partial or complete non-fulfillment of the obligations arises from negligence, up to three-fourths of the punishment may be reduced.
(3) If the partial or complete non-fulfillment of the obligation is caused by intermediaries who have a contract with the principal obligors or their representatives, the same punishments shall also be applied to them.

(4) Those persons mentioned in the above paragraphs who commit fraud in the fulfillment of obligations during wartime shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years and judicial fine up to ten thousand days.

Spreading false news during war

Article 323

(1) A person who, during war, disseminates or transmits false or exaggerated or specially motivated rumors or news in a manner that will cause the public to feel anxiety and excitement or will undermine the morale of the people or will reduce the country's resistance against the enemy, or who engages in any activity that may harm fundamental national interests shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years.
(2) If the act is committed;
a) By propaganda,
b) Directed at soldiers,
c) As a result of an agreement with a foreigner,
The punishment to be imposed shall be imprisonment from ten years to twenty years.
(3) If the act is committed as a result of an agreement with the enemy, life imprisonment shall be imposed.
(4) A person who, during wartime, engages in actions aimed at reducing the value of foreign currencies or affecting the value of public credit papers in a manner that will endanger the nation's resistance against the enemy shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years and judicial fine up to three thousand days.
(5) If the act mentioned in the fourth paragraph is committed as a result of an agreement with a foreigner, the punishment shall be increased by half; if committed as a result of an agreement with the enemy, it shall be increased by one fold.

Neglect of duty related to mobilization

Article 324

(1) A public official who neglects or delays their duties related to mobilization during peacetime shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to three years.

Acceptance of titles and similar ranks from the enemy

Article 325

(1) A citizen who accepts an academic degree or honorary title, decoration and other honorary rank or salary or other benefits pertaining to them from a state at war with Turkey shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.

SEVENTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against State Secrets and Espionage Documents relating to the security of the State

Article 326

(1) A person who partially or completely destroys, demolishes documents or papers relating to the security of the State or its internal or external political interests, or commits forgery on them, or uses them, even temporarily, in a place other than where they were allocated, or obtains or steals them by fraud shall be sentenced to imprisonment from eight years to twelve years.

(2) If the above-mentioned acts are committed during war or have endangered the State's war preparations or war effectiveness or military operations, life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Obtaining information relating to the security of the State

Article 327

(1) A person who obtains information that must remain secret by its nature in terms of the security of the State or its internal or external political interests shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to eight years.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime or endangers the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations, a sentence of life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Political or military espionage

Article 328

(1) A person who obtains information that must remain secret by its nature in terms of the security of the State or its internal or external political interests with the intent of political or military espionage shall be sentenced to imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years.
(2) If the act;
a)	is committed for the benefit of a state at war with Turkey,
b)	is committed during wartime or endangers the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations,
The perpetrator shall be punished with aggravated life imprisonment.

Disclosure of information concerning the security and political interests of the State

Article 329

(1) A person who discloses information that must remain secret by its nature in terms of the security of the State or its internal or external political interests shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years.
(2)	If the act is committed during wartime or endangers the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.
(3)	If the act occurs as a result of the perpetrator's negligence, in the case specified in the first paragraph, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to two years, and in the presence of one of the cases specified in the second paragraph, to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

Disclosure of information that must remain secret

Article 330

(1) A person who discloses information that must remain secret by its nature in terms of the security of the State or its internal or external political interests with the intent of political or military espionage shall be sentenced to life imprisonment.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime or places the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations in danger, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.

International espionage

Article 331

(1) A citizen who obtains information that must remain secret by its nature in terms of the security of a foreign state or its internal or external political interests with the intent of political or military espionage for the benefit of another foreign state, or a foreigner who has obtained this in Turkey, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to four years.

Entering military prohibited zones

Article 332

(1) Those who enter places prohibited from entry for the military interests of the State, secretly or by deception, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from two years to five years.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

Exploiting State secrets, disloyalty in State services

Article 333

(1) A person who uses or causes to be used for his own or another's benefit scientific discoveries or new inventions or industrial innovations that he has learned by reason of his duty and that require secrecy for the security of the State shall be punished with imprisonment from five years to ten years and a judicial fine of up to three thousand days.
(2)	If the act is committed for the benefit of a state at war with Turkey or endangers the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to life imprisonment.
(3)	A person assigned by the Turkish State to perform a specific task belonging to the State in a foreign country, if he does not perform this duty faithfully and damage occurs as a result of this act, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years.
(4)	Those who receive information that the crimes defined in this article will be committed but do not report them to the authorities in time shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to two years, even if the crime remains at the attempt stage.

Obtaining prohibited information

Article 334

(1) A person who obtains information that the competent authorities have prohibited from disclosure according to laws and regulatory acts and that must remain secret by its nature shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to three years.
(2) If the act places the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations in danger, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from five years to ten years.

Obtaining prohibited information with the intent of espionage

Article 335

(1) A person who obtains information that the competent authorities have prohibited from disclosure according to laws and regulatory acts and that must remain secret by its nature with the intent of political or military espionage shall be sentenced to imprisonment from eight years to twelve years.
(2) If the act is committed for the benefit of a state at war with Turkey or places the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations in danger, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to aggravated life imprisonment.

Disclosure of prohibited information

Article 336

(1) A person who discloses information that the competent authorities have prohibited from disclosure according to laws and regulatory acts and that must remain secret by its nature shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to five years.
(2)	If the act is committed during wartime or endangers the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.
(3)	If the act occurs as a result of the perpetrator's negligence, in the case specified in the first paragraph, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to two years, and in the case specified in the second paragraph, to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

Disclosure of prohibited information with the intent of political or military espionage

Article 337

(1) A person who discloses information that the competent authorities have prohibited from disclosure according to laws and regulatory acts and that must remain secret by its nature with the intent of political or military espionage shall be sentenced to imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime or places the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations in danger, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.

Commission of espionage acts as a result of negligence

Article 338

(1) If the commission of the crimes defined in this chapter has been made possible or facilitated as a result of the relevant persons acting contrary to their duty of care and diligence, the negligent perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to three years.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime or places the State's war preparations or war activities or military operations in danger, the negligent perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

Possession of documents related to State security

Article 339

(1) A person who is caught with documents useful for obtaining information that must remain secret in terms of the security of the State or its internal or external political interests or matters that the competent authorities have prohibited from disclosure and that must remain secret by their nature, and for the possession of which no acceptable reason can be shown, or with anything of this nature, shall be sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years.
(2) If the act is committed during wartime, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three years to eight years.

EIGHTH CHAPTER
Crimes Against Relations with Foreign States Crime against a foreign head of state

Article 340

(1) The penalty to be imposed on a person who commits a crime against the head of one of the foreign states shall be increased by one-eighth. If the crime requires a sentence of life imprisonment, aggravated life imprisonment shall be imposed.
(2) If the act is among the crimes whose investigation and prosecution are subject to complaint, the investigation and prosecution are subject to the complaint of the foreign state.

Insult to a foreign state flag

Article 341

(1) A person who publicly insults an officially displayed foreign state flag or other symbols of sovereignty shall be sentenced to imprisonment from three months to one year.
(2) Investigation and prosecution for this crime are subject to the complaint of the relevant state.

Crime against foreign state representatives

Article 342

(1) Foreign state representatives permanently or temporarily assigned in the Republic of Turkey and their diplomatic officers or representatives of international organizations and their officers granted diplomatic privileges and immunities shall be considered public officials with respect to crimes committed against them due to their duties; persons who commit crimes shall be sentenced according to the relevant provisions of this Code.
(2) If the crime committed is insult, investigation and prosecution shall be subject to the complaint of the victim.

Condition of reciprocity

Article 343

(1) The application of the provisions written in this chapter is subject to the condition of reciprocity.

NINTH CHAPTER
Final Provisions Provisional Article 1 – (Added: 11/4/2013-6459/14 art.)
(1)	In cases pending due to the amendment made to Article 235 of this Code by the Law enacting this article, a decision of lack of jurisdiction cannot be rendered.

Entry into force

Article 344- (1) Of this Code;

a)	Article 184 titled "Causing zoning pollution" on the date of publication,
b)	The first paragraph of Article 181 titled "Intentional pollution of the environment" and the first paragraph of Article 182 titled "Negligent pollution of the environment" two years after the date of publication,
c)	Other provisions on June 1, 2005,107 shall enter into force.

Execution

Article 345- (1) The Council of Ministers shall execute the provisions of this Code

107 The phrase "April 1, 2005" in this article has been amended as "June 1, 2005" by Provisional Article 1 of Law No. 5328 dated 31/3/2005 and incorporated into the text.

PROVISIONS THAT CANNOT BE INCORPORATED INTO LAW NO. 5237
1- Provisional Article 1 of Law No. 5560 dated 6/12/2006:
PROVISIONAL ARTICLE 1 – In files that have been adjudicated as of the date this Law enters into force but have not yet become final, a reversal decision cannot be rendered on the grounds that the scope of reconciliation has been expanded.

LIST SHOWING THE ENTRY INTO FORCE DATE OF LEGISLATION ADDING OR AMENDING LAW NO. 5237 OR PROVISIONS ANNULLED BY THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT

Number of the Amending Law/ Annulling Constitutional Court
Decision

Amended or Annulled Articles of Law No. 5237

Entry into Force Date
5328	59, 62, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90,116, 235, 344	31/3/2005
5378	122	7/7/2005

5377	4, 7, 13, 30, 31, 43, 61, 66, 82, 84, 87,
103, 105, 107, 125, 145, 150, 155, 158,
168, 184, 188, 190, 191, 218, 221, 245,
252, 263, 268, 269, 288, 292, 293, 299,
302, 304, 305

8/7/2005
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 23/11/2005 and E.: 2005/103,
K.:
2005/89

104

25/2/2006
5560	61,73,80,87,89,142,191,221,227,234,245
and Provision That Cannot Be Incorporated	19/12/2006
5739	50	1/3/2008
5759	301	8/5/2008
5841	154	14/3/2009
5918	13, 55, 165, 254, 282	9/7/2009
6008	79	25/7/2010
6086	257	19/12/2010

Number of the Amending Law/ Annulling Constitutional Court
Decision

Amended or Annulled Articles of Law No. 5237

Entry into Force Date
6217	191	14/4/2011
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 7/7/2011 and E.:2010/69,
K.:2011/116

297

21/4/2011
Constitutional Court's decision dated 30/6/2011 and E.:2010/52,
K.:2011/113

278

15/10/2011

6352	132, 133, 134, 141, 142, 163, 168, 220,
250, 252, 254, 255,257, 277, 278, 285,
288
5/7/2012
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 17/11/2011 and E.: 2010/115,
K.:
2011/154

Seventh paragraph of Article 267

17/3/2013
6456	158	18/4/2013
6459	94, 215, 220, 235, 318, Provisional Article 1	30/4/2013
6460	263	30/4/2013
6462	122, 278	3/5/2013
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 10/4/2013 and E.: 2013/14,
K.:
2013/56

267
Six months after 10/12/2013 (10/6/2014)
6526	135, 136, 138	6/3/2014

Number of the Amending Law/ Annulling Constitutional Court
Decision

Amended or Annulled Articles of Law No. 5237

Entry into Force Date
6529	112, 113, 115, 122, 222	13/3/2014
6545	12, 18, 102, 103, 104, 105, 142, 143, 149,
152, 188, 190, 191, 277	28/6/2014
6638	188, 191	4/4/2015
Constitutional Court's decision dated 14/1/2015 and E.: 2014/116,
K.:
2015/4

272
Six months after 29/4/2015
(29/10/2015)
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 27/5/2015 and E.: 2014/36,
K.:
2015/51

230

10/6/2015
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 8/10/2015 and E.: 2014/140,
K.:
2015/85

53

24/11/2015
Constitutional
Court's decision dated 12/11/2015 and E.: 2015/26,
K.:
2015/100

103

One year after 11/12/2015 (11/12/2016)
6698	135, 226, 243, 245/A	7/4/2016
6706	18	5/5/2016
Constitutional
Court's decision
dated 26/5/2016 and E.: 2015/108,
K.:

103	Six months after 13/7/2016
(13/1/2017)

Number of the Amending Law/ Annulling Constitutional Court
Decision

Amended or Annulled Articles of Law No. 5237

Entry into Force Date
2016/46
6754	276	24/11/2016
6763	54, 75, 103, 158, 174, 179, 192, 227, 228,
297	2/12/2016
KHK/694	188, 190, 228	25/8/2017
7078	188, 190, 228	8/3/2018

KHK/700

6,47,287	On the date the President takes the oath and assumes office as a result of the Turkish Grand National Assembly and Presidential elections held together on 24/6/2018
(9/7/2018)
7188	75, 136	24/10/2019
7196	79	24/12/2019
7242	50, 51, 53, 86, 87, 220, 241,	15/4/2020
7328	57, 59	25/6/2021
7331	82, 86, 96, 109	14/7/2021
7332	151	14/7/2021
7406	62, 82, 86, 94, 96, 106, 113, 123/A	27/5/2022
7413	237, 240	28/6/2022
7418	217/A	18/10/2022
7445	79, 188, 191	5/4/2023

This excerpt sits under: TURKISH PENAL CODE1
