LAW ON THE PROTECTION OF THE FAMILY AND THE PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

LAW ON THE PROTECTION OF THE FAMILY AND THE PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

Law Number	: 6284
Date of Adoption	: 8/3/2012
Official Gazette in which it was Published	: Date: 20/3/2012	Number: 28239
Düstur in which it was Published	: Series: 5	Volume: 52

PART ONE
Purpose, Scope, Fundamental Principles and Definitions Purpose, scope and fundamental principles

ARTICLE 1

(1) The purpose of this Law is to regulate the procedures and principles regarding the measures to be taken for the protection of women, children, family members who are subjected to violence or are at risk of being subjected to violence, and persons who are victims of unilateral persistent stalking, and for the prevention of violence against these persons.
(2)	In the implementation of this Law and in the provision of necessary services, the following fundamental principles shall be observed:
a)	The Constitution of the Republic of Turkey and the international conventions to which Turkey is a party, in particular the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, and other legal regulations in force shall be taken as basis.
b)	In the provision of support and services to be given to victims of violence, a procedure based on fundamental human rights, sensitive to gender equality, in accordance with the principle of social state, fair, effective and swift shall be followed.
c)	Protective measure decisions taken for the victim of violence and the perpetrator of violence shall be executed in a manner befitting human dignity.
ç) Special measures that prevent gender-based violence against women and protect women from gender-based violence within the scope of this Law cannot be interpreted as discrimination.

Definitions

ARTICLE 2 – (1) In this Law:

a)	Ministry: means the Ministry of Family and Social Policies,
b)	Domestic violence: means all kinds of physical, sexual, psychological and economic violence occurring between family or household members or other persons considered as family members, even if the victim of violence and the perpetrator of violence do not share the same household,
c)	Judge: means the family court judge,
ç) Violence against women: means all kinds of attitudes and behaviours defined as violence in this Law, which are applied to women only because they are women or which affect women, constituting gender-based discrimination and leading to violation of women's human rights,

d)	Violence: means all kinds of physical, sexual, psychological, verbal or economic attitudes and behaviours occurring in social, public or private sphere, which result or are likely to result in physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering to a person, including threats and coercion directed thereto, or arbitrary restriction of liberty,
e)	Victim of violence: means the person who is directly or indirectly subjected to or at risk of being subjected to attitudes and behaviours defined as violence in this Law, and persons who are affected or at risk of being affected by violence,
f)	Violence prevention and monitoring centres: means centres where support and monitoring services are provided for the prevention of violence and the effective implementation of protective and preventive measures, which carry out their work on a twenty-four hours seven days basis,
g)	Perpetrator of violence: means persons who apply or are at risk of applying attitudes and behaviours defined as violence in this Law,
ğ) Protective measure decision: means protective measure decisions to be given by judges, law enforcement officers and provincial governors, upon request or ex officio, regarding victims of violence and perpetrators of violence within the scope of this Law.

PART TWO
Provisions Regarding Protective and Preventive Measures Protective measure decisions to be given by the provincial governor

ARTICLE 3

(1) Regarding persons protected within the scope of this Law, one, several or similar measures deemed appropriate among the following measures may be decided by the provincial governor:
a)	Provision of suitable accommodation for themselves and, if necessary, for the children accompanying them, at their current location or at another location.
b)	Provision of temporary financial assistance, without prejudice to assistance to be provided under other laws.
c)	Provision of guidance and counselling services in psychological, vocational, legal and social aspects.
ç) In case of vital danger, taking under temporary protection upon the request of the person concerned or ex officio.
d)	If necessary, if the protected person has children, provision of crèche facilities for a period limited to four months to support participation in working life, or two months if the person is working, not exceeding half of the monthly net minimum wage determined each year for those over sixteen years of age, to be documented and met from the relevant appropriation of the Ministry's budget.
(2) In cases where delay is dangerous, the measures set out in subparagraphs (a) and (ç) of the first paragraph may also be taken by the relevant law enforcement chiefs. The law enforcement chief shall submit the documents to the approval of the provincial governor at the latest within the first working day following the date on which the decision was taken. Measures not approved by the provincial governor within forty-eight hours shall lapse automatically.

Protective measure decisions to be given by the judge

ARTICLE 4

(1) Regarding persons protected within the scope of this Law, one, several or similar measures deemed appropriate among the following protective measures may be decided by the judge:
a)	Change of workplace.
b)	In case the person is married, determination of a separate place of residence from the common place of residence.
c)	In case the conditions in the Turkish Civil Code numbered 4721 dated 22/11/2001 exist and upon the request of the protected person, registration of a family residence annotation in the land registry.
ç) In case there is a vital danger for the protected person and it is understood that other measures will not be sufficient to prevent this danger, and based on the informed consent of the person concerned, change of identity and other relevant information and documents in accordance with the provisions of the Witness Protection Law numbered 5726 dated 27/12/2007.

Preventive measure decisions to be given by the judge

ARTICLE 5

(1) With regard to perpetrators of violence, a decision may be made by the judge for one, several or similar measures deemed appropriate from among the following preventive measures:
a) Not to engage in words and behaviour involving threat of violence, insult, humiliation or degradation towards the victim of violence.
b) Immediate removal from the joint residence or the place where they are located and allocation of the joint residence to the protected person.
c) Not to approach the protected persons, the residence, school and workplace where these persons are located. ç) If there is a previously issued decision on establishing personal relations with children, that personal relations be conducted in the presence of an escort, that personal relations be limited or completely removed.
d) If deemed necessary, not to approach the relatives and witnesses of the protected person, even if they have not been subjected to violence, and their children, without prejudice to cases concerning the establishment of personal relations.
e) Not to damage the personal belongings and household goods of the protected person.
f) Not to disturb the protected person by means of communication or otherwise.
g) To surrender to law enforcement any weapons that are legally permitted to be possessed or carried. ğ) Even if performing a public duty that requires carrying a weapon, to surrender to their institution the weapon in their custody by reason of this duty.
h) Not to use alcohol or narcotic or stimulant substances in places where the protected persons are located, or not to approach the protected persons and the places where they are located while under the influence of these substances, and if there is addiction, to ensure their examination and treatment, including hospitalisation.
ı) To apply to a health institution for examination or treatment and to ensure their treatment.
(2) In cases where delay would be detrimental, the measures set out in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the first paragraph may also be taken by the relevant law enforcement chiefs. The law enforcement chief submits the documents for the judge's approval at the latest within the first working day following the date on which the decision was taken. Measures not approved by the judge within twenty-four hours shall lapse automatically.

(3) Together with the measures specified in this Law, the judge is authorised to decide on protective and supportive measures set out in the Child Protection Law No. 5395 dated 3/7/2005 and on matters of custody, guardianship, alimony and establishment of personal relations in accordance with the provisions of Law No. 4721.
(4) If the perpetrator of violence is also the person who provides for or contributes to the family's livelihood, the judge may order provisional alimony even if not requested, taking into account the standard of living of the victim of violence, provided that alimony has not been ordered under the provisions of Law No. 4721.

Provisions reserved in relation to offences

ARTICLE 6

(1) By reason of a person's possession of a weapon, use of narcotic or stimulant substances constituting an offence, or by reason of their act constituting another offence;
a) At the investigation and prosecution stage, the statutory provisions relating to protective measures or probation measures,
b) In the event of conviction, the statutory provisions relating to the execution of penalties or security measures and probation measures that may be applied within this framework,
are reserved.

Notification

ARTICLE 7

(1) In the event of violence or the danger of violence being applied, anyone may notify the official authorities or bodies of this situation. Public officials who receive the notification are obliged to fulfil their duties under this Law without delay and to inform the authorities regarding other measures that need to be applied.

Issuance, service and confidentiality of protective orders

ARTICLE 8

(1) A protective order is issued upon the request of the person concerned, the application of the Ministry or law enforcement officials or the public prosecutor. Protective orders may be requested from the most quickly and easily accessible local judge, civil administrator or law enforcement unit.
(2) A protective order may be issued for a maximum of six months for the first time. However, in cases where it is understood that the violence or danger of violence being applied will continue, a decision may be made ex officio, upon the request of the protected person or the Ministry or law enforcement officials, to change the duration or form of the measures, to lift these measures or to continue them as they are.
(3) No evidence or document is required as to the fact that violence has been applied in order for a protective order to be issued. A preventive order is issued without delay. The issuance of this order cannot be delayed in a manner that could jeopardise the achievement of the purpose of this Law.
(4) The protective order is communicated or served on the protected person and the perpetrator of violence. The decision to reject the request for a protective order is served only on the protected person. In cases where delay would be detrimental, the protective order issued by the relevant law enforcement unit is immediately served on the perpetrator of violence by means of a report.

(5) In the communication and service procedures of the protective order, a warning is given that coercive detention will be applied against the perpetrator of violence in the event of non-compliance with the protective order.
(6) If deemed necessary, together with the protective order, upon request or ex officio, the identity information of the protected person and other family members or information that may reveal their identity and their addresses, as well as other information of importance for the effectiveness of protection, shall be kept confidential in all official records. A separate address for service shall be determined. The relevant provisions of the Turkish Penal Code No. 5237 dated 26/9/2004 shall apply to persons who unlawfully give, disclose or reveal this information to others.
(7) Upon request, the delivery of personal belongings and documents to the persons concerned shall be ensured through law enforcement.

Objection

ARTICLE 9

(1) Decisions issued under the provisions of this Law may be objected to by the persons concerned within two weeks from the date of communication or service to the family court.
(2) Upon objection to protective orders issued by the judge, the file shall be sent without delay to the chamber following it in number if there is more than one chamber of the family court in that place, to the first chamber for the last numbered chamber, to the civil court of first instance if there is a single chamber of the family court in that place, and to the nearest civil court of first instance if the family court judge and the civil court of first instance judge are the same judge.
(3) The objection authority shall issue its decision within one week. Decisions issued upon objection are final.

Notification and implementation of protective orders

ARTICLE 10

(1) Measure decisions taken pursuant to the provisions of this Law shall be notified by the most expeditious means to the relevant provincial and district directorates of the Ministry and, depending on the nature of the decision rendered, to the Chief Public Prosecutor's Office or to law enforcement.
(2) Applications made to the relevant authorities within the scope of this Law and decisions regarding the acceptance or rejection of such applications shall be notified immediately by the authority to which the application was made to the relevant provincial and district directorates of the Ministry.
(3) The law enforcement unit of the place of residence or location of the persons subject to protective or preventive measure decisions or the place where the measure is to be implemented shall be responsible and authorized for the execution of the protective measure decision regarding the temporary placement of the protected person under protection and the preventive measure decisions rendered against the perpetrator of violence.
(4) In cases where the measure decision is issued and implemented by the law enforcement chief or where the protected person is at the law enforcement facility, the person shall be promptly transferred by law enforcement units to the relevant provincial or district directorates of the Ministry; where this is not possible, temporary accommodation shall be provided for the person and those accompanying them, with expenses to be covered from the relevant appropriation of the Ministry's budget.
(5) Failure to serve or notify the measure decision to the relevant parties shall not constitute an obstacle to the implementation of the decision.

(6) Persons for whom a decision has been made to provide accommodation shall be placed in facilities belonging to the Ministry or under the supervision and control of the Ministry. In cases where accommodation facilities are insufficient, protected persons may be temporarily accommodated in social facilities, dormitories or similar places belonging to public institutions and organizations upon the request of the civil administrator, in urgent cases of law enforcement, or of the Ministry.
(7) The measure decision regarding the change of workplace shall be executed by the competent authority or person in accordance with the provisions of the relevant legislation to which the person is subject.

Law enforcement duties

ARTICLE 11

(1) Law enforcement duties shall be carried out in the central and provincial organization of law enforcement, in relation to the services specified in this Law, by sufficient personnel who have received training on the human rights of children and women and on gender equality and who have been designated by the relevant law enforcement units.

Monitoring by technical methods

ARTICLE 12

(1) Technical tools and methods may be used by court order in the implementation of measure decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this Law. However, persons' sounds and images may not be listened to, monitored or recorded in this manner.
(2) The procedures and principles regarding monitoring by technical tools and methods shall be regulated by regulation.

Violation of measure decisions

ARTICLE 13

(1) A perpetrator of violence against whom a measure decision has been rendered pursuant to the provisions of this Law, in the event of acting contrary to the requirements of this decision, shall be subject to coercive detention from three days to ten days by court order, according to the nature of the violated measure and the severity of the violation, even if the act constitutes a crime.
(2) Upon each repetition of violation of the requirements of the measure decision, the duration of coercive detention shall be from fifteen days to thirty days according to the nature of the violated measure and the severity of the violation. However, the total duration of coercive detention may not exceed six months.
(3) Decisions regarding coercive detention shall be executed by the Chief Public Prosecutor's Office. These decisions shall be notified to the relevant provincial and district directorates of the Ministry.

PART THREE
Establishment of Centers, Support Services and Interinstitutional Coordination Establishment of violence prevention and monitoring centers

ARTICLE 14

(1) The Ministry shall establish violence prevention and monitoring centers where necessary expert personnel serve and preferably female personnel are employed, where support and monitoring services are provided for the prevention of violence and the effective implementation of protective and preventive measures, which operate on a twenty-four hour, seven day basis, and whose working procedures and principles are determined by regulation.

(2) In the established centers, monitoring activities shall be carried out and support services shall be provided for the prevention of violence and the effective implementation of protective and preventive measures.

Support services

ARTICLE 15

(1) Support services to be provided by violence prevention and monitoring centers for the prevention of violence within the scope of this Law and for monitoring the effective implementation of measure decisions rendered are as follows:
a) To establish an information bank by collecting data regarding protective and preventive measure decisions and the issuance and implementation of coercive detention, and to maintain a registry of measure decisions.
b) To coordinate accommodation, temporary financial assistance, health, legal aid services and other services provided to the protected person.
c) To make applications for obtaining and implementing measure decisions in necessary cases.
ç) To prepare and implement programs on an individual and societal scale aimed at ending violence within the scope of this Law.
d) To ensure the expansion of the call center established within the Ministry in accordance with the purpose of this Law and the monitoring of applications made.
e) To cooperate with relevant non-governmental organizations working to end violence within the scope of this Law.
(2) Support services to be provided by violence prevention and monitoring centers in relation to protected persons are as follows:
a) To guide the person regarding their rights, institutions from which they can receive support, finding employment and similar matters, and to engage in activities for their participation in vocational training courses.
b) To make recommendations and provide assistance for achieving the purpose intended by the measure decision rendered.
c) To monitor the results of the implementation of measure decisions and their effects on persons.
ç) To provide assistance and counseling in resolving psycho-social and economic problems.
d) Upon the request of the judge; to prepare and submit a detailed social investigation report regarding the person's past, family, environment, education, personal, social, economic and psychological situation.
e) Where requested by the relevant authority, to prepare a report on the results of the implementation of measures and their effects on the relevant parties.
f) To provide necessary guidance regarding the provision of financial support pursuant to the provisions of the Social Assistance and Solidarity Encouragement Law No. 3294 dated 29/5/1986.
(3) Support services to be provided by violence prevention and monitoring centers in relation to the perpetrator of violence are as follows:
a) Upon the request of the judge; to prepare and submit a detailed social investigation report regarding the person's past, family, environment, education, personal, social, economic and psychological situation and the risk they pose to other persons and society.

b) Where requested by the relevant authority or body, to prepare a report on the results of the implementation of measures and their effects on the relevant parties.
c) In an encouraging, informative and guiding manner, to engage in activities for the person's;
1) Participation in education and rehabilitation programs aimed at anger control, coping with stress, and changing attitudes and behaviors by raising awareness for preventing violence,
2) Examination or treatment at a health institution in the event of alcohol, narcotic, volatile or stimulant substance addiction or mental disorder,
3) Participation in vocational training courses.
(4) Services for victims of violence and perpetrators of violence shall be provided in separate units except in mandatory cases.

Interinstitutional coordination and training

ARTICLE 16

(1) Interinstitutional coordination in the implementation of the provisions of this Law shall be carried out by the Ministry.
(2) Public institutions and organizations and other natural and legal persons are obliged to cooperate and assist in matters falling within their own area of responsibility in relation to the implementation of this Law and to promptly implement the protective measure decisions taken. Natural and legal persons are encouraged to support the Ministry's work and to carry out joint work within the scope of this Law.
(3) The Turkish Radio and Television Corporation and private television organizations and radios broadcasting nationally, regionally and locally are obliged to broadcast informational materials prepared or commissioned by the Ministry on women's participation in working life, mechanisms to combat violence especially related to women and children, and similar policies for at least ninety minutes per month. These broadcasts shall be made between 08.00-22.00 hours, with a minimum of thirty minutes between 17.00-22.00 hours, and copies of the broadcasts shall be delivered regularly to the Radio and Television Supreme Council every month. Broadcasts made outside these hours shall not be included in the monthly ninety-minute period. These periods shall be supervised by the Radio and Television Supreme Council. Informational materials to be broadcast on television organizations and radios shall be prepared by Ministry units with the opinions of universities, relevant professional organizations and civil society organizations also being obtained.
(4) During the performance of the duties envisaged in this Law, the personnel of public institutions and organizations shall assist Ministry officials.
(5) All public institutions and organizations and public professional organizations shall ensure that their personnel and members participate in training programs on women's human rights and gender equality, which the Ministry will prepare and coordinate for the purpose of effective implementation of this Law.
(6) Courses aimed at education on women's human rights and gender equality shall be included in primary and secondary education curricula.

FOURTH CHAPTER
Financial Provisions Provision of temporary financial assistance

ARTICLE 17

(1) In the event that it is decided to provide temporary financial assistance in accordance with the provisions of this Law, daily payment shall be made up to one thirtieth of the monthly net minimum wage amount determined each year for those over sixteen years of age. In case there is more than one protected person, an additional payment shall be made at the rate of twenty percent of this amount for each additional person. However, the amount to be paid can in no way exceed one and a half times the determined daily payment amount. In case accommodation is provided to protected persons, the amounts determined in this paragraph shall be applied by reducing them by fifty percent.
(2) These payments shall be met from the appropriation allocated for temporary financial assistance in the Ministry budget. The payments made shall be collected from the perpetrator of violence within one month from the date of notification. Those that cannot be collected in this way shall be pursued and collected by the relevant tax office in accordance with the provisions of the Law No. 6183 dated 21/7/1953 on the Procedure for Collection of Public Receivables.
(3) In case it is determined that the protected person has made a statement contrary to the truth, the assistance provided shall be collected from this person in accordance with the provisions of Law No. 6183.

Alimony

ARTICLE 18

(1) In the event that alimony is decided in accordance with the provisions of this Law, a copy of the decision shall be sent ex officio to the execution office of the place of residence of the alimony creditor or debtor.
(2) In case the person obliged to pay alimony has a connection with the Social Security Institution, the alimony shall be collected by the execution office from the monthly salary, salary or wage of the person concerned without requiring an application from the protected person. The postal expenses of execution offices related to alimony collection transactions shall be met from the flagrante delicto allowance of the Chief Public Prosecutor's Office.

Health expenses

ARTICLE 19

(1) Among persons for whom a protective measure decision has been made in accordance with the provisions of this Law, those who are not general health insurance holders and do not fall within the scope of persons whom the general health insurance holder is obliged to support, or who cannot actually benefit from general health insurance due to general health insurance premium debt, or who do not have the right to benefit from treatment assistance pursuant to other legislative provisions; during the continuation of these situations, shall be deemed general health insurance holders within the scope of sub-clause (1) of clause (c) of the first paragraph of Article 60 of the Social Insurance and General Health Insurance Law No. 5510 dated 31/5/2006, without being subject to an income test.
(2) In the event that it is decided that a person for whom a preventive measure decision has been made in accordance with the provisions of this Law also needs to be rehabilitated or treated, the expenses for rehabilitation services not covered by general health insurance and the expenses of other health services that must be provided within the scope of rehabilitation services shall be met from the relevant items of the Ministry budget.

Exemption from fees and expenses, taxes and participation in lawsuits

ARTICLE 20

(1) No expenses shall be collected under any name such as litigation expenses, fees, postal expenses and the like for applications within the scope of this Law and transactions made for the execution and enforcement of decisions given. The payments made pursuant to Article 17 of this Law are exempt from income tax and inheritance and transfer tax, and the papers issued for these payments are exempt from stamp tax.
(2) The Ministry may, if it deems necessary, participate in all types of administrative, criminal, legal lawsuits and non-contentious proceedings filed due to violence or threat of violence against women, children and family members.

FIFTH CHAPTER
Miscellaneous and Final Provisions
Positions1

ARTICLE 21

(1) The positions listed in the attached list have been created and added to the section pertaining to the Ministry of Family and Social Policies in annex (I) of the Decree Having the Force of Law No. 190 dated 13/12/1983 on General Positions and Procedure.

Regulation

ARTICLE 22

(1) The procedures and principles regarding the implementation of this Law shall be regulated within six months by regulations prepared by the Ministry with the opinions of the Ministries of Justice, Interior, Finance, National Education and Health being obtained.

Repealed provisions and references

ARTICLE 23

(1) The Law No. 4320 dated 14/1/1998 on the Protection of the Family has been repealed.
(2) References made to Law No. 4320 in legislation shall be deemed to have been made to this Law.
(3) The implementation of decisions given in accordance with the provisions of Law No. 4320 before this Law enters into force shall continue.

Commencement of operation of violence prevention and monitoring centers
PROVISIONAL ARTICLE 1 – (1) The violence prevention and monitoring centers envisaged to be established in Article 14 of this Law shall be established within two years from the date this Law enters into force in provinces to be determined by the Ministry for pilot implementation. Until their establishment is completed, which units of the Ministry will carry out the duties of the centers shall be determined by the Ministry.

Entry into force

ARTICLE 24 – (1) This Law enters into force on the date of its publication.

Execution

ARTICLE 25 – (1) The provisions of this Law shall be executed by the Council of Ministers.

1 For the positions included in this article, see the Official Gazette dated 20/3/2012 and numbered 28239.

This excerpt sits under: LAW ON THE PROTECTION OF THE FAMILY AND PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
