REPUBLIC OF BENIN

REPUBLIC OF BENIN
FRATERNITY-JUSTICE-WORK

PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC

LAW N°2011-26 OF 09 JANUARY 2012
On the prevention and punishment of violence against women

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE .......................................................................................	5
TITLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS ...........................	7
CHAPTER I: PURPOSE AND DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS ...........	7
TITLE II: AWARENESS-RAISING, PREVENTION AND DETECTION MEASURES ..............................................................................
11
CHAPTER I: THE EDUCATIONAL FIELD ...............................................	11
CHAPTER II: THE FIELD OF ADVERTISING AND MEANS OF COMMUNICATION .............................................................................
13
CHAPTER III: THE HEALTH AND SOCIAL FIELD ...........................	14
CHAPTER IV: THE JUDICIAL AND PARAJUDICIAL FIELD ...........	15
TITLE III: RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE .......	16
CHAPTER I: THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION, SOCIAL AID AND FREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE ..................................................
16
CHAPTER II: RIGHTS RELATED TO WORK .......................................	17
TITLE IV: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK ..........................................	19
SOLE	CHAPTER	:	ESTABLISHMENT	OF COMPETENT STRUCTURES ..................................................................................
19
TITLE V: CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROVISIONS ..........................	19
CHAPTER I: CIVIL PROVISIONS ................................	19
CHAPTER II: CRIMINAL PROVISIONS ........................................	19
TITLE VI: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS .......................	21

PREFACE

Violence against women constitutes a crucial development problem that affects women even in their dignity.
The number of women subjected to violence in Africa, in general, in Benin in particular, is not negligible. Indeed, the study commissioned by the Ministry of Family, Social Affairs, National Solidarity, Disabled Persons and Senior Citizens on violence against women at the national level revealed that: out of approximately 52% of the population constituted by women, 69% declared having suffered violence at least once in their lifetime. More than half of the women interviewed (51.5%) have suffered at least once in their lifetime physical or moral suffering. These sufferings endured are shouting at women (72.8%); threats of divorce (32.8%); refusal to eat what the woman has prepared (30.9%); complaints about the woman's behavior to the mother-in-law (26.9%); insults to the woman in front of strangers (22.6%); sexual violence (28.5%); rape of girls aged 2-14 years (1.4%); abduction (8.5%) and excision (15.0%). In view of this prevalence and the reluctance of perpetrators of violence against women, the Government promulgated Law No. 2011-26 of 09 January 2012, on the prevention and punishment of violence against women. This law constitutes a mechanism both for combating and developing women, a notable advance in the legal protection of Beninese women and a better promotion of the principle of gender equality.
Women, being part of vulnerable groups, this legal text makes it possible to punish violations of the rights recognized to them and to fight against discrimination, except positive discrimination.
The advent of this law constitutes the success of all the different actors who contributed to it, I would like to mention: civil society, the national representation, the Ministry of Family and the Government without forgetting the development partners who work for the cause of women in Benin.
Law No. 2011-26 of 09 January 2012 on the prevention and punishment of violence against women will certainly restore hope to women. Its proper application and appropriation by women themselves depend on it.
Fatouma AMADOU DJIBRIL

The Minister of Family, Social Affairs, National Solidarity, Disabled Persons and Senior Citizens

The National Assembly deliberated and adopted in its session of 27 September 2011,
Following the Decision of conformity with the Constitution DCC 11-091 of 08 December 2011 of the Constitutional Court,
The President of the Republic promulgates the law whose content follows:

TITLE ONE

GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I

PURPOSE AND DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS

Article 1: The purpose of this law is to combat all forms of violence against women and girls in the Republic of Benin.
Through its criminal, civil and social components, it aims to provide a multidisciplinary response to violence against women and girls.

Article 2

Violence against women is defined, under the terms of this law, as all acts of violence directed against the female sex and causing or likely to cause women harm or physical, sexual or psychological suffering including the threat of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether in public life or in private life.
The violations concern:	Physical or moral, sexual and psychological violence exercised within the family such as beatings, marital rape, sexual assaults and attacks, female genital mutilation as provided for by law 2003-03 of 03 March 2003 on the punishment of the practice of female genital mutilation in the Republic of Benin, forced or arranged marriages, "honor" crimes and other traditional practices harmful to women.	Physical or moral, sexual and psychological violence exercised within the community including rape, sexual assaults and attacks, sexual harassment as provided for by law 2006-

19 of 05 September 2006 on the punishment of sexual harassment and protection of victims in the Republic of Benin and intimidation at work, in educational establishments and other places, procuring, trafficking, forced prostitution.
Under this law, also considered as violence against women is the fact, for a medical or paramedical agent, of not providing a woman during childbirth with all the required diligence, or of refraining from performing their professional duty.

Article 3: In this law, the following terms mean

abortion: the act of using means or substances intended to cause the premature expulsion of the fetus or, more generally, the artificial termination of pregnancy in a woman; harassment: the act of giving orders, using words, gestures, writings, messages, and this repeatedly, uttering threats, imposing constraints, exerting pressure or using any other means for the purpose of obtaining from a person in a situation of vulnerability or subordination favors of any nature whatsoever including sexual favors for one's own benefit or for the benefit of a third party against the will of the harassed woman; incest: sexual intercourse perpetrated on a person with whom one has kinship ties up to and including the third degree; incitement of minors to debauchery: the act of acting upon minors with a view to satisfying the passions of others or in any case as an intermediary agent of corruption and debauchery; forced marriage: any marriage or cohabitation contracted or decided without the free and informed consent of both parties concerned; female genital mutilation: all interventions including the partial or total removal of the external genital organs of a woman or injury to female genital organs performed for cultural or religious reasons or for any other non-therapeutic reason; pedophilia: erotic attraction of an adult towards children. More specifically, an adult who engages in touching or maintains sexual relations with a minor;
harmful traditional practices against women: acts derived from customs and traditions that harm women. These include in particular:
•	dietary prohibitions in case of pregnancy or childbirth,
•	force-feeding which consists of excessively feeding minor girls with a view to making them physically fit for marriage,
•	degrading widowhood rites,
•	infringements on women's freedom of movement,
•	pressure on women through children. forced prostitution: the act of causing one or more persons to perform one or more acts of a sexual nature, by force, by threat of force or coercion or by taking advantage of the inability of said persons to give their consent freely in order to obtain a pecuniary or other advantage; procuring: the activity of one who facilitates the debauchery of others by serving as an intermediary, thereby deriving benefit from the proceeds of this activity; forced sterilization: the act of committing or causing to be committed on a woman without her free consent or without a justified medical decision, an act likely to deprive her of her biological and organic capacity for reproduction; rape: any act of vaginal, anal or oral penetration by another person's sex organ or vaginal or anal penetration by any object without the intelligent and voluntary consent of the person penetrated. However, consent is not valid in the case of minor women under sixteen (16) years of age.
The person penetrated is not obliged to fight against their aggressor.
Being married to the person penetrated is not an excuse for the crime of rape; violence in the family environment: abuse of power or intentional neglect with a view to dominating, subjugating, controlling or assaulting women physically, verbally, psychologically, patrimonially,

economically and sexually, both inside and outside the family home, whether the aggressor is or has been linked to his victim by kinship relations, by blood or by marriage, by marriage relations, cohabitation or whether he maintains or has maintained a de facto relationship with her; violence in the professional environment: refusal, in violation of the law, to hire the victim by contract, to maintain their employment or to respect the general conditions of work; depreciation of work performed, threats, intimidation, humiliation, exploitation and any type of distraction based on sex; domestic violence: any physical or sexual violence committed by a person against the person of another when the two parties are married, cohabiting, or consanguineous, or when they live in the same house, or when the two parties have had an intimate relationship in the past, but are no longer together; economic violence: the act of using one's means to slow down or prevent the economic or financial development of any person, or the act of preventing any person from enjoying their socio-economic rights; patrimonial violence: any act or neglect affecting the survival of the victim and consisting of transforming, removing, destroying, retaining or misappropriating objects, personal documents, goods and valuables, patrimonial rights or economic resources intended to cover their needs and which may extend to damage caused to property common to or owned by the victim; physical violence: any type of act resulting in non-accidental harm, through the use of physical force or any type of weapon or object that may or may not cause internal, external or both types of injuries; psychological or moral violence: the act of subjecting any person to repeated actions or words having the object or effect of degrading living conditions likely to infringe upon their rights and dignity, to impair their physical or mental health or to compromise their plans or future.
It is also an act or neglect causing harm to psychological stability, abandonment, repeated inattention, excessive jealousy, insults and humiliation, devaluation,

marginalization, lack of affection, indifference, infidelity, destructive comparisons, rejection, restriction of self-determination and threats; all situations that may lead the victim to sink into depression, to isolate themselves, to lose self-esteem, or even to commit suicide; sexual violence: any act having the effect of degrading or causing harm to the body and/or sexuality of the victim and which, consequently, infringes upon their freedom, dignity and physical integrity.
It is the expression of an abuse of power dictated by the supremacy of man over woman who is thus denigrated and treated as an object; all other similar forms that harm or infringe upon the dignity, integrity or freedom of women; zoophilia: the act by any person through trickery, violence, threats or any form of coercion or artifice, of forcing a person to have sexual relations with an animal.

TITLE II

AWARENESS-RAISING, PREVENTION AND DETECTION MEASURES

CHAPTER I

THE EDUCATIONAL DOMAIN

Article 4

Schooling is compulsory for all children without distinction of sex, race or religion up to the age of sixteen (16) years.

Article 5

The fight for equality between men and women constitutes a national priority.
To this end, principles and teachings of mutual respect between the sexes, learning to live together, rejection and condemnation of violence, development of critical thinking and analysis against violence and all gender inequalities between women and men, shall be taken into account in educational curricula.

These teachings must ensure training in the knowledge and respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms as well as understanding of concrete situations that violate them. Likewise, the education system shall include, in its quality principles, the elimination of obstacles that hinder full equality between men and women and especially violence against women. They shall provide training adapted in its content and methods to the economic, social and cultural developments of the country and its environment.

Article 6

The school is responsible for transmitting and ensuring the acquisition of knowledge and working methods.
It aims for gender diversity and real equality between men and women, little girls and little boys, young girls and young boys, particularly in terms of guidance, detection of violence suffered by young people and the fight against sexism.

Article 7

The ministries in charge of national education in collaboration with the ministry in charge of family and the ministry of justice shall adopt the necessary measures so that in the initial training programs of the teaching staff is included on a mandatory basis and subject to evaluation a specific training policy on gender equality and the fight against violence against women, with the aim of ensuring that they acquire the necessary knowledge and techniques enabling them to ensure:	education in respect for fundamental rights and freedoms and equality between men and women in the exercise of tolerance and freedom in accordance with democratic principles of common life;	education for conflict prevention and for their peaceful resolution, in all contexts of personal, family and social life;	early detection of violence in the family context, especially against women.

Article 8

Public or private schools must provide for the immediate enrollment, in similar or related sections, of young girls who are victims of violence and forced to change residence.
Children affected by a change of residence caused by acts of violence against women must also be taken into account.

Article 9

The State, local authorities and/or private structures must provide for an extensive program of supplementary and continuing training for professionals who intervene in the fight against violence against women

CHAPITRE II

DU DOMAINE DE LA PUBLICITE ET DES MOYENS DE COMMUNICATION

Article 10

Any advertising that uses degrading, devaluing, dehumanizing and vexatious representations of women and men and the relationships between them is considered unlawful.

Article 11

The High Authority for Broadcasting and Communication (HAAC) must ensure the equitable representation of women and men by the media, particularly by avoiding as far as possible degrading and vexatious representations, by fighting against sexist stereotypes, by avoiding an unbalanced presence of persons of both sexes in broadcast programs. The broadcasters' specifications shall mandatorily include these principles.
It must exercise its power of sanction on the media concerned.

Article 12

Upon publication of this law, the High Authority for Broadcasting and Communication is responsible for:	verifying the pornographic content of various media broadcasts;
verifying before they are placed on the market the compliance with the law of cinematographic works: video cassettes, DVDs, internet broadcasting and any medium for broadcasting pornographic scenes.
It shall particularly examine the representation of violence, procuring, trafficking and incitement to commit them as well as incitement to prostitution.
It may suspend the marketing of unlawful content. It shall then inform the ministry in charge of the interior and refer the matter to the public prosecutor so that he may initiate the prosecutions provided for by the criminal code.

CHAPITRE III

DU DOMAINE SANITAIRE ET SOCIAL

Article 13

The State has the obligation to promote through socio-health structures the early detection of cases of violence against women.
To this end, it must develop awareness, initial and continuing training programs for socio-health personnel with the aim of improving clinical and psychological care and helping with the rehabilitation of women victims.
In all cases of rape, the justice system must request the competent health structures for the purpose of mandatory HIV/AIDS screening tests and any other sexually transmitted infection for the victim and the perpetrator in order to assess the possibility of contamination that would create greater harm to the victim.
The costs shall be borne by the State.

Article 14

The initial and continuing training of all health professionals as well as professionals in the medical-social sector includes specific teaching dedicated to violence perpetrated against women and its consequences in terms of public health.
This teaching, which shall take place throughout all years of training including in a multidisciplinary manner and which shall be evaluated, aims to promote prevention, early detection, assistance and rehabilitation of women victims of violence.

University administrations and competent schools must ensure that these training contents are included in the training program for medical, paramedical and social professionals.

CHAPITRE IV

DU DOMAINE JUDICIAIRE ET PARAJUDICIAIRE

Article 15

The State has the obligation to promote judicial and parajudicial institutions for handling cases of violence against women.
To this end, it must develop awareness programs, initial and continuing training for judicial and parajudicial personnel, with the aim of improving effective care and rehabilitation of women victims.
Given that most rapes and domestic violence take place in private locations, hidden from the eyes of potential witnesses, the Beninese justice system must broaden the categories of incriminating evidence and take into account the oral testimonies of victims.
The testimony of a victim alone can support an intimate conviction.

Article 16

The initial and continuing training of all judicial and parajudicial professionals includes mandatory specific teaching dedicated to domestic and sexual violence and their consequences in terms of public health.
This multidisciplinary teaching aims to promote the prevention, assistance and rehabilitation of women victims of violence and will be subject to an annual evaluation by the relevant ministries.
Each public prosecutor's office must designate at least one of its trained members who will be responsible for representing the public prosecution in all cases of domestic and sexual violence.
Each court of first instance must designate at least one investigating judge who will be responsible for investigating all cases of domestic and sexual violence.
The State must strengthen the capacities of judicial police officers so that in each police station or gendarmerie brigade, cases of domestic and/or sexual violence are handled.

University administrations and competent schools must ensure that these training contents are included in the training programme for judicial and parajudicial professionals, armed forces, public security forces and similar personnel.

TITRE III

RIGHTS OF WOMEN VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPITRE I

RIGHT TO INFORMATION, SOCIAL AID AND FREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE

Article 17

The State must make effective women's enjoyment of their rights to physical and moral integrity, to freedom, to security as well as to equality and non-discrimination on grounds of sex.

Article 18

In each department, social promotion centres must take care of women victims of violence for the purpose of providing them with emergency social services, reception and assistance.
These services are organised in such a way as to meet urgent needs and provide sustainable multidisciplinary support.
The multidisciplinary services provided in this framework specifically include:	information for victims;	psychological and psychiatric support;	social support;	health support;	the service of judicial police officers;	follow-up of legal and administrative procedures;	preventive training on women/men equality;	support for training and professional integration;	ease of access to reception centres.

Article 19

Minors who are in the care and supervision of the assaulted person are also entitled to comprehensive social assistance through these social services.

Article 20

Women victims of violence, including young girls threatened with forced or arranged marriage, young girls placed in care, sexually abused are considered as priority in access to reception centres.
In cases of domestic or conjugal violence where both parties occupy the same dwelling, the assaulted party shall have the right to continue to occupy the dwelling provisionally.

CHAPITRE II

RIGHTS RELATED TO WORK

Article 21

The female employee victim of violence within or outside the company shall have the right, upon her request and after favourable opinion from the occupational physician, to temporary reduction or reorganisation of her working time, to geographical transfer, to assignment to another establishment, to suspension of her employment contract and to resignation without notice.
At the expiry of the suspension of her employment contract, the female employee returns to her previous job.

Article 22

Absences or non-compliance with working hours justified by the physical or psychological situation of the female employee related to violence against women may not give rise to sanctions except by decision of social services, support services or health services.
The employer must be informed within seventy-two (72) hours.
The female employee benefits from a guarantee of remuneration during these absences.

Article 23

The head of the company must take all necessary measures to prevent, put an end to and/or sanction any remarks, acts or

verbal or non-verbal behaviour with sexual or sexist connotations or any other behaviour based on sex or taking into account real or supposed sexuality, having the object or effect of violating the rights and dignity of women or young girls, or of creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment, in particular by informing female employees, establishing investigation procedures and precautionary measures.

Article 24

The occupational physician is authorised to propose individual measures such as transfers or transformations of positions justified by considerations relating in particular to age, physical resistance, violence suffered by women within or outside the company or the physical and mental health condition of workers.

Article 25

The woman, civil service agent, victim of violence, who would be obliged to abandon her work position in the locality where she was in service, in order to ensure the effectiveness of her protection or her right to integrated social assistance, shall enjoy a preferential right to occupy another work position appropriate to her corps and grade, presenting analogous characteristics, which would be vacant and to be filled.
The competent public administration shall be required to inform the woman victim of violence of vacant positions to be filled in the same locality or in the localities that the person concerned would request expressly.

Article 26

Women, civil service agents, victims of violence, benefit from the same conditions provided for in articles 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 of this law

TITRE IV

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

CHAPITRE UNIQUE

CREATION OF COMPETENT STRUCTURES

Article 27

The Government formulates and implements public policies on combating violence against women.

Article 28

The Government presents during the first ordinary session to the National Assembly, a report which accounts for the implementation of its policy on combating violence against women.

TITRE V

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

CHAPITRE I

CIVIL PROVISIONS

Article 29

When, in application of this law, a woman seizes a court for attacks on her physical or psychological integrity, or that of children, the residence of the child is automatically determined by the competent judge in favour of the woman victim.
The decision may be modified by the judge or the court according to the judgment.

CHAPITRE II

CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 30

For any criminal offence that punishes physical or sexual violence, the fact that the victim and the perpetrator enjoy a domestic

relationship, defined in article 3 of this law, shall be considered as an aggravating circumstance.
The maximum penalty in misdemeanour matters is aggravated by five (05) years' imprisonment and that in criminal matters is aggravated by at least ten (10) years.

Article 31

Any person who is guilty or accomplice of a forced or arranged marriage or forced cohabitation, as defined in article 3 of this law is punished by imprisonment of one (01) year to three (03) years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) francs to two million (2,000,000) francs.
All persons who are accomplices in the planning and/or execution of such a marriage or cohabitation are equally guilty.

Article 32

Psychological violence as defined in article 3 of this law is punished by a fine of up to one million (1,000,000) francs.

Article 33

Economic violence as defined in Article 3 of this law is punishable by a fine ranging from five hundred thousand (500,000) francs to two million (2,000,000) francs, without prejudice to civil reparation equal to the compensatory reparation provided for by the code of persons and the family.

Article 34

Forced prostitution as defined in Article 3 of this law is punishable by imprisonment from one (01) year to five (05) years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) francs to ten million (10,000,000) francs.
If the offense is followed or preceded by another offense or if the victim is a minor under sixteen (16) years of age, the sentence is increased to at least ten (10) years.

Article 35

Forced sterilization as defined in Article 3 of this law is punishable by imprisonment from one (01) year to five (05) years and a

fine from one million (1,000,000) francs to ten million (10,000,000) francs.

Article 36

Zoophilia as defined in Article 3 of this law is punishable by imprisonment of at least ten (10) years and a fine which shall not be less than twenty-five million (25,000,000) francs.

Article 37

All traditional practices harmful to women constitute common law offenses and are punished as such. All other acts of violence not specifically provided for by this law are in accordance with the legislation in force.

TITLE VI

MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 38

Decrees shall specify, as necessary, the modalities of application of this law.

Article 39

All prior provisions contrary to this law are repealed.

Article 40: This law shall be executed as law of the State

Done at Cotonou, January 09, 2012 By the President of the Republic,
Head of State, Head of Government,

Dr BONI YAYI

The Prime Minister in Charge of Coordination of Government Action, Evaluation of Public Policies, the Denationalization Program and Social Dialogue,
Pascal Irénée KOUPAKI

The Minister of Family, Social Affairs, National Solidarity, the Disabled and Elderly Persons,

Fatouma AMADOU DJIBRIL

The Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice, Legislation, Human Rights, Government Spokesperson

Akuavi Marie-Elise Christiana GBEDO
