LAW

LAW
No. 7895, dated 27.1.1995
CRIMINAL CODE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA
(Amended by:
laws no. 8175, dated 23.12.1996; no. 8204, dated 10.4.1997; no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; no.
9017, dated 6.3.2003; no. 9030, dated 13.3.2003; no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; no. 9275, dated
16.9.2004; no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; no. 9859, dated 21.1.2008; no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; no. 23/2012, dated
1.3.2012; no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; no. 98, dated 31.7.2014; no. 176/2014, dated 18.12.2014; no. 135/2015, dated
5.12.2015; no. 82/2016, dated 25.7.2016; no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017; no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017; no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019, no. 35/2020, dated 16.4.2020, no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020; no. 43/2021, dated 23.3.2021;
decisions of the Constitutional Court: no. 13, dated 29.5.1997; no. 46, dated 28.8.1997; no. 58, dated 5.12.1997; no. 65,
dated 10.12.1999; no. 11, dated 2.4.2008; no. 19, dated 1.6.2011; no. 47, dated 26.7.2012 ; no. 9, dated 26.2.2016;
no. 24, dated 4.5.2021)
(updated)
In support of article 16 of law no. 7491, dated 29.4.1991 "On the main constitutional provisions", upon proposal of the Council of Ministers
THE ASSEMBLY
OF THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA DECIDED:
I
GENERAL PART

CHAPTER I

CRIMINAL LAW AND ITS APPLICATION

Article 1

Criminal law and classification of criminal offences

Criminal law defines criminal offences, punishments and other measures taken against their perpetrators.
Criminal offences are divided into crimes and criminal contraventions. Their distinction is made in each case in the provisions of the special part of this Code.

Article 1/a

Bases of criminal legislation
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The Criminal Code is based on the Constitution of the Republic of Albania, on the general principles of international criminal law, as well as on international agreements ratified by the Albanian state.
Criminal legislation consists of this Code and other laws that provide for criminal offences.

Article 1/b

Tasks of criminal legislation
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The criminal legislation of the Republic of Albania has the task of protecting the independence of the state and the integrity of its territory, human dignity, human rights and freedoms, the constitutional order, property, the environment, coexistence

and understanding of Albanians with national minorities, as well as religious coexistence from criminal offences, as well as their prevention.

Article 1/c

Principles of the Criminal Code
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001, words added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The Criminal Code is based on the constitutional principles of the rule of law, equality before the law, justice in determining guilt and punishment, protection of the best interests of children, as well as humanism.
Application of criminal law by analogy is not permitted.

Article 2

No punishment without law

No one may be punished criminally for an act that was not previously expressly provided for by law as a crime or criminal contravention.
No one may be punished with a type and measure of punishment not provided for by law.

Article 3

Temporal application of criminal law

No one may be punished for an act that, according to the law at the time it was committed, did not constitute a criminal offence.
A new law that does not punish the criminal offence has retroactive force. In case the person has been punished, the execution of the punishment cannot begin and, if it has begun, it ceases.
When the law at the time the criminal offence was committed and the subsequent law are different, the law whose provisions are more favourable to the person who committed the criminal offence shall apply.

Article 4

Ignorance of the law

Ignorance of the law that punishes the criminal offence does not constitute grounds for exemption from criminal liability, except in cases where the ignorance is objectively unavoidable.

Article 5

Territory of the Republic of Albania

The territory of the Republic of Albania, within the meaning of criminal law, means the land space, the breadth of territorial and internal sea waters, the airspace extending over the land space and territorial and internal sea waters, as well as any other place where the sovereignty of the Albanian state extends, such as the premises of Albanian diplomatic and consular representations, ships flying the flag of the Republic of Albania, ships of the naval forces, military or civil aviation wherever they are located.

Article 6

Application of criminal law for criminal offences committed by Albanian citizens
(Sentence added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

For criminal offences committed by Albanian citizens within the territory of the Republic of Albania, the criminal law of the Republic of Albania applies.

The criminal law of the Republic of Albania is also applicable to an Albanian citizen who commits a crime in the territory of another state, when the crime is simultaneously punishable and as long as a final decision has not been given for him by a foreign court. The condition for simultaneous punishability in the territory of the other state does not apply in cases of corruption crimes in the public or private sector, as well as the exercise of illegal influence.
Within the meaning of this article, Albanian citizens shall also be considered those persons who, in addition to Albanian citizenship, also enjoy other citizenship.

Article 7

Application of criminal law for criminal offences committed by foreign citizens
(Letter "d" amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; letter "h" added by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; letter "i" added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; letter "c" amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; letter "j" added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; letter "e" removed and letters "h" and "i" amended by law no.
23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A foreign citizen who commits a criminal offence in the territory of the Republic of Albania is liable under the criminal law of the Republic of Albania.
The criminal law of the Republic of Albania is also applicable to a foreign citizen who, outside the territory of the Republic of Albania, commits to the detriment of the interests of the state or of an Albanian citizen one of the following crimes:
a)	crimes against humanity;
b)	crimes against independence and constitutional order;
c)	acts with terrorist purposes;
d)	organization of prostitution, illegal trafficking of persons, children and women, illegal production and trafficking of weapons, drugs, other narcotic and psychotropic substances, nuclear substances, pornographic materials, as well as illegal trafficking of works of art and objects of historical, cultural and archaeological value;
f)	falsification of the Albanian state seal, Albanian money and securities;
g)	crimes that harm the life and health of an Albanian citizen, for which the law provides for punishment of more than five years of imprisonment or any more severe type of punishment;
h)	laundering of proceeds of criminal offence or criminal activity;
i)	corruption crimes in the public or private sector, as well as the exercise of illegal influence;
j)	criminal offences in the field of information technology.

Article 7/a

Universal jurisdiction
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; letter "dh" added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The criminal law of the Republic of Albania is also applicable to a foreign citizen who is located in the territory of the Republic of Albania and has not been extradited, who outside the territory of the Republic of Albania has committed one of the following acts:
a)	crimes against humanity;
b)	war crimes;
c)	genocide;
ç) acts with terrorist purposes;
d)	torture;
dh) financing of terrorism.

The criminal law of the Republic of Albania is also applicable to a foreign citizen who, outside the territory of the Republic of Albania, commits any of the criminal offences for which special laws or international agreements to which the Republic of Albania is a party determine the applicability of Albanian criminal legislation.

Article 8

Application of criminal law for criminal offenses committed by stateless persons
(Amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

For a stateless person who commits a criminal offense in the territory of the Republic of Albania and a crime outside this territory, the rules of articles 7 and 7/a of this Code apply.

Article 9

Internationally protected persons
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The provisions of this Code also apply to criminal offenses committed against internationally protected persons.
An internationally protected person, except when international agreements ratified by the Albanian state provide otherwise, is:
a)	the head of a state, including a member of a collegial body that performs the functions of the head of state, according to the constitution of that state, the head of government or the minister of foreign affairs, when they are in another state, as well as the family members accompanying them;
b)	any representative or official of a state or any official or agent of an international organization of an intergovernmental character, who, at the time and place of the commission of the criminal offense against him, his office, private residence or means of transport, enjoys, in accordance with international law, special protection from any attack on his person, freedom and dignity, as well as the members of his family.

Article 9/a

Responsibility for foreign persons who enjoy immunity
(Renumbered by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The issue of responsibility for foreign nationals who commit a criminal offense in the territory of the Republic of Albania and who enjoy immunity under international law is resolved through diplomatic channels.

Article 10

Force of criminal decisions of foreign courts

Criminal decisions rendered by foreign courts against Albanian nationals that confirm the commission of a criminal offense, when not otherwise provided by bilateral or multilateral agreements, are valid in Albania within the limits of Albanian law also for the following:
a)	for the purpose of qualifying the person who committed the criminal offense as a repeat offender;
b)	for the enforcement of decisions containing supplementary punishments;
c)	for the enforcement of security measures;
d)	for the compensation of damage or other civil effects.

Article 11

Extradition

Extradition may be permitted only when expressly provided for in international agreements to which the Republic of Albania is a party.
Extradition is permitted when the criminal offense that is the subject of the extradition request is provided as such simultaneously by both Albanian and foreign law.
Extradition is not permitted:
a)	if the person to be extradited is an Albanian national, except in cases when the agreement provides otherwise;
b)	if the criminal offense that is the subject of the extradition request has a political or military character;
c)	when there are grounds to suspect that the person sought to be extradited will be persecuted, punished or sought for reasons of his political, religious, national, racial or ethnic beliefs.
d)	if the person sought to be extradited has been tried by a competent Albanian court for the criminal offense for which extradition is requested.

CHAPTER II CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

Article 12

Age for criminal responsibility

A person who at the time of committing a crime has reached the age of fourteen years has criminal responsibility.
A person who commits a criminal misdemeanor has responsibility when he has reached the age of sixteen years.

Article 13

Causal link

No one has criminal responsibility when between his action or omission and the consequences or the possibility of their occurrence, the causal link is missing.

Article 14

Fault
No one may be punished for an action or omission provided by law as a criminal offense, if the offense was not committed with fault.
A person who commits the offense intentionally or negligently is considered at fault.

Article 15

Intent
A criminal offense is committed intentionally when the person foresees the consequences of the criminal offense and desires their occurrence or, although he foresees and does not desire them, consciously allows their occurrence.

Article 16

Negligence

A criminal offense is committed negligently when the person, although he does not desire the consequences, foresees the possibility of their occurrence and frivolously hopes to avoid them, or does not foresee them, although according to the circumstances he should have and could have foreseen them.

Article 17

Irresponsibility due to mental condition

A person who at the time of committing the offense suffered from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that completely disrupted his mental equilibrium and consequently was not able to control his actions or omissions nor to understand that he was committing a criminal offense has no criminal responsibility.
A person who at the time of committing the criminal offense suffered from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that reduced his mental equilibrium to fully understand and control his actions or omissions is responsible, but this circumstance is taken into account by the court in determining the measure and type of punishment.

Article 18

Commission of a criminal offense in a state of intoxication

A person who has committed a criminal offense in a state of intoxication is not excluded from responsibility.
When intoxication is caused in circumstances of chance and has resulted in a reduction of mental equilibrium, this circumstance is taken into account for the mitigation of punishment against him.
When intoxication is done with premeditation to commit the criminal offense, this circumstance is taken into account for the aggravation of punishment.
The above rules also apply when the criminal offense is committed under the effect of narcotics or other stimulants.

Article 19

Necessary defense

A person who has committed the offense being compelled to defend the life, health, rights and interests of himself or another, from an unlawful, real and immediate attack provided that the character of the defense is in proportion to the dangerousness of the attack, has no criminal responsibility.
Manifest disproportion between them constitutes exceeding the limits of necessary defense.

Article 20

Extreme necessity

A person who has committed the offense out of necessity to face a real and immediate danger that threatens him, another person or property from serious and unavoidable harm by other means, provided that it was not provoked by him and the damage caused is not greater than the damage averted, has no criminal responsibility.

Article 21

Exercise of a right or fulfillment of duty

A person who acts to exercise rights or fulfill duties specified by law or by an order given by a competent person has no criminal responsibility, except in the case when the order is manifestly unlawful.
When the criminal offense is committed as a result of an unlawful order, the person who gave the order is responsible.

CHAPTER III ATTEMPT

Article 22

Meaning of attempt

A criminal offense is considered to have remained in attempt when, although the person undertakes direct actions to commit it, the offense is interrupted and not completed due to circumstances independent of his will.

Article 23

Responsibility for attempt

A person who attempts to commit a crime is responsible for it.
The court, depending on the degree of proximity of the consequence, as well as the reasons for which the crime remained in attempt, mitigates the punishment and may reduce it below the minimum provided by law or determine a milder type of punishment than that provided by law.

Article 24

Withdrawal from commission of the criminal offense

A person who by his own will and definitively withdraws from the commission of the criminal offense, despite the possibilities he has for its commission, has no criminal responsibility.
When the previous actions contain the elements of some other criminal offense, the person is responsible for the offense committed.

CHAPTER IV

COOPERATION OF PERSONS FOR THE COMMISSION OF A CRIMINAL OFFENSE

Article 25

Meaning of cooperation

Cooperation is the commission of a criminal offense by two or more persons with an agreement between
them.

Article 26

Accomplices

Accomplices in the commission of a criminal offense are: organizers, perpetrators, instigators and aiders. Organizers are those persons who organize and direct the activity for the commission of the criminal offense. Perpetrators are persons who carry out direct actions for the realization of the criminal offense.
Instigators are persons who incite other accomplices to commit the criminal offense.
Aiders are persons who, through advice, instructions, provision of means, removal of obstacles, giving promises to conceal the accomplices, traces or objects resulting from the criminal offense, assist in its commission.

Article 27

Liability of accomplices

Organizers, instigators and aiders have the same liability as perpetrators for the criminal offense committed by them.
In determining the punishment for accomplices, the court must take into account the degree of participation of each and the role played in the commission of the criminal offense.

Article 28

Special forms of complicity
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed second paragraph of point 1, amended point 2, by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)
1.	A criminal organization is the highest form of complicity, in which three or more persons participate and which is distinguished by a special degree of organization, structuring, stability, duration, as well as by the purpose of committing one or more criminal offenses, to realize material and non-material benefits.
2.	A terrorist organization is a special form of criminal organization, composed of two or more persons, who have a stable cooperation over time, with the aim of committing acts with terrorist purposes.
3.	An armed gang is a special form of complicity which, possessing weapons, war ammunition and other necessary means, aims to commit criminal offenses provided for in chapters V, VI and VII of the special part of this Code.
4.	A structured criminal group is a special form of complicity, in which three or more persons participate, for the commission of one or more criminal offenses, to realize material and non-material benefits.
A structured criminal group for the commission of a criminal offense is not formed randomly and it is not necessary to be distinguished by stable membership, division of tasks, developed organization and structuring.
5.	The creation and participation in a criminal organization, terrorist organization, armed gang or structured criminal group are qualified as criminal offenses and are punished according to the provisions of the special part of this Code or other special criminal provisions.
6.	Members of a criminal organization, terrorist organization, armed gang or structured criminal group are liable for all criminal offenses committed by them in fulfillment of the purposes of their criminal activity.
7.	A member of a criminal organization, terrorist organization, armed gang or structured criminal group benefits from exemption from punishment or its reduction, when he provides assistance that is deemed decisive for the recognition of their activity, other accomplices, assets owned directly or indirectly by them, as well as for investigative activities carried out against criminal organizations, terrorist organizations, armed gangs and structured criminal groups.

CHAPTER V PUNISHMENTS

Article 29

Principal punishments
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; added last paragraph by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; repealed last paragraph by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 47, dated 26.7.2012)
For persons who have committed crimes, the following principal punishments are given:

1.	Life imprisonment
2.	Imprisonment
3.	Fine
For persons who have committed criminal contraventions, the following principal punishments are given:
1.	Imprisonment
2.	Fine

Article 30

Supplementary punishments
(Amended point 2, by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; amended point 1 by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; added point 10 by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
For persons who have committed crimes or criminal contraventions, together with the principal punishment, one or more of the following supplementary punishments may also be given:
1.	Prohibition of the right to exercise public functions.
2.	Confiscation of the means of commission of the criminal offense and products of the criminal offense.
3.	Prohibition to drive vehicles.
4.	Removal of decorations, honorary titles.
5.	Removal of the right to exercise an activity or craft.
6.	Removal of the right to exercise managerial duties with legal persons.
7.	Prohibition to stay in one or more administrative units.
8.	Expulsion from the territory.
9.	Obligation for publication of the judicial decision.
10.	Loss of parental responsibility.
The court, in special cases, when the imposition of principal punishments is deemed inappropriate and when the law provides for imprisonment up to 3 years or other lighter punishments for the offense committed, may be satisfied only with the determination of the supplementary punishment.

Article 31

Life imprisonment punishment
(Amended first paragraph, second paragraph and title by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; repealed last paragraph by law no.
9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Life imprisonment punishment is given by court decision for the commission of a serious crime.
Life imprisonment punishment is not given to persons who at the time of commission of the crime had not reached the age of eighteen years, as well as to women.

Article 32

Imprisonment punishment
(Amended first paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Imprisonment punishment for crimes is given for a period from five days to thirty-five years. For criminal contraventions, imprisonment punishment is given for a period from five days to two years.

Article 33

Manner of serving life imprisonment punishment and imprisonment punishment

Life imprisonment punishment and imprisonment punishment are served in institutions designated specifically for this purpose.

The rules on the manner of serving punishments, the rights and duties of convicts are determined by law. Minors serve imprisonment punishment in separate places from adults.
Women serve imprisonment punishment in separate institutions from men.

Neni 34

Fine punishment
(Third and fourth paragraphs amended by law no. 8175, dated 23.12.1996, fifth paragraph added, seventh paragraph amended, by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; fourth paragraph amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; paragraph 8 repealed by Constitutional Court decision no. 19, dated 1.6.2011; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; fifth paragraph amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Fine punishment consists of payment to the state of a sum of money within the limits provided by law.
Fine punishment is imposed on persons who commit a crime or criminal contravention. For persons who commit a crime, the fine is imposed from 100 thousand to 10 million lekë.
For persons who commit a criminal contravention, the fine is imposed from 50 thousand to 3 million lekë.
For persons who commit crimes with motives of gaining property or securing any other kind of material benefit, the court decides according to article 36 of this Code, the confiscation of the means of committing the criminal offense and the products of the criminal offense or, in their absence, a fine punishment in the amount from 100 thousand to 5 million lekë.
The court imposes the fine punishment after having investigated the person's ability to pay. The ability to pay is determined by the person's personal and property situation, as well as by other circumstances related to them. The fine punishment is paid within the time limit specified in the court's decision.
The court, taking into account the economic situation of the convicted person, may allow the fine to be paid in installments, specifying the installments and the time limit for their payment.
When the convicted person does not pay the fine and the fine cannot be collected through compulsory execution, the court decides to replace the fine with imprisonment, calculating five thousand lekë for one day of imprisonment.
When the convicted person cannot pay the fine on time through no fault of his own and if the criteria on which the fine was determined have changed after the decision was rendered and do not clearly justify payment of the fine, then the convicted person may request:
a)	postponement of the fine payment deadline for up to six months;
b)	performance of work of public interest.
If the court orders the performance of work in the public interest, the rules of article 63 of this Code apply.
If the fine is not paid even after postponement of the deadline or if the convicted person does not perform the work in the public interest, the court decides to replace the fine with imprisonment.
When the fine has been imposed for committing a crime, its replacement with imprisonment may not exceed three years, while when it has been imposed for committing a criminal contravention, the replacement may not exceed one year of imprisonment, but always without exceeding the maximum imprisonment penalty provided by the relevant provision. If the criminal provision does not provide for imprisonment penalty, the maximum imprisonment penalty is considered to be six months.
When the convicted person as above pays the fine during the execution of imprisonment, the court revokes the decision, making the calculations according to the criterion of paragraph 8 of this article.

Neni 35

Removal of the right to exercise public functions
(Reformulated by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

Removal of the right to exercise public functions, for a period of not less than five years, is imposed mandatorily against a person who has committed a crime related to duty, by abusing public function or has committed a crime for which the court has imposed an imprisonment sentence of not less than ten years.
Removal of the right to exercise public functions may be imposed for a period from three to five years, when the court has imposed a sentence from five to ten years of imprisonment, and from one to three years, when a sentence of up to three years of imprisonment has been imposed.

Neni 36

Confiscation of the means of committing the criminal offense and the products of the criminal offense
(Amended by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003)

1.	Confiscation is imposed mandatorily by the court and concerns the taking and transfer in favor of the state:
a)	of things that have served or are designated as means for committing the criminal offense;
b)	of the products of the criminal offense, which includes any kind of property, as well as documents or legal instruments that certify titles or other interests in property that derives or is obtained directly or indirectly from the commission of the criminal offense;
c)	of rewards, given or promised, for committing the criminal offense;
ç) of any other property, the value of which corresponds to that of the products of the criminal offense;
d)	of things, the production, use, possession or disposal of which constitutes a criminal offense, even when no conviction decision has been rendered.
2.	If the products of the criminal offense have been transformed or converted partially or completely into other property, the latter are subject to confiscation.
3.	If the products of the criminal offense have been combined with property acquired lawfully, the latter are confiscated up to the value of the products of the criminal offense.
4.	Income or other benefits from the products of the criminal offense, from property into which the products of the criminal offense have been transformed or converted or from property with which these products have been mixed, are also subject to confiscation, in the same measure and manner as the products of the criminal offense.

Neni 37

Prohibition from driving vehicles

The prohibition from driving vehicles is imposed by the court, for a period from one to five years, against persons who have committed a criminal offense, when it is assessed that it will have a preventive effect or is consistent with the nature of the offense committed.

Neni 38

Removal of decorations and titles

Removal of decorations and honorary titles is decided for persons who have committed a criminal offense punishable by imprisonment and it is assessed that their retention is not consistent with the nature of the criminal offense committed.
Removal of decorations and honorary titles is permanent when the person is sentenced for a crime over ten years and from one to five years, when sentenced up to ten years of imprisonment.

Neni 39

Removal of the right to exercise a profession or an activity
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Removal of the right to exercise a profession or an activity prohibits the convicted person from exercising the profession or activity for which a special permit, certificate, authorization or license has been issued by the competent authority.
Removal of the right to exercise an activity or a profession is imposed for a period from one month to five years and is a consequence of any conviction for criminal offenses committed by abusing them, or when it is assessed that the further exercise of the activity or profession conflicts with the legal relationship that the specific criminal offense aims to protect.

Neni 40

Removal of the right to exercise managerial duties
(Last paragraph added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

Removal of the right to exercise managerial duties with legal persons removes the convicted person's ability to exercise the duties of director, administrator, entrepreneur, liquidator, as well as any other duty related to the capacity of representative of the legal person.
Removal of the right to exercise managerial duties with legal persons is a consequence of any conviction for criminal offenses and is imposed for a period from one month to five years, when the convicted person has abused functions or has acted in violation of the rules related to the duty.
When the sentence imposed by the court is not less than five years of imprisonment, this right may be removed for a period from five to ten years.

Neni 41

Prohibition from staying in one or more administrative units

The prohibition from staying in one or more administrative units is imposed by the court for a period from one to five years, when it is assessed that the convicted person's stay in these places constitutes a danger to public security.

Neni 42

Expulsion from the territory

Expulsion from the territory of the Republic of Albania is imposed by the court against a foreign national and a stateless person who commits a crime and it is deemed that his further stay in the territory of the Republic of Albania should not continue in the future.
The decision is revoked by the court, upon the request of the convicted person, when the foreign national or stateless person acquires Albanian citizenship.

Neni 43

Publication of the court decision

Publication of the court decision is imposed by the court when it deems that knowledge of the content of the decision is of interest to legal and natural persons.
Publication of the court decision consists of the obligation of the convicted person to publish at his own expense in one or more newspapers or radio-television stations wholly or partially the court decision, according to the order made by the court.
The date of publication and its duration are determined by the court.
Press and radio-television bodies are obliged to make the publication of the court decision sent by the court.
Publication of the court decision is not imposed when it risks the disclosure of state secrets, violates the intimate life of persons or affects public morals.

Neni 43/a

Loss of parental responsibility
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Loss of parental responsibility is imposed by the court against a person who exercises parental responsibility, when he is convicted as an author or accomplice in a criminal offense against a child or as an accomplice with a child in the commission of a criminal offense.

Neni 44

Manner of serving supplementary punishments

When the court, together with an imprisonment sentence, also imposes one or more of the supplementary punishments mentioned in Article 30 of this Code, their execution begins together with the serving of the principal punishment.
For numbers 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Article 30 of this Code, their execution begins after serving the imprisonment sentence. The rights affected by the supplementary punishments cannot be exercised by the convicted person during the time of serving the imprisonment sentence.

Neni 45

Application of criminal law to legal persons
(Repealed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

Legal persons, with the exception of state institutions, are criminally liable for criminal offenses committed in their name or for their benefit by their bodies and representatives.
Local government units are criminally liable only for actions committed during the exercise of their activity, which can be exercised through the delegation of public services.
The criminal liability of legal persons does not exclude that of natural persons who have committed or are accomplices in the commission of the same criminal offenses.
The criminal offenses and corresponding punitive measures that apply to legal persons, as well as the procedure for their imposition and execution, are regulated by special law.

Neni 46

Medical and educational measures
(First and third paragraphs amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

Medical measures may be imposed by the court against irresponsible persons who have committed a criminal offense, while educational measures may be imposed against minors who are excluded from punishment or who due to age have no criminal liability.
Medical measures are:
1.	Compulsory outpatient treatment
2.	Compulsory treatment in a medical institution.
The court decision on medical and educational measures is revocable at any time when the circumstances for which it was given disappear, but in any case, the court is primarily obliged, after the passage of one year from the date of issuing the decision, to review its decision.
The rules for revoking the court decision containing medical measures are provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure. The rules for imposing or revoking medical and educational measures for minors are provided by the Code of Justice for Minors.

KREU VI CAKTIMI I DËNIMIT

Neni 47

Manner of determining the punishment

The court determines the punishment by respecting the provisions of the general part of this Code and the limits of punishments provided by law for the criminal offense.
In determining the punishment against a person, it takes into account the dangerousness of the criminal offense, of its author, the degree of guilt, as well as mitigating and aggravating circumstances.

Neni 48

Mitigating circumstances
(Two paragraphs added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The following circumstances mitigate the punishment:
a)	When the act is committed driven by motives with positive moral and social values;
b)	when the act is committed under the influence of psychological shock caused by provocation or unlawful actions of the victim or any other person;
c)	when the act is committed under the influence of unlawful actions or instructions of a superior; ç) when the person who committed the act shows deep remorse;
d)	when the person has compensated for the damage caused by the criminal offense or has actively helped to eliminate or reduce the consequences of the criminal offense;
dh) when the person appears before the competent authorities after committing the criminal offense;
e)	when the relations between the person who committed the criminal offense and the victim are normalized.
The mitigating circumstance provided in letter "a" of the first paragraph of this article does not mitigate the punishment when the criminal offense is committed in the circumstances provided in letter "j" of Article 50 of this Code.
The mitigating circumstance provided in letter "e" of the first paragraph of this article does not mitigate the punishment of a person who has committed a criminal offense against children or a criminal offense of domestic violence.

Neni 49

The court, regardless of the circumstances mentioned in Article 48 of this Code, may take into consideration other circumstances as long as it considers them such as to justify mitigation of the punishment.

Neni 50

Aggravating circumstances
(Letter "b" amended, letters "h" and "i" added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; letter "dh" amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; letter "j" added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007;
letter "ç/1" and "e/1" added and letter "g" and "j" amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; letter "f/1 added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The following circumstances aggravate the punishment:
a)	commission of the act driven by base motives;
b)	commission of the act to place before liability or to conceal the criminal liability of another or to avoid punishment for another criminal offense or to realize, or to secure for oneself or for third parties property gains, or any other kind of material benefit;
c)	commission of the criminal offense with cruelty and brutality;
ç) commission of a crime after imposition of a punishment for a crime committed earlier;
ç/1) commission of the criminal offense after placing the person under electronic monitoring;

d)	commission of actions that aggravate or increase the consequences of the criminal offense;
dh) commission of the criminal offense by abusing public office or religious service;
e)	when the act is committed against children, pregnant women or persons who, for various reasons, cannot defend themselves;
e/1) commission of the criminal offense during or after the issuance of court protection orders from domestic violence;
f)	when the act is directed against representatives of other states;
f/1. When the act is directed against elected persons and public officials, because of their duty.
g)	when the act is committed by taking advantage of family relations, cohabitation, friendship, hospitality;
gj) commission of the criminal offense in cooperation;
h)	commission of the criminal offense more than once;
i)	when the act is committed using weapons, war ammunition, explosive, incendiary, poisonous and radioactive substances.
j)	when the act is committed driven by motives related to gender, race, color, ethnicity, language, gender identity, sexual orientation, political, religious or philosophical beliefs, health condition, genetic predispositions or limited ability.

Neni 51

Punishment for minors
(Amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

For minors who at the time of committing the criminal offense have not reached the age of 18, the punishment cannot be more than half of the punishment provided by law for the criminal offense committed. The rules for determining the punishment for minors are provided in the Code of Criminal Justice for Minors.

Neni 52

Exemption of minors from punishment

The court, based on the low dangerousness of the criminal offense, the concrete circumstances of its commission, the previous conduct of the minor, may exempt him from punishment.
In these cases the court may decide to send the minor to an educational institution.

Neni 52/a

Exemption or reduction of punishment for justice collaborators and victims
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013, reference amended by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)

The person who has promised or given a reward or other benefits, according to articles 164/a, 244, 244/a, 245, 312, 319, 319/a, 319/b, and 319/c of this Code may benefit from exemption from serving the punishment or its reduction, if he makes a denunciation and provides assistance in the criminal proceedings of these offenses. In rendering the decision, the court also takes into account the time when the denunciation was made, whether or not the consequences of the offense occurred.
The person harmed by criminal offenses related to trafficking in persons may benefit from exemption from punishment for committing criminal offenses during the period of trafficking and to the extent that he was compelled to commit those unlawful acts or omissions.
The person who has committed one of the criminal offenses related to trafficking in narcotics, weapons or ammunition, trafficking in persons or for criminal offenses committed by criminal organizations, who cooperates and assists the criminal prosecution authorities in the fight against them or, as the case may be, in the discovery of other persons who commit such crimes, cannot be punished more than half of the punishment provided for the offense committed by him. In special cases, when mitigating circumstances also concur in his favor, this person may be exempted from punishment.

Neni 52/b

Exemption from punishment for crimes in the field of elections
(Added by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)

The person who has committed one or more criminal offenses provided in chapter X of this Code, who cooperates and assists the criminal prosecution authorities for the investigation, as well as for the discovery of other persons, collaborators in the commission of the criminal offense or perpetrators of other related offenses, is exempted from punishment for the criminal offense committed by him.

Neni 53

Reduction of punishment below the limits provided by law
(Words added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The court, in special cases, when it considers that the offense and its perpetrator present low dangerousness and several mitigating circumstances are present, and no aggravating circumstance is present, has the right to determine a punishment below the minimum or a milder type of punishment than that provided by the relevant provision.

Neni 53/a

Replacement of imprisonment with payment of a sum of money in favor of the state
(Added by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

The court, in cases when expressly provided by the provision, when it considers that the criminal offense and its perpetrator present low social dangerousness and when it determines a punishment up to two years imprisonment, may decide to replace the imprisonment with payment of a sum of money in favor of the state, calculating one day of imprisonment as five thousand lekë.
This replacement may be decided when requested by the perpetrator of the criminal offense.
In case the sum of money determined by the court is not paid within 10 days from the moment the decision becomes final, upon request of the prosecution, the court decides to revoke the decision for replacement of imprisonment.

Neni 54

Acceptance of payment of fine

For criminal contraventions for which, in addition to the fine, imprisonment is also provided, the court, upon request of the perpetrator of the criminal contravention may accept that he pay on the spot a sum of money in favor of the state budget, equal to half of the maximum fine provided for criminal contraventions in the General Part of this Code.
The request may be submitted at any stage of the trial until before the final decision of the first instance is rendered.
When the court does not accept the request, it gives the punishment for the offense committed.
Acceptance of the request is not allowed for persons who have previously been punished even for criminal contraventions.

Neni 55

Determination of punishments for several criminal offenses

(Second paragraph added by law no. 144/2013, dated 2.5.2013 and repealed by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 9, dated 26.2.2016; second paragraph amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015 and repealed by law no.
82/2016, dated 25.7.2016)

When the acts or omissions contain the elements of several criminal offenses, as well as when the person has committed several criminal offenses for which no decision has yet been rendered, the court first determines the punishment for each criminal offense and finally gives a single punishment, which consists of the increased heavier punishment.
The increased heavier punishment cannot exceed the total sum of the punishments determined separately, nor the highest limit provided for the type of punishment given.
When the court considers that the commission of many criminal offenses does not show great dangerousness of the guilty person, it may give as final punishment the heavier punishment it has determined for one of the criminal offenses.
The court in the final decision gives one or more of the supplementary punishments given separately for each particular offense.

Neni 56

Combination of punishments

When the convicted person, before full serving of the punishment, is punished for a criminal offense committed before the rendering of the decision, the rules of the above article apply and the served part of the punishment is counted in the new punishment.
When the convicted person, after the rendering of the decision, but before full serving of the punishment, commits a new criminal offense, the court combines the new punishment with the remaining part of the previous punishment, following the rules provided by article 55 of this Code.

Neni 57

Calculation of pre-trial detention
(Third paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The time of pre-trial detention is calculated in the punishment of imprisonment or fine, as well as in the obligation to perform work in the public interest as follows:
One day of pre-trial detention equals one and a half days of imprisonment. One day of pre-trial detention equals 5 thousand lekë fine.
One day of pre-trial detention equals eighteen hours of work in the public interest.

KREU VII ALTERNATIVES TO IMPRISONMENT

Neni 58

Semi-liberty
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

For punishment up to one year imprisonment, the court, due to the obligations of the convicted person for work, education, qualification or professional training, essential family responsibilities or for the need for medical treatment or rehabilitation, may decide the execution of the imprisonment decision with semi-liberty.
The convicted person who serves the punishment with semi-liberty is obliged to return to prison after having fulfilled the obligations outside prison, within the time period determined by the court.
When the convicted person does not fulfill the obligations according to this article, article 62 of this Code applies.

Article 59

Suspension of the execution of imprisonment and probation

(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; third paragraph added, fourth paragraph amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

1. Due to the low dangerousness of the person, age, health or mental conditions, way of life and needs, especially those related to family, education or work, circumstances of the commission of the criminal offense, as well as behavior after the commission of the criminal offense, the court, when imposing a prison sentence of up to five years, may order that the convicted person maintain contact with the probation service and be placed on probation, suspending the execution of the sentence, on condition that during the probation period no other criminal offense is committed.
2. The court orders that the convicted person fulfill one or more obligations provided for in Article 60 of this Code.
3. For sentences given up to two years imprisonment, suspended by the court, the probation period is twice the length of the imprisonment sentence given by the court.
4. The probation period, with the exception of the rule provided for in paragraph 3 of this article, is 24 months up to 5 years. The probation period begins the day after the announcement of the court decision that has decided on the suspension of the imprisonment sentence. The probation period may be shortened or extended depending on the manner of execution of probation and the personal conditions of the convicted person, but without prejudice to the minimum and maximum period provided for in this paragraph.
5. If the convicted person does not maintain contact with the probation service or does not fulfill the obligations provided for in Article 60, as ordered by the court, the court decides to replace the first sentence with another sentence, extend the supervision period, within the probation period, or revoke the suspension of the execution of the decision.

Article 59/a

House arrest
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; second paragraph added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

For prison sentences up to two years or when this time is the remaining part of the sentence, according to a decision for a longer period of imprisonment, the court may decide that the sentence given be served with house arrest of the convicted person, in another private house or in a public care and health center, when the following circumstances exist:
a) For pregnant women or mothers with children, under the age of 10 years, who live with her.
b) For fathers, who have parental responsibility for the child, who lives with him, under the age of 10 years, when his mother has died or is unable to care for him.
c) For persons, in serious health conditions, who require continuous care from the health service, outside prison.
ç) For persons over 60 years of age, who are incapacitated from a health perspective.
d) For young people, under the age of 21 years, with documented health, educational, work or family responsibility needs.
The court, in the circumstances provided for in letters "a" and "b" of the first paragraph of this article, may not decide that the sentence given be served with house arrest, for convicted persons who have committed a crime against their spouse, cohabitant or child.
The court may allow persons sentenced to house arrest to leave their residence, for the fulfillment of essential family needs, to engage in work, education or training activities or for rehabilitation programs, for which the probation service agrees.
In this case the court determines the measures that the probation service must take.
The court revokes house arrest and replaces it with another punishment, when the conditions provided for in the first paragraph of this article no longer exist. If the convicted person leaves the residence without authorization of the court or violates the obligations specified in the court decision, Article 62 of this Code applies.

Article 60

Obligations of the convicted person placed on probation
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; point 12 of the first paragraph amended, one sentence in the second paragraph amended and third paragraph added by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)
The convicted person placed on probation may be obligated by the court to fulfill one or more of the following obligations:
1. To exercise a professional activity or to receive an education or professional training.
2. Use of salary and other income or property for the fulfillment of financial obligations.
3. To repair the civil damage caused.
4. To be prohibited from driving certain vehicles.
5. Not to exercise professional activity when the criminal offense is related to this activity.
6. Not to frequent certain places.
7. Not to frequent establishments that serve alcoholic beverages.
8. To remain in his residence at specified hours.
9. Not to associate with certain persons, mainly with convicted persons or accomplices of the criminal offense.
10. Not to possess, hold or use weapons.
11. Treatment or rehabilitation in a health institution or submission to a treatment, medical or rehabilitation program.
12. To submit to a treatment, or medical or rehabilitation program, with the aim of stopping the use of alcohol or narcotic substances.
In determining the obligations for the convicted person, the court takes into account the age of the convicted person, mental state, way of life and his needs, especially those related to family, education or work, motives for committing the criminal offense, attitude after committing the criminal offense, as well as other circumstances, which affect the establishment of obligations, according to this article and their supervision. The obligations provided for in points 11 and 12, of paragraph 1, of this article, are determined only with the consent of the convicted person.
The period for fulfillment of an obligation provided for in paragraph 1, of this article, is determined by the court within the specified probation period.

Article 60/a

Obligation to abstain from the use of alcohol or drugs
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; words added in the third paragraph by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

The court, against the convicted person placed on probation, who is in the condition of chronic dependence on alcohol or narcotic substances, imposes the obligation to submit to medical treatments for abstaining from the use of alcohol or drugs.
Medical treatment for abstaining from the use of alcohol or drugs is done in the specialized medical institution, according to the determination made by the Ministry of Health, based on the request of the probation service.
The probation service supervises the execution of the court decision and reports immediately to the prosecutor, when the convicted person does not fulfill the obligation imposed according to the provisions of Article 60 of this Code.

Article 61

Obligations of the convicted person during the probation period
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.12.2008)
During the probation period the convicted person is obligated:

a) to appear regularly and to continuously inform the probation service about the fulfillment of the conditions and obligations specified by the court;
b) to obtain permission from the probation service for changing residence, place of work or for frequent movements within the country.

Article 62

Violation of conditions and obligations during the probation period
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

If the convicted person, during the probation period, commits another criminal offense, the court may change the obligations it has imposed, replace the given sentence with another sentence, or revoke, wholly or partially, the suspension decision.
If the convicted person, during the probation period, violates the conditions or obligations imposed on them, the probation service immediately reports to the prosecutor.
For minor and first-time violations of the conditions or obligations imposed by the court, the prosecutor has the right to issue a warning, which is registered in the convicted person's personal file.
For serious or repeated violations, the prosecutor requests the court to change the imposed obligation, add other obligations, replace them with another sanction, or revoke the decision to suspend the sentence and serve the remaining part of the sentence in prison.

Article 63

Suspension of execution of the imprisonment decision and obligation to perform work in the public interest
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

The court, due to the low dangerousness of the person and the circumstances of committing the criminal offense, when it has imposed a sentence of up to one year imprisonment, may decide to suspend the execution of the imprisonment decision and replace it with the obligation that the convicted person perform work in the public interest.
Work in the public interest means the performance by the convicted person of work, with their consent and without remuneration, in favor of the public interest or an association specified in the court's decision, for a period from forty to two hundred and forty hours.
This obligation cannot be imposed when the convicted person refuses the suspension in the court hearing. Work in the public interest is performed within a period of six months.
In its decision, the court specifies the number of work hours and the obligation that the convicted person maintain contact with the probation service. The probation service determines the type of work to be performed, specifies the place where the work will be performed and the days of the week when it will be performed, taking into account, as far as possible, the regular employment of the convicted person or their family obligations. The duration of work in the public interest does not exceed eight hours per day.
After completion of the work, the sentence is considered served.
If the convicted person does not perform the work in the public interest, does not maintain contact with the probation service or violates the conditions or other obligations imposed by the court, the prosecutor immediately informs the court. The court, in this case, decides according to Article 62 of this Code.

Article 64

Conditional release
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008;
words added to the third paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; third subparagraph of paragraph 1 amended and paragraph 5 added by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

A person sentenced to imprisonment may be conditionally released from serving the sentence only for special reasons, if through their conduct and work they demonstrate that the purpose of their education has been achieved with the sentence served, and they have served:	no less than half of the sentence given for criminal misdemeanors;	no less than two-thirds of the sentence given for crimes with sentencing measures up to five years imprisonment;	no less than three-quarters of the sentence given for crimes with sentencing measures over 5 years up to the maximum provided by law, with the exception of the provisions in paragraph 3 of this article.
The time benefited by amnesty or pardon is not counted in the measure of the sentence served.
Conditional release is not permitted for repeat offenders for crimes committed intentionally as well as for those convicted of committing the criminal offenses provided for in Articles 78/a, 79/a, 79/b, 79/c or the third paragraph of Article 100.
Conditional release is revoked by the court when the convicted person, for a criminal offense committed intentionally, during the conditional period, commits another criminal offense intentionally, applying the provisions for the combination of sentences.
The court orders the convicted person to maintain contact with the Probation Service during the probation period and to fulfill one or more of the obligations provided for in Article 60 of this Code. When the convicted person does not maintain contact with the Probation Service or when they do not fulfill the obligations provided for in Article 60 of this Code, ordered by the court, the latter decides to replace the first sentence with another sentence, extend the supervision period during the probation period or revoke the decision for early conditional release.

Article 65

(First and second paragraphs amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; word amended in the second paragraph and third paragraph added by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

1.	Conditional release is not permitted for a person sentenced to life imprisonment.
2.	Only in exceptional cases may a person sentenced to life imprisonment be conditionally released when:
They have served no less than thirty-five years imprisonment and during the serving of the sentence have maintained exemplary conduct and it is assessed that the purpose of the sentence for their education has been achieved.
3.	From this rule, those convicted of the criminal offenses provided for in Articles 78/a, 79/a, 79/b, 79/c and the third paragraph of Article 100 are excluded.

Article 65/a

Security period
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The court, in rendering the decision, may also decide to set a security period, during which the application of Article 64 of this Code is not permitted, in cases when one of these circumstances exists:
a)	criminal offense, the measure of the sentence of which is over five years;
b)	the commission of the criminal offense was done with savagery and cruelty;
c)	when the offense was committed against children, pregnant women or persons who, for various reasons, cannot defend themselves;
ç) when the offense was committed by taking advantage of family relationships or cohabitation;
d)	when the commission of the criminal offense was motivated by reasons related to gender, race, religion, nationality, language, political, religious or social beliefs.
The security period extends for the time period from three-quarters of the sentence given by the court until the full duration of the criminal sentence.

CHAPTER VIII

EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTION, OF SENTENCES AND THEIR NON-EXECUTION

Article 66

(Amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)
Criminal prosecution cannot be conducted when from the commission of the offense until the moment of taking the person as a defendant have passed:
a)	forty years in the case of crimes that provide for a sentence of life imprisonment;
b)	twenty years for crimes that provide for a sentence of no less than ten years imprisonment or another more severe sentence;
c)	ten years for crimes that provide for a sentence from five to ten years imprisonment; ç) five years for crimes that provide for a sentence up to five years imprisonment or fine;
d)	three years for criminal misdemeanors that provide for a sentence up to two years imprisonment; dh) two years for criminal misdemeanors that provide for a sentence of fine.
The criminal offenses of Chapter II, Section I, Articles 76 - 79/c, are not subject to prescription.

Article 67

Non-prescription of criminal prosecution

Crimes of war and those against humanity are not subject to prescription of criminal prosecution.

Article 68

Prescription of execution of sentence

The sentence decision is not executed when from the day it became final have passed:
a)	twenty years for a decision containing a sentence of fifteen to twenty-five years imprisonment;
b)	ten years for a decision containing a sentence of five to fifteen years imprisonment;
c)	five years for decisions containing a sentence of imprisonment up to five years or other lighter sentences.

Article 69

Rehabilitation

The following are considered not convicted:
a) those who have been sentenced to imprisonment for a period of up to six months or to any other lighter sentence and who during two years from the day of serving the sentence have not committed another criminal offense;
b) those who have been sentenced to imprisonment for a period from six months to five years and who during five years from the day of serving the sentence have not committed another criminal offense;
c) those who have been sentenced to imprisonment for a period from five to ten years and who during seven years from the day of serving the sentence have not committed another criminal offense;
ç) those who have been sentenced to imprisonment for a period from ten to twenty-five years and who during ten years from the day of serving the sentence have not committed another criminal offense.

Article 70

Pardon

By the act of pardon the competent body exempts the person wholly or partially from serving the sentence given by a judicial decision or makes the replacement of the sentence with a milder type of sentence.

Article 71

Amnesty

By the act of amnesty the competent body exempts from criminal prosecution, from serving the sentence wholly or partially or makes the replacement of the sentence with a milder type of sentence.
Amnesty extends to those criminal offenses committed until one day before its proclamation, except when the respective act provides otherwise.

Article 72

Application of the provisions of the general part

The provisions of the general part of this Code are also applied to other criminal offenses provided as such by special laws.

SPECIAL PART

CHAPTER I

CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 73

Genocide
(The words "or with death" removed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The implementation of a premeditated plan aimed at destroying wholly or partially a national, ethnic, racial or religious group directed against members of the group and accompanied by the following acts, such as: intentional killing of members of the group, serious physical and mental harm, placing in severe living conditions that cause physical destruction, implementation of measures aimed at preventing births, as well as forced transfer of children of one group to another group, is punished by imprisonment of not less than ten years or by life imprisonment.

Article 74

Crimes against humanity
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Killings, forced disappearance, exterminations, enslavement, internments and deportations, as well as any kind of torture or other inhuman violence, committed, according to a concrete premeditated plan, or in a systematic manner, against a group of civilian population, for political, ideological, racial, ethnic and religious motives are punished by not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

Article 74/a

Computer distribution of materials pro genocide or crimes against humanity
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Offering to the public or intentional distribution to the public, through computer systems, of materials that deny, minimize, in a significant manner, approve or justify acts that constitute genocide or crime against humanity, is punished by imprisonment from three to six years.

Article 75

War crimes

(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Acts committed by various persons in time of war, such as killing, mistreatment or deportation for slave labor, as well as for any other kind of inhuman exploitation to the detriment of the civilian population or in occupied territory, killing or mistreatment of prisoners of war, killing of hostages, destruction of private or public property, destruction of cities, communes or villages, not dictated by military necessity, is punished by deprivation of liberty of not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

CHAPTER II

CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON CRIMES AGAINST LIFE
SECTION I
CRIMES AGAINST LIFE COMMITTED INTENTIONALLY

Article 76

Intentional murder

Murder committed intentionally is punished by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 77

Intentional murder in connection with another crime
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Intentional murder, which precedes, accompanies, conceals or follows another crime, is punished by imprisonment of not less than twenty years.

Article 78

Premeditated murder
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; words added in the second paragraph by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; second paragraph amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Premeditated murder is punished by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty-five years.
Murder committed for interest or revenge is punished by imprisonment of not less than twenty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 78/a

Murder for blood feud
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Intentional murder for blood feud is punished by imprisonment of not less than thirty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 79

Murder in other aggravating circumstances
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; letter "c" amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; letter "c" repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Intentional murder committed:
a) against a minor;
b) against a person with physical or mental disabilities, seriously ill or pregnant, when the qualities of the victim are visible or known;
c) repealed;
ç) against the informant, witness, injured party or other judicial parties;
d) more than once;
dh) against two or more persons;
e) in such a manner that causes special suffering to the victim; ë) in a manner dangerous to the life of many persons,
is punished by imprisonment of not less than twenty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 79/a

Murder of public officials
(added by law no. 144/2013)

Intentional murder of a deputy, judge, prosecutor, lawyer, military person or other public officials, during duty or because of it, when the qualities of the victim are visible or known, is punished by imprisonment of not less than thirty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 79/b

Murder of employees of the State Police
(Added by law no. 144/2013)

Intentional murder of employees of the State Police, during duty or because of it, when the qualities of the victim are visible or known, is punished by imprisonment of not less than thirty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 79/c

Murder because of family relationships
(Added by law no. 144/2013)

Intentional murder of a person who is a spouse, ex-spouse, cohabitant or ex-cohabitant, close relative or close in-law with the perpetrator of the criminal offense, is punished by imprisonment of not less than twenty years or by life imprisonment.

Article 80

Providing the conditions and material means to commit murder is punished by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 81

Infanticide
(Word amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Murder of an infant committed intentionally by the mother, immediately after birth, is punished by imprisonment up to five
years.

Article 82

Murder committed in a state of strong mental shock

Intentional murder committed in a state of strong mental shock of the moment caused by violence or serious insult by the victim is punished by imprisonment up to eight years.

Article 83

Murder committed with exceeding the limits of necessary defense

Murder committed in the conditions of exceeding the limits of necessary defense is punished by imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 83/a

Serious threat for revenge or for blood feud
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; the part providing also punishment with fine, as main punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Serious threat for revenge or blood feud, made to a person to be locked in the house, is punished by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 83/b

Incitement to blood feud
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal penalty, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Incitement of others to revenge or blood feud, when it does not constitute another criminal offense, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 84

Threat

A serious threat of murder or serious injury made to a person constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

Article 84/a

Threat with motives of racism and xenophobia through computer systems
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)
A serious threat of murder or serious injury made to a person through computer systems, on grounds of ethnic origin, nationality, race or religion, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to three years.
SECTION II
CRIMES AGAINST LIFE CAUSED BY NEGLIGENCE

Article 85

Manslaughter by negligence

Killing committed by negligence is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

SECTION III
CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED INTENTIONALLY

AGAINST HEALTH

Article 86

Torture
(Amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
The intentional commission of acts by which a person is caused severe physical or mental suffering, by a person exercising public functions, or with his instigation or approval, overt or tacit, for the purpose of:
a)	obtaining from him or another person information or confessions;
b)	punishing him for an act committed or suspected to have been committed by him/or another person;
c)	intimidating or coercing him or another person;
ç) any other purpose based on any form of discrimination;
d)	any other inhuman or degrading act; is punishable by imprisonment from four to ten years.

Article 87

Torture with serious consequences

Torture, as well as any other inhuman act, when it has resulted in mutilation, disfigurement or any permanent damage to the health of the person or death, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 88

Intentional serious injury
(Second paragraph amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Injury committed intentionally that has resulted in mutilation, disfigurement or any other permanent damage to health, termination of pregnancy, or has been life-threatening at the moment of its infliction, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
The same offense, when committed against several persons, against a person who is a spouse, ex-spouse, cohabitant or ex-cohabitant, close blood relative or close in-law of the perpetrator of the criminal offense, or when it has resulted in death, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 88/a

Serious injury in a state of severe mental shock
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Serious injury committed in a state of severe mental shock of the moment, caused by violence or serious insult by the victim, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 88/b

Serious injury exceeding the limits of necessary defense
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Serious injury committed by exceeding the limits of necessary defense is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 89

Intentional light injury

Injury committed intentionally that has caused temporary incapacity for work of more than 9 days constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 89/a

Illegal trafficking in organs
(Added by law no. 8204, dated 10.4.1997; amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)
Trafficking in transplants, as well as any activity related to the illegal removal and implantation of organs, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
This offense committed by a person who abuses his position towards a child or another unprotected person is punishable by imprisonment from seven to ten years.
This offense, when committed more than once or in cooperation, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.
When the above offense causes the death of the victim or this offense is committed by a structured criminal group or criminal organization, it is punishable by fifteen to twenty-five years imprisonment.

Article 89/b

Spread of infectious diseases
(Added by law no. 35/2020, dated 16.4.2020)
The intentional spread of an infectious disease with high risk to health, through the commission of acts or omissions by a person who is diagnosed as a carrier of the disease or by a person who intends to spread it, is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
When this offense is committed by negligence, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.
The same offense, when it has caused serious consequences to health or danger to the life of people, is punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Article 90

Other intentional injuries

Beating, as well as any other act of violence, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine.
The same offense, when it has caused temporary incapacity for work up to 9 days, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to six months.
SECTION IV
CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH COMMITTED BY NEGLIGENCE

Article 91

Serious injury by negligence

Serious injury committed by negligence constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

Article 92

Light injury by negligence

Light injury committed by negligence constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine.

SECTION V
CRIMINAL OFFENSES ENDANGERING LIFE AND HEALTH FROM TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY OR FAILURE TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE

Article 93

Termination of pregnancy without the woman's consent

Termination of pregnancy without the woman's consent, except in cases where the termination is dictated by a justified health reason, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Article 94

Termination of pregnancy performed in unauthorized places and by unauthorized persons

Termination of pregnancy performed not in public hospital facilities or specially authorized private clinics, or by a person who is not a doctor or beyond the permissible time for termination except in cases where this is dictated by a justified health reason, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.
When the offense has caused endangerment of life or death, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five
years.

Article 95

Provision of means for termination of pregnancy

Provision of means that serve for the termination of pregnancy to a woman with the intention that she perform the termination herself or with the help of another person constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

Article 96

Negligence in medical treatment
(Second paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001, amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Negligence in medical treatment of patients by a health professional, when it has endangered the life of the person or seriously damaged his health, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.
The same offense, when it has caused the death of the person, is punishable by imprisonment up to two years.

Article 97

Failure to provide assistance

Failure to provide assistance, without reasonable cause, by a person who by law or by reason of duty was obliged to provide it, when as a result thereof serious damage to health, endangerment of life or death has been caused, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 98

Failure to provide assistance by the ship's captain

Failure to provide assistance by the ship's captain to people who are drowning at sea or in other waters, when this assistance could be provided without serious risk to the ship, crew and passengers, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to four years.

Article 99

Causing suicide
(Amended wording by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Causing the suicide or attempted suicide of a person, as a result of systematic ill-treatment or other systematic conduct that seriously affects dignity, committed by a person who has them in dependency or by a person with whom they have a family or cohabitation relationship, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
SECTION VI SEXUAL CRIMES

Article 100

Sexual or homosexual relations with minors
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended wording in the second and third paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations with a minor child who has not reached the age of fourteen or with a minor who has not reached sexual maturity, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
When the sexual or homosexual relation is committed in cooperation, more than once or with violence, or when serious consequences to health are caused to the injured child, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty-five years.
When the act has resulted in the death or suicide of the minor child, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than thirty years or life imprisonment.

Article 101

Sexual or homosexual relations with violence with minors aged 14-18 years
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations, with violence, with a minor child aged fourteen to eighteen years who has reached sexual maturity, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
When the sexual or homosexual relation, with violence, is committed in cooperation or more than once, or when serious consequences to health are caused to the injured child, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
When the act has resulted in the death or suicide of the minor child, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty years.

Article 102

Sexual relations with violence with adults
(Amended first and second paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended first paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Engaging in sexual relations with violence, with adults or between spouses or cohabitants, without the consent of one of them, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
When the sexual relation with violence is committed in cooperation or more than once, or when serious consequences to health are caused to the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
When the act has resulted in the death or suicide of the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 102/a

Homosexual relations with violence with an adult
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Engaging in homosexual relations with violence with an adult is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven
years.
When the homosexual relation with violence is committed in cooperation or more than once, or when serious consequences to health are caused to the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When the act has resulted in the death or suicide of the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 103

Sexual or homosexual relations with persons unable to protect themselves
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations, by taking advantage of the physical or mental incapacity of the injured person or by placing them in an unconscious state, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When the sexual or homosexual relation is committed in cooperation or more than once, or when serious consequences to health are caused to the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
When the act has resulted in the death or suicide of the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 104

Sexual or homosexual relations with threat of use of weapon
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations, by threatening the injured person with immediate use of a weapon, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 105

Sexual or homosexual relations by abusing duty
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations by abusing relations of dependency or duty, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 106

Sexual or homosexual relations with persons in kinship or under guardianship
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations between parent and child, brother and sister, between brothers, sisters, between other persons who are kin in direct line or with persons who are in guardianship or adoption relations, is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 107

Sexual or homosexual relations in public places
(Added wording by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; added article 107/a by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Engaging in sexual or homosexual relations in public places or in environments exposed to people's view, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

Article 107/a

Sexual violence
The exercise of sexual violence, through the performance of acts of a sexual nature on the body of another person with objects, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When this act is committed in cooperation, against several persons, more than once, or against children aged fourteen to eighteen years, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
When this act is committed against a minor who has not reached the age of fourteen or a minor who has not reached sexual maturity, regardless of whether it is committed with violence or not, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty years.
When this act has resulted in the death or suicide of the injured person, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty-five years.

Article 108

Indecent acts
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; added paragraphs by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Committing indecent acts with minors who have not reached the age of fourteen, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
The same act, when committed against a minor who has not reached the age of fourteen, with whom the perpetrator has a family relationship, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
The intentional inclusion as a witness, in actions of a sexual nature, of a minor who has not reached the age of fourteen or a minor who has not reached sexual maturity, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
A proposal made by an adult, by any means or form, to meet a minor who has not reached the age of fourteen or a minor who has not reached sexual maturity, with the purpose of committing any of the criminal offenses provided for in this section or in section VIII of chapter II of this Code, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 108/a

Sexual harassment
(Added article 108/a by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Engaging in conduct of a sexual nature, which violates the dignity of a person, by any means or form, creating a threatening, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
When this act is committed in cooperation, against several persons, more than once, or against children, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

SECTION VII
CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST THE FREEDOM OF THE PERSON

Article 109

Kidnapping or hostage-taking of a person
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004;
the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Kidnapping or hostage-taking of a person with the purpose of obtaining property or any other kind of benefit, to prepare the creation of facilitating conditions for the commission of a crime, to assist in the concealment or escape of the perpetrators or accomplices in the commission of a crime, to evade punishment, to compel the fulfillment of certain demands or conditions, for political purposes or any other purpose, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
The same act committed against a minor under the age of 14 is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.
Kidnapping or hostage-taking of a person or of a minor under the age of 14, preceded or accompanied by physical or psychological torture, when committed against several persons or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty years and, when death has been caused, by life imprisonment.

Article 109/a

Kidnapping or hostage-taking of a person in mitigating circumstances
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

When the kidnapped or held hostage person is voluntarily released before the end of seven days from the kidnapping or hostage-taking, without achieving the purpose of the crime and, when no torture or other damage to health has been inflicted on the person, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to five years.

Article 109/b

Extortion by means of threat or violence for the giving of property
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Extortion by means of threat or violence to perform or not perform a certain act, to unlawfully obtain property or any other kind of benefit, for oneself or for a third party, is punishable by imprisonment from two to eight years.
The same act, when committed by using or threatening to use weapons, torture, inhuman and degrading acts that have caused damage to health, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
When the act has resulted in death, it is punishable by life imprisonment.

Article 109/c

Enforced disappearance
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Enforced disappearance, through arrest, imprisonment, kidnapping or any other form of deprivation of liberty of a person, by public officials or by persons acting with their authorization, support or approval, accompanied by refusal to acknowledge the fact of deprivation of liberty or by concealment of the fate of the person or the place where he is located, denying him the necessary assistance and protection, according to law, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

A superior who:
a)	has knowledge that subordinates placed under his effective authority and control are committing or will commit enforced disappearances, or disregards data and information that clearly indicate this fact;
b)	exercises his responsibility and effective control over the activities with which the enforced disappearance is connected; or
c)	has not taken all necessary and reasonable measures within his competence to prevent or punish the person who gives authorization, support and approval for the enforced disappearance, or to refer the matter to the competent authorities for criminal prosecution, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When this act is committed against children, pregnant women or persons who, for various reasons, cannot defend themselves, or is accompanied by severe physical suffering, is committed in cooperation, against several persons or more than once, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
When this act has resulted in the death of the person, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than thirty years or by life imprisonment.
The unlawful taking of children who are the subject of an enforced disappearance, or of children whose father, mother or legal representative has been made the subject of an enforced disappearance, or of children born during the period of enforced disappearance, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 110

Unlawful deprivation of liberty
(Second paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Unlawful deprivation of liberty of a person constitutes a criminal misdemeanor and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
When this act is accompanied by severe physical suffering, is committed in cooperation, against several persons or more than once, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Article 110/a

Trafficking in adults
(Added by law 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004;
the title, words in the first paragraph and the third paragraph amended and the second paragraph added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed
by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring or receipt of persons by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, abuse of duty or taking advantage of the social, physical or psychological condition or the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to obtain the consent of the person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, the use or transplantation of organs, as well as other forms of exploitation, both within and outside the territory of the Republic of Albania, are punishable by imprisonment from eight to fifteen years.
When this act is committed against an adult female person it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.
The organization, direction and financing of trafficking in persons are punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

When this act is committed in cooperation, more than once, is accompanied by mistreatment and coercion with physical or psychological violence against the victim, to perform various actions, brings serious consequences to health, or endangers his life, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.
When the act has resulted in the death of the victim, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty years or by life imprisonment.
When the criminal offense is committed through the exploitation of state function or public service, the imprisonment is increased by ¼ of the sentence given.

Article 110/b

Obtaining or using services offered by trafficked persons
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Obtaining or using services offered by trafficked persons, or services that are the object of exploitation from trafficking, knowing that the person is trafficked, is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
When this act is committed against a child it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Article 110/c

Acts that facilitate trafficking
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The falsification, possession or procurement of identity documents, passports, visas or other travel documents or the holding, removal, concealment, damage or destruction thereof, which have served for the trafficking of adults, but without having knowledge of this fact, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
The same act, when committed in cooperation, more than once, or is committed by the person whose duty is to issue the identity card, passport, visa or travel document, or has enabled the trafficking of children, is punishable by imprisonment from four to eight years.
The same act, when it has brought serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment of not less than five years.

Neni 111

Hijacking of aircraft, ships and other vehicles

The seizure and taking control of aircraft, ships and other means of transport in which people are present, by using violence or by threatening with weapons or other means, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Neni 112

Violation of dwelling

Entering or remaining in another person's dwelling without his consent constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
When the act is committed with violence or with threat to use weapons, it constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

SEKSIONI VIII
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST MORALITY AND DIGNITY

Neni 113

Prostitution
(Second paragraph added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

years.

The exercise of prostitution is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
Giving remuneration for personal benefit from prostitution is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three

Neni 114

Exploitation of prostitution

(Title amended and second paragraph repealed by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Inciting, intermediating or receiving remuneration for the exercise of prostitution is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
The same act, when committed with minors, against several persons, with persons with whom close blood relations, in-law relations, guardianship exist, or by taking advantage of official relations, or committed in cooperation or more than once, or by persons charged with state and public functions, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

Neni 114/a

Exploitation of prostitution in aggravating circumstances
(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998, article 2, point 6 and last paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Neni 114/b

Trafficking in women
(Amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Neni 115

Keeping premises for prostitution

Keeping, exploiting, financing, renting premises for the exercise of prostitution, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.

Neni 116

Homosexuality
(Repealed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Neni 117

Pornography
(Second paragraph added by law no. 9859, dated 21.1.2008; amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The production, distribution, advertising, importation, sale and publication of pornographic materials in environments where there are children, by any means or form, constitute a criminal contravention and are punishable by imprisonment up to two years.
The production, importation, offering, making available, distribution, transmission, use or possession of child pornography, as well as knowingly creating access to it, by any means or form, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
The recruitment, use, coercion, or persuasion of a child to participate in pornographic performances, or participation in pornographic performances involving children, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Neni 118

Violation of graves

The violation of cemeteries, graves, exhumation of corpses, as well as theft of objects that may be found in them, as well as any other act that diminishes respect for the dead, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 119

Insult
(Second paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The intentional insult of a person constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine from fifty thousand to one million lekë.
The same act, when committed publicly, against several persons or more than once, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine from fifty thousand to three million lekë.

Neni 119/a

Distribution of racist or xenophobic material through computer systems
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

The public offering or intentional distribution to the public, through computer systems, of materials with racist or xenophobic content constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 119/b

Insult with racist or xenophobic motives through computer systems
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)
The intentional public insult, through computer systems, directed at a person, because of ethnic origin, nationality, race or religion, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 120

Defamation
(Second paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
The intentional dissemination of statements, as well as any other information, knowing them to be false, that harm the honor and dignity of a person, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine from fifty thousand to one million five hundred thousand lekë.
The same act, when committed publicly, against several persons or more than once, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine from fifty thousand to three million lekë.

Neni 121

Unlawful interference with private life
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The installation of devices that serve for listening or recording words or images, listening or recording words, fixing or recording images, as well as keeping for publication data that expose an aspect of a person's private life, without his consent, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

The distribution, offering for publication or publication by any means or form of public communication or other manner of data obtained in the manner specified in the first paragraph of this article, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The same act, when committed against minors, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
When the criminal offence is committed through the exploitation of state function or public service or by a person who possesses such data because of state duty or public service, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.

Neni 121/a

Stalking
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The threatening or harassment of a person by means of repeated acts, with the aim of causing him a continuous and serious state of anxiety or fear for personal safety, of a relative or of a person with whom he has a spiritual connection, or to force him to change his way of life, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to four years.
When this act is committed by an ex-spouse, ex-cohabitant or person who has had a spiritual connection with the victim, the punishment is increased by one third of the given sentence.
When this act is committed against a minor, a pregnant woman or a person unable to defend himself, as well as when committed by a masked person or accompanied by carrying or using weapons, the punishment is increased up to one half of the given sentence.

Neni 122

Disclosure of personal secrets

The disclosure of a secret that belongs to the private life of a person by one who obtains it because of duty or profession, when obliged not to disclose it without being authorized, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
The same act, committed with the aim of gain or to harm another person, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 123

Obstruction or violation of secrecy of correspondence

The intentional commission of acts such as destruction, non-delivery, opening and reading of letters or any other correspondence, as well as interruption or taking control, listening to telephone, telegraph or any other means of telecommunication conversations, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

SEKSIONI IX
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN, MARRIAGE AND FAMILY

Neni 124

Abandonment of minor children
(Word amended in the first paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The abandonment of a child under the age of 16 by the parent or person who is obliged to care for them, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When the act has caused serious damage to the health or death of the child, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 124/a

Solicitation or receipt of compensation for adoption procedures
(Added by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013, article 48)

The solicitation, proposal, giving or acceptance of compensation and other benefits, to perform or not to perform an act related to the adoption process of a minor, is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years.

Neni 124/b

Maltreatment of minors
(Added by law no. 9859, dated 21.1.2008; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; second paragraph amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Physical or psychological maltreatment of a minor by parents, sister, brother, grandfather, grandmother, legal guardian or any person who is obliged to care for them, is punishable by imprisonment from three months to two years.
Forcing, exploiting, inciting or using a minor to work, to secure income, to beg or to perform actions that harm their mental and/or physical development, or their education, is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
When the act has caused serious damage to the health or death of the minor, it is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Neni 125

Failure to provide means of subsistence

Failure to provide the necessary means of subsistence for children, parents or spouse, by the person who is obliged to provide it pursuant to a court decision, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 126

Failure to notify change of residence

Failure to notify within one month the change of residence, to interested parties or the enforcement body, by the person who according to a court decision is obliged to provide the necessary means of subsistence for their children, parents or spouse, as well as the person to whom the children have been entrusted after dissolution of marriage, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 127

Unlawful taking of a child

The unlawful taking of a child, by removing them from the person exercising parental authority or to whom they have been entrusted for upbringing and education, as well as failure to hand over the child to the other parent pursuant to a court decision, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Neni 128

Switching of children

The switching of children committed through negligence by personnel where children are kept for upbringing, medical treatment or in maternity homes, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 128/a

Concealment or intentional switching of a child
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The concealment or intentional switching of a child with another, committed by medical personnel, is punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Neni 128/b

Trafficking of minors
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001, amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; added by law no. 9859, dated 21.1.2008; words amended in the first paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The recruitment, sale, transportation, transfer, concealment or reception of minors for the purpose of exploitation of prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or forms similar to slavery, use or transplantation of organs, as well as other forms of exploitation, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
The organization, direction and financing of trafficking of minors is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
When this act is committed in cooperation or more than once, or is accompanied by maltreatment and coercion with physical or psychological violence of the victim, to perform various actions, or results in serious consequences for health, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.
When the act has resulted in the death of the victim, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than twenty years or by life imprisonment.
When the criminal offence is committed through abuse of state function or public service, the imprisonment is increased by ¼ of the sentence given.

Neni 129

Incitement of minors to crime

The incitement or attraction of minors under the age of fourteen to commit crime, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 130

Coercion or prevention from cohabiting or from contracting or dissolving marriage
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Coercion or prevention from starting or continuing cohabitation, or coercion to contract or dissolve marriage, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
The intentional request to an adult or child to go outside the territory of the Republic of Albania, with the purpose of forcing them to contract marriage, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 130/a

Domestic violence
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; last paragraph amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013, amended by law no. 35/2020, dated 16.4.2020)
Beating, as well as any other act of physical, psychological violence, against a person who is a spouse, ex-spouse, cohabitant or ex-cohabitant, close relative (ancestors, descendants, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, children of brothers and sisters), or close in-law (father-in-law,

mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law/sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson and stepdaughter), or in an intimate or former intimate relationship with the perpetrator of the criminal offence, resulting in harm to their physical, psycho-social and economic integrity, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
Serious threat of murder or serious injury, against a person who is a spouse, ex-spouse, cohabitant or ex-cohabitant, close relative (ancestors, descendants, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, children of brothers and sisters), or close in-law (father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law/sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson and stepdaughter), or in an intimate or former intimate relationship with the perpetrator of the criminal offence, resulting in harm to their mental integrity, is punishable by imprisonment up to four years.
Intentional injury, against a person who is a spouse, ex-spouse, cohabitant or ex-cohabitant, close relative (ancestors, descendants, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, children of brothers and sisters), or close in-law (father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law/sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson and stepdaughter), or in an intimate or former intimate relationship with the perpetrator of the criminal offence, which has caused temporary incapacity for work of more than nine days, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
These same acts, committed repeatedly, or in the presence of children, are punishable by one to five years imprisonment.

CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST FREEDOM OF BELIEF

Neni 131

Prevention of activities of religious organizations

The prohibition of activities of religious organizations, as well as the creation of obstacles to the free exercise of their activities, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 132

Destruction or damage of objects of worship

The intentional destruction or damage of objects of worship, when it has caused the total or partial loss of their values, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 133

Obstruction of religious ceremonies

Prohibiting or creating obstacles for persons to participate in religious ceremonies, as well as to freely express religious beliefs, constitutes a criminal offence and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

CHAPTER III

CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY AND IN THE ECONOMIC SPHERE

SECTION I THEFT OF PROPERTY

Article 134

Theft
(a paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
Theft of property is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to three years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.
The same offence, when it has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from four to ten years.

Article 135

Theft committed by abusing duty
(Words added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Theft of property committed by a person who has the duty to guard and administer it, or by abusing duty, is punishable by imprisonment up to ten years.

Article 136

Theft of banks and savings funds
(Second paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Theft of banks and savings funds is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 137

Theft of electrical energy or telephone impulses
(First paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; second paragraph amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; amended by law no. 98/2014, dated 31.7.2014)
Theft of electrical energy or telephone impulses, damage to the meter, as well as any other illegal and unauthorized intervention in the measurement system or in the electrical network or telephone network, committed with the aim of illegal gain, constitutes a criminal offence and is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
When this criminal offence is committed in collaboration, more than once, or by non-household users of electrical energy or the telephone service network, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 137/a

Theft of electronic communications network
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Theft of electronic communications network is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration, more than once, or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Article 138

Theft of works of art and culture

Theft of works of art and culture is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

years.

Theft of works of art and culture of national importance is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten

Article 138/a

Trafficking in works of art and culture
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Import, export, transit and trade in violation of the law of works of art and culture, with the aim of material gain or any other benefit, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration or more than once, or causes serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 139

Theft with violence

Theft of property accompanied by the use of violence is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen
years.

Article 140

Theft with weapons
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Theft of property, accompanied by the carrying of military weapons and ammunition or their use, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 141

Theft resulting in death
(Words "or with death" removed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Theft of property, when accompanied by violence that has caused the death of a person, is punishable by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty-five years or life imprisonment.

Article 141/a

Trafficking in motor vehicles
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Import, export, transit and trade in violation of the law, of stolen motor vehicles, with the aim of material gain or any other benefit, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration or more than once, or causes serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 142

Providing means for theft

Providing conditions and material means to steal property is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to three years.
SECTION II FRAUD

Article 143

(Second paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

Appropriation of private or public property through the presentation of false facts or by concealing true facts, lies or abuse of trust, for oneself or other persons, constitutes the criminal offence of fraud and is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
This offence, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from two to six years.
When the offence has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 143/a

Fraudulent and pyramid schemes
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Organization and operation of fraudulent and pyramid lending schemes, with the aim of material gain, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
The same offence, when it has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 143/a/1

Market manipulation
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Intentionally inaccurate presentation of the value of a good, service or currency, with the aim of disrupting the free and fair functioning of the market, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to four years.

Article 143/a/2

Unauthorized use and dissemination of privileged information
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A person who, in an authorized or unauthorized manner, becomes aware of privileged information, of which the public has no knowledge and which he may use with the aim of material gain for himself, for a third party or to the detriment of the latter, in one of the following ways:
a)	to buy or to sell securities tradable in the territory of the Republic of Albania or traded by an issuer, with headquarters in the Republic of Albania;
b)	knowing the privileged nature of the information, communicates it, without authorization, to a third party;
c)	knowing the privileged nature of the information, advises a third party to buy or to sell securities tradable in the territory of the Republic of Albania or traded by an issuer, with headquarters in the Republic of Albania, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When this offence is committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 143/a/3

Price manipulation and dissemination of false information
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Action or inaction of a person who:
a)	signs a fictitious contract for the sale or replacement of securities;
b)	executes orders for the purchase or sale of securities, for which the order has been executed at the same price, or if he uses these securities as counter-orders;

c)	disseminates information or other false facts about the increase or decrease of the price of securities or the creation of fictitious active trading in them, with the aim of personal gain for himself, a third party or to the detriment of the latter, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When this offence is committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.

This excerpt sits under: LIGJ > CHAPTER II

Article 143/a/4

Submission of false data and their unauthorized distribution
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A person who, as a member of the board of directors or supervisory board of an issuer, permits or enables the distribution of a prospectus different from that prescribed by law, or permits or enables the submission of false data or false representation of facts of material value in a prospectus, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When this act is committed in cooperation, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it shall be punished by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 143/a/5

Registration of securities on the stock exchange in an unauthorized manner
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A person who, as a member of the board of directors of the stock exchange, permits the registration in quotation one, the quotation of public joint stock companies or in other quotations of securities that do not meet the conditions of the law for securities, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When this act is committed in cooperation, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it shall be punished by imprisonment from two to five years.

Article 143/a/6

Concealment of ownership
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A person who intentionally does not provide data on ownership to the Financial Supervisory Authority, according to the law on securities, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to one year.
When this act is committed in cooperation, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it shall be punished by imprisonment from two to five years.

Article 143/a/7

Illegal trading of securities
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

A person who engages in unauthorized intermediation for the purchase or sale of securities shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to one year.
When this act is committed in cooperation, more than once or has caused serious consequences, it shall be punished by imprisonment from two to five years.

Article 143/b

Computer fraud
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal penalty, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The input, alteration, deletion or removal of computer data or interference with the functioning of a computer system, with the intent to secure for oneself or others, by fraud, an unlawful economic benefit or to cause a third party a reduction of property, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to six years.
The same act, when committed in cooperation, to the detriment of several persons, more than once or when it has caused serious material consequences, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 144

Fraud in subsidies

Fraud in submitted documents, unlawfully obtaining subsidies from the state, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to four years.

Article 144/a

Creation of fraudulent schemes related to value added tax
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The organization and operation of fraudulent schemes, with the purpose of material gain for oneself or others, through non-payment, or obtaining credit or refund of value added tax, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 145

Fraud in insurance

The submission of false circumstances regarding the object to be insured, or the creation of false circumstances and their submission in documents unlawfully obtaining insurance, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Article 146

Fraud in credit

Fraud in submitted documents, unlawfully obtaining credit by fictitiously registering as mortgage objects that do not exist, or beyond their real value, or in the ownership of another, done with the intent not to repay the credit obtained, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 147

Fraud for works of art and culture
(Word amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Theft of property by means of fraud, by presenting a work of art and culture as original or of a different author from what it actually is, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to four years.

Article 148

Publication of another's work under one's own name
(Word amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The publication or use in whole or in part under one's own name of a literary, musical, artistic or scientific work that belongs to another, constitutes a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 149

Violation of copyright
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001 and no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The reproduction in whole or in part, distribution, public communication, sale, offering for sale, use, supply, export or import for profit purposes of a work protected by copyright, without the consent of the author or rights holder, when his moral or economic rights have been violated, constitutes a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to two years.
The same act, when committed in cooperation or more than once, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 149/a

Violation of industrial property rights
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The production, distribution, holding for trading purposes, sale, offering for sale, supply, distribution, export or import for these purposes of:
a)	a product or process protected by a patent, without the consent of the patent owner;
b)	a product protected by an industrial design, without the consent of the industrial design owner;
c)	goods or services protected by a trademark, without the consent of the trademark owner;
ç) a product derived from a geographical indication, without the consent of the geographical indication owner;
committed intentionally, constitute a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to one year.
The same act when committed in cooperation or more than once constitutes a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 149/b

Violation of semiconductor circuit topography rights
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The production, use, holding for trading purposes, sale, offering for sale, supply, distribution, export or import for these purposes of a product that violates the rights of the registered topography of the circuit, semiconductor or integrated circuit, without the consent of the topography owner, committed intentionally, constitute a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to one year.
When this act is committed in cooperation or more than once it constitutes a criminal offense and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

SECTION III DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY

Article 150

Destruction of property

The intentional destruction or damage of property, when the material consequences are not light, shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to three years.

Article 151

Destruction of property by fire

The intentional destruction or damage of property by fire shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it shall be punished by imprisonment up to ten years.
When serious consequences for the life and health of people have been caused, it shall be punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 152

Destruction of property by explosive

The intentional destruction or damage of property by explosive shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to five years. When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it shall be punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When serious consequences for the life and health of people have been caused, it shall be punished by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Neni 153

Destruction of property by flooding

Intentional destruction or damage of property by flooding is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When serious consequences to the life and health of people have been caused, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 154

Destruction of property by other means

Intentional destruction or damage of property by other means, which constitute a danger to the surrounding environment and the life of people, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When serious consequences to the life and health of people have been caused, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 154/a

Destruction of buildings and other structures
(Added by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)
Intentional commission of any other action, different from those provided for in the above articles of this section, which may bring about the total or partial destruction of a building, civic structure, industrial work, infrastructure or any other structure or which may endanger the life or health of people, if it does not constitute another criminal offense, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When serious consequences to the life and health of people have been caused, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 155

Destruction of roads

Intentional destruction or damage of automobile roads, railways and works connected to them, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to seven years.
When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offenses, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
When serious consequences to the life and health of people have been caused, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 156

Destruction of electrical network
(Second paragraph added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Intentional destruction or damage of electrical, telegraph, telephone, radio-television network or any interconnecting network, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offense, when committed in cooperation, more than once, or has brought serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 157

Destruction of irrigation network

Intentional destruction or damage of irrigation and drainage canals or works connected to them, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 158

Administration of water without right, by diverting or changing the water line, by opening dams, by constructing or closing drainage or irrigation canals, lines or other works, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 159

Destruction of water supply network
(Amended by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Connection, as well as any other intervention made without permission in the water supply network, for taking drinking water, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
Intentional destruction of the water supply network is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 160

Destruction of cultural works

Intentional destruction or damage of cultural works is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When cultural works of national importance have been destroyed or damaged by the criminal offense, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment from two to eight years.

Neni 161

Destruction of property by negligence

Destruction or damage of property by negligence, when it has brought serious material consequences, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 162

Collision of mass transport vehicles

Causing by negligence the collision of trains, ships, airplanes, when it has caused derailment, burning, sinking, overturning, going off the rails or has been accompanied by serious material consequences, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

SEKSIONI IV
CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED IN COMMERCIAL COMPANIES

Neni 163

Preparation of false statements

Preparation of false statements, in the case of increase of the company's capital, related to the distribution of shares of the founding capital of the partners, to its payment or to the deposit of funds, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine.

Neni 164

Abuse of competences

Abuse of competences by members of the supervisory board or administrators of the company with the purpose of gain or to favor another company where they have interests, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 164/a

Active corruption in the private sector
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage, for oneself or for other persons, to a person who exercises a managerial function in a commercial company or works in any position in the private sector, to perform or not perform an act in violation of his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from three months to three years.

Neni 164/b

Passive corruption in the private sector
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The request or receipt, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or acceptance of an offer or promise, arising from an undue advantage, by a person who exercises a managerial function or works in any position in the private sector, to perform or not perform an act in violation of his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.

Neni 165

Falsification of signatures

Falsification of signatures and contributions or false declaration of contributions of company funds, or publication of signatures and contributions for fictitious persons, or valuation of contribution in kind with a value greater than the actual value, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 166

Irregular issuance of shares

Irregular issuance of shares made before registration of the company or when registration has been done unlawfully, or when the formalities of the company have not yet been completed, or when the amendment of the statute on the occasion of capital increase has not yet been made or has not been registered or has been done unlawfully, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 167

Unlawful holding of two capacities

Holding simultaneously the capacities of partner and accountant constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Neni 168

Giving false information
Giving false information about the state of the company by the accountant at a commercial company, or failure to report to the competent bodies the commission of a crime, when the cases of exceptions from criminal liability provided for in article 300 of this Code do not exist, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 169

Disclosure of company secrets
Disclosure of company secrets by its accountant, except in cases when required by law, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 170

Failure to make mandatory entries
Failure to make mandatory entries by the administrator or liquidator of the company constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine.

Article 170/a

Illegal employment
(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Employment without registration with the competent authorities or without guaranteeing the insurance of the employee according to the rules, when an administrative measure has been previously given, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by a fine of up to 10 thousand lekë for each case or by imprisonment of up to 1 year.
Intentional failure to perform or concealment of violations related to employment and social insurance by persons charged with the implementation and control of the respective provisions, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by a fine of up to 100 thousand lekë or by imprisonment of up to 2 years.

Article 170/b

Illegal competition through violence
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; first paragraph amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

The commission, during the exercise of commercial activity, of acts of competition by means of threat or violence is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.
When the acts of competition are directed against activities financed wholly or partially and in any manner by the state or public entities, the imprisonment penalty is increased by one third.

SECTION IV/1
CRIMINAL OFFENCES IN RELATION TO THE EXERCISE OF BANKING AND FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Article 170/c

Exercise of banking activity without a licence
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The exercise of banking activity by persons who are not licensed for this purpose, according to the banking legislation in force, is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment of up to three years.
The same offence, when it has caused serious consequences to state interests or those of citizens, is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment of up to seven years.

Article 170/ç

Exercise of financial activities without a licence
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The exercise of one or more financial activities different from banking activity, by persons who are not licensed for this purpose, according to the banking and/or financial legislation in force, is punishable by a fine or imprisonment of up to three years.
The same offence, when it has caused serious consequences to state interests or those of citizens, is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment of up to five years.
SECTION V
CRIMES IN THE FIELD OF CUSTOMS

Article 171

Smuggling of prohibited or restricted goods
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The illegal import, export or transit of prohibited or restricted goods entering and leaving the Republic of Albania, committed by any means or method whatsoever, is punishable by imprisonment of up to ten years.

Article 172

Smuggling of goods for which excise is paid or with full or partial suspension from
customs or excise duties
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export or transit of goods, for which excise is paid, through passage outside customs points, partial or full concealment, inaccurate declaration at customs, false declaration regarding the nature, type, quality, price, destination of the goods or other forms, which aim at evasion of customs

duties or obtaining partial or total exemption, reimbursement or reduction from customs tariffs, taxes, duties, excise or any advantage whatsoever related to the import or export of goods, is punishable by imprisonment of up to seven years.
The release for consumption of goods placed in free circulation after being imported with full or partial suspension from customs or excise duties, due to their final destination or their final use, with the aim of evading customs duties, is punishable by up to five years imprisonment.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 173

Smuggling of licensed goods
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export or transit of goods, for which a licence from the competent authority is required, through passage outside customs points, partial or full concealment, inaccurate declaration at customs, false declaration regarding the nature, type, quality, price, destination of the goods or other forms, which aim at evasion of customs duties, is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 174

Smuggling of other goods
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export or transit of goods, through passage outside customs points, full or partial concealment, inaccurate declaration at customs, false declaration regarding the nature, type, quality, price, destination of the goods or other forms, which aim at evasion of customs duties or obtaining partial or total exemption, reimbursement or reduction from customs tariffs, taxes, duties, excise or any advantage whatsoever, related to the import or export of goods, is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Article 175

Smuggling by employees related to customs activity
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The commission of smuggling by customs employees or employees related to customs activity, even in cooperation with other persons, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 176

Smuggling of cultural values
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export or transit of national cultural values in contravention of the legal provisions relating to them is punishable by imprisonment of up to ten years.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 177

Smuggling of goods with intermediate regime
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export or transit of goods, by presenting them as goods with intermediate regime, with the aim of evading customs duties or obtaining partial or total exemption, reimbursement or reduction from customs tariffs, taxes, duties, excise or any advantage whatsoever, related to the

import or export of goods, is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 178

Trading and transportation of goods that are smuggled
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The trading, alienation or transportation of goods, which are known to be smuggled, as well as any other assistance given to persons engaged in these activities, is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment of up to three years.
The same offence, when committed with goods, for which excise is paid or which are prohibited or restricted, is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years.
When the criminal offence, provided for in the second paragraph of this article, is committed in cooperation or more than once, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 179

Storage or warehousing of smuggled goods
(Amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The storage, warehousing, keeping or processing of goods, which are known to be smuggled, is punishable by a fine or by imprisonment of up to three years.
The same offence, when committed with goods, for which excise is paid or which are prohibited or restricted, is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years.
The same offence, when committed in cooperation or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Neni 179/a

Non-declaration at the border of cash and valuables
(Added by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003)

Non-declaration, upon entry or exit from the territory of the Republic of Albania, of cash amounts, of any form of bank check, precious metals or stones, as well as other valuables, beyond the value provided by law, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 179/b

Breaking, removal, replacement of security marks of customs authorities
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Breaking, removal of customs seals, replacement, alteration or falsification of other security marks placed by customs authorities for purposes of supervision or control or for suspension of commercial activity in economic premises or placed on means of transport or on goods or falsification in any manner of the identification number of the means of transport, with the purpose of evading customs control, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offense, when it concerns excise or prohibited or restricted goods, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 179/c

Removal of goods from customs zones without paying obligations
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Removal of goods from customs zones without permission of customs authorities and without paying the obligations that must be paid or without guaranteeing their payment, with the exception of cases of exemption from the obligation to provide guarantees, as provided by customs legislation, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, when it concerns excise goods, is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years.

Neni 179/ç

Smuggling by captain, pilot or crew
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Transportation of goods without a manifest or absence or refusal to present the manifest and relevant documents, loading, unloading or transportation of goods, passengers and their luggage without permission of customs authorities, staying in places where there is no customs office or stopping near the port or airport without permission of customs authorities, unloading or transshipment of goods in violation of customs legislation, absence on board the means of transport of goods that should be found there, based on the manifest and other customs documents, committed, as the case may be, by the captain, pilot or crew, is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
SEKSIONI VI
CRIMINAL OFFENSES IN CONNECTION WITH TAXES AND TAXATION

Neni 180

Concealment of income
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; words repealed in the first paragraph by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)

Concealment or evasion of payment of tax obligations, through non-submission of documents or non-declaration of necessary data, according to legislation in force, submission of falsified documents, or false declarations or information, with the purpose of material gain, for oneself or for others, through inaccurate calculation of the amount of tax, fee, or contribution, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
When this offense is committed with the purpose of concealing or evading payment of a tax obligation with a value higher than five million lekë, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
When this offense is committed with the purpose of concealing or evading payment of a tax obligation with a value higher than eight million lekë, it is punishable by imprisonment from four to eight years.

Neni 180/a

(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Non-issuance of the tax coupon, certificate or tax invoice by the person who has the obligation to issue the tax coupon, certificate or tax invoice, when an administrative measure has been taken previously, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
Exercise of an illegal or unregistered commercial activity with tax authorities, not equipped with a fiscal cash register, according to legal provisions in force, or giving orders in violation of the law, with the purpose of non-issuance of the tax coupon, certificate or tax invoice, when an administrative measure has been taken previously, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 181

Non-payment of fees and taxes

Non-payment of fees and taxes within the specified deadline, despite the possibility of paying them, by the person against whom administrative measures have been taken previously for this purpose, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 181/a

Non-performance of duties by tax authorities

(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Non-performance of duties related to collection within the legal deadline of fees and taxes by employees of tax authorities and other official persons who are charged with these duties, when done through their fault, is punishable by imprisonment up to seven years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Neni 182

Alteration of measuring devices
(Words "by fine" repealed by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)

Alteration or interference with measuring and registering devices and cash registers for issuing coupons, or use of altered devices and cash registers, or allowing the use by others of irregular devices and cash registers, with the purpose of evading full payment of tax, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 182/a

Destruction of marks of blocking or suspension of commercial activity
(Added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; words "by fine" repealed by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)

Intentional destruction of distinctive marks placed by the tax administration for blocking or suspension of commercial activity, or exercise of commercial activity after notification of the decision of the tax administration for its blocking or suspension, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment up to one year.

SEKSIONI VII
FALSIFICATION OF CURRENCY AND SECURITIES

Neni 183

Falsification of currency
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Falsification or putting into circulation of falsified currency is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 184

Falsification of securities
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Falsification or putting into circulation of checks, bills of exchange, credit cards, traveler's checks or other falsified securities, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 185

Production of means for falsification
(Second paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Production or possession of means to falsify currency, checks, bills of exchange, credit cards, traveler's checks or other securities, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment from one to three years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
SEKSIONI VIII FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS

Neni 186

Falsification of documents
(Amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; the part providing for punishment by fine as well, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Falsification or use of falsified documents is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
When this offense is committed in collaboration or more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from six months to four years.
When falsification is done by the person who has the duty to issue the document, it is punishable by imprisonment from one year to seven years.

Neni 186/a

Computer forgery
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)
The unauthorised entry, alteration, deletion or removal of computer data, for the creation of false data, with the purpose of presenting and using them as authentic, regardless of whether the created data are directly readable or understandable, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to six years.
When this offence is committed by a person who has the duty of safeguarding and administering computer data, in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences for the public interest, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 187

Forgery of school documents

The forgery or use of forged school documents is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When the forgery is committed by a person who has the duty to issue the document, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 188

Forgery of health documents

The forgery or use of forged health documents is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When the forgery is committed by a person who has the duty to issue the document, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 189

Forgery of identity cards, passports or visas
(Amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The forgery or use of forged identity cards, passports or visas is punishable by imprisonment from six months to four years.

When this offence is committed in collaboration or more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.
When the forgery is committed by a person who has the duty to issue the identity card, passport or visa, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Neni 190

Forgery of seals, stamps or forms
(Amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; amended word by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004, article 15; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 47, dated 26.7.2012)
The forgery or use of forged seals, stamps or forms or the presentation of false circumstances in the latter, which are addressed to state bodies, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to four years.
When this offence is committed in collaboration or more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.
When the forgery is committed by a person who has the duty of drafting them, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Neni 191

Forgery of civil status documents
(Amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 47, dated 26.7.2012,)
The forgery or use of forged civil status documents is punishable by imprisonment from three months to two years.
When this offence is committed in collaboration or more than once or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from six months to four years.
When the forgery is committed by a person who has the duty to issue the document, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Neni 192

Production of means for forgery of documents

The production or possession of means for committing forgery of documents constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 192/a

Destruction and theft of documents
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The destruction by any means of archive or library documents, as well as the destruction or theft of documents that are of particular importance, in violation of the requirements of the law, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The theft of archive or library documents that are of particular importance, or their export in violation of the requirements of the law, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 192/b

Unauthorised computer access
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Unauthorised access or access in excess of authorisation to enter a computer system or a part of it, by breaching security measures, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When this offence is committed in military computer systems, national security, public order, civil protection, health or in any other computer system of public importance, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
SEKSIONI IX
CRIMINAL OFFENCES IN THE FIELD OF BANKRUPTCY

Neni 193

Provoked bankruptcy

The intentional bringing of a legal person into a state of bankruptcy is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 194

Concealment of the state of bankruptcy

Entering into economic trade relations with third parties by a legal person, with the purpose of concealing the state of bankruptcy, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 195

Concealment of assets after bankruptcy

The concealment of assets after the bankruptcy of a legal person, with the purpose of avoiding its consequences, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to seven years.

Neni 196

Breach of obligations

The breach by a legal person of the obligations that weigh upon it on the occasion of bankruptcy, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

SEKSIONI X
UNAUTHORISED CONDUCT OF GAMES OF CHANCE

Neni 197

Organisation or conduct of games of chance activities in violation of the law
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The organisation or conduct of games of chance activities in violation of the law, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
The same offence, if persons under the age of 18 participate in the game, is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
When this offence is committed by a person charged with state functions or in public service, who has a connection with games of chance activities, the imprisonment is increased by one quarter of the sentence given.

Neni 197/a

Predetermination of results in sports competitions
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The commission of acts or omissions for the predetermination of results in sports competitions, national and international, in violation of the principles of fair play, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment from three months to two years.
The same offence, committed for purposes of financial gain, is punishable by imprisonment from two to seven years.

Neni 197/b

Distortion of competition in sports competitions
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

The distortion of competition in sports competitions by participants, through the use of prohibited substances, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 198

Making premises available for unauthorised games

Making premises available for the organisation or playing of lotteries, games of chance or gambling, in violation of legal provisions, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.
SEKSIONI XI
CRIMINAL OFFENCES THAT VIOLATE THE LEGAL REGIME OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
(Amended by law no. 176/2014, dated 18.12.2014)

Neni 199

Misuse of land

The misuse of land in violation of its designation constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Article 199/a

Illegal construction
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; amended by law no. 176/2014, dated 18.12.2014, a paragraph added after the first paragraph by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)
Construction carried out without a permit, in serious violation of the permit or under the conditions of a revoked permit on land owned by oneself, is punishable by imprisonment up to one year.
The same offense, committed for the fulfillment of housing needs according to law, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to three months.
The same offense, committed on public or state land or on the land of another, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
The same offense, when it has caused serious consequences or committed for profit purposes, is punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Article 199/b

Illegal design, supervision, implementation or approval of constructions
(Added by law no. 176/2014, dated 18.12.2014 and amended by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)

Design, supervision, implementation or approval of construction works in violation of the law, planning documents, professional standards in force or in violation of the development permit

or construction permit by persons against whom administrative measures have previously been taken for these violations, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
Incitement with or without remuneration, or coercion of the designer, supervisor, implementer or approver of construction works to violate the rules that guarantee the performance of constructions in accordance with the law, planning documents, professional standards in force or in violation of the development or construction permit, according to the first paragraph of this article, if it does not constitute another criminal offense, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
When serious material consequences have resulted from the criminal offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When serious consequences for the life and health of people have been caused, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 200

Occupation of land

Occupation of land constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

CHAPTER IV

CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT

Article 201

Pollution of air, water and land
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Pollution of air, pollution of surface and underground waters, pollution on the surface or in depth of land, serious damage to animals or plants, through discharge, emission or introduction of ionizing radiation or of a quantity of materials into air, land or water, beyond the limit of norms permitted by law, are punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offense, when committed in zones specially protected by law, such as zones with environmental, cultural, artistic, historical, architectural or archaeological values, or when it has caused or has the potential to cause serious damage to the ecosystem, biodiversity, flora or fauna, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
When the criminal offense provided for in the first paragraph of this article has caused or has the potential to cause light injury to one or more persons, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to seven years.
When this offense has caused or has the potential to cause serious injury to one or more persons, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.
The same offense, when it has caused or has the potential to cause the death of one or more persons, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 201/a

Waste management
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Collection, transport, recovery or disposal of waste, including supervision of these operations, care of disposal sites, as well as actions undertaken in violation of the requirements of legislation in force for waste management, when it causes or has the potential to cause serious damage to air quality, land quality or water quality, to animals or to plants, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, when it causes or has the potential to cause serious damage to human health, is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.

When death of a person has resulted or has the potential to result as a consequence of the offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
When this offense is committed through negligence, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.

Article 201/b

Transport of waste
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Transport of waste entering, leaving or transiting through the territory of Albania, in a non-negligible quantity, carried out in a single transport or in several transports apparently connected to each other, in violation of the requirements of legislation in force for waste management or of permits and authorizations issued by competent authorities, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Article 201/c

Hazardous activities
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Operation of a plant where a hazardous activity is carried out or where hazardous substances or preparations are stored or used, in violation of the requirements of relevant legislation or of permits and authorizations issued by competent authorities, which cause or have the potential to cause serious damage outside the plant to air quality, land quality or water quality, to animals or to plants, is punishable by imprisonment from two to eight years.
The same offense, when it causes or has the potential to cause serious damage to human health, is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.
When death of a person has resulted or has the potential to result from the offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
When this offense is committed through negligence, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Article 201/ç

Nuclear materials and hazardous radioactive substances
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Production, processing, treatment, use, storage, warehousing, transport, import, export or disposal of nuclear materials or other hazardous radioactive substances, in violation of the requirements of relevant legislation or of permits and authorizations issued by competent authorities, when it causes or has the potential to cause serious damage to air quality, land quality or water quality, or to animals or to plants, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense when it causes or has the potential to cause serious damage to human health, is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.
When death of a person has resulted or has the potential to result as a consequence of the offense, it is punishable by imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty years.
When this offense is committed through negligence, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to four years.

Article 202

Damage to protected species of wild flora and fauna
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Killing, destruction, possession, taking of specimens of protected species of wild flora and fauna or parts or by-products thereof, in violation of the requirements of legislation in force for the protection of wild fauna and for protected areas or of permits and authorizations issued by competent authorities, except in cases where such a thing has occurred over a negligible quantity of these specimens and has

a negligible impact on the conservation status of the species, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 202/a

Trading in protected species of wild flora and fauna
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Trading in specimens of protected species of wild flora and fauna or parts or by-products thereof, in violation of the requirements of the legislation in force for the protection of wild fauna and for protected areas or of permits and authorizations issued by the competent authorities, with the exception of cases where such a thing has occurred over a negligible quantity of these specimens and has a negligible impact on the conservation status of the species, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 202/b

Damage to habitats in environmental protected areas
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Actions that violate the requirements of the legislation in force for protected areas or of permits and authorizations issued by the competent authorities and that cause serious deterioration of a habitat, which is located within an environmental protected area, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 203

Ozone-depleting substances
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

The production, import, export, placing on the market or use of ozone-depleting substances, in violation of the requirements of the relevant legislation or of permits and authorizations issued by the competent authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from one to seven years.

Article 204

Prohibited fishing

Fishing at prohibited times, with prohibited means, places and methods constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
Fishing carried out with means of common danger such as explosives, poisonous substances, etc., constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Article 205

Illegal cutting of forests

Cutting or damaging forests without permission or at prohibited times and places, when the act does not constitute an administrative contravention, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Article 206

Cutting of decorative and fruit trees

Cutting of decorative trees and damaging gardens and parks in cities constitute a criminal contravention and are punishable by fine.

Cutting of trees in orchards, olive groves and vineyards, after permission for cutting has been previously refused by the competent authorities, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment up to three months.

Article 206/a

Destruction by fire of forests and forest environment
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; amended words in the first, second and third paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Intentional destruction or damage, with serious material consequences, of the forest fund, forest nursery, forest stock or any unit similar to them, by fire, is punishable by imprisonment from five to eight years.
The same act, committed with the purpose of changing the category and destination of the land, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
The same act, when it has caused serious consequences for property, health or life of people or causes serious and prolonged damage to the environment or protected areas, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 206/b

Destruction by negligence with fire of forests and forest environment
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; amended words in the first and second paragraph by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Destruction or damage by negligence, with serious material consequences, of the forest fund, forest nursery, forest stock or any unit similar to them, by fire, is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.
The same act, when it has caused serious consequences for property, health or life of people or causes serious and prolonged damage to the environment or protected areas, is punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Article 207

Violation of quarantine of plants and animals

Violation of the rules for quarantine of plants or animals, when it has brought serious material consequences or that endanger the life and health of people, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine.

Article 207/a

Abandonment of companion animal
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
When from the abandonment of the companion animal or from failure to place a protective muzzle on the companion animal, in public environments or in environments open to the public, consequences have resulted in damage to the health of a person, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to six months.
When from the criminal act serious injury of a person has resulted, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
When from the criminal act the death of a person has resulted, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 207/b

Intentional killing of companion animal
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Intentional killing of a companion animal is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Article 207/c

Mistreatment of animal
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Mistreatment or torture of an animal, causing it permanent health damage, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
When the act has resulted in the death of the animal, it is punishable by imprisonment up to six months.

Article 207/ç

Fights between animals
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Promoting, organizing or directing fights between animals that cause suffering or torture of animals, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
Providing animals for fighting, raising or training animals with the purpose of using or selling for fighting, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.
Placing bets on fights conducted between animals, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two months.
When the act has resulted in the death of the animal, it is punishable by imprisonment up to six months.

CHAPTER V

CRIMES AGAINST INDEPENDENCE AND CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER

SECTION I
CRIMES AGAINST INDEPENDENCE AND INTEGRITY

Article 208

Surrender of territory
(Removed words "a with death" by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Surrender wholly or partially of the territory to a foreign state or power, with the purpose of undermining the independence and integrity of the country, is punishable by imprisonment not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

Article 209

Surrender of armed forces
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Surrender wholly or partially of the armed forces or defensive materials or supply with weapons and ammunition of a foreign state or power, with the purpose of undermining the independence and integrity of the country, is punishable by imprisonment not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

Article 210

Agreement for surrender of territory

Agreement made with foreign powers or states for surrender partially or wholly of the territory or of the armed forces and defensive materials, with the purpose of undermining the integrity of the country, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 211

Provocation of war

Carrying out actions that aim to provoke war or to place the Republic of Albania before the danger of intervention by foreign powers, is punishable by imprisonment not less than fifteen years.

Article 212

Agreement for armed intervention

Agreement made with foreign powers or states to cause armed intervention against the territory of the Republic of Albania, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.

Article 213

Providing secret information

Providing secret information of a military character or of any other kind to a foreign power to undermine the independence of the country, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 214

Obtaining information

Obtaining secret information of a military character or of any other kind, with the purpose of giving it to a foreign power, to undermine the independence of the country, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 215

Damage to protective objects

The destruction or damage of means, equipment, apparatus, armament, military equipment or military protective objects, with the purpose of reducing the defensive capacity of the country, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 216

Provision of means for the destruction of military equipment

The production or possession of means to destroy or damage equipment, apparatus, armament, means of military equipment or military protective objects, with the purpose of reducing the defensive capacity of the country, is punishable by imprisonment up to ten years.

Article 217

Receipt of rewards

The receipt or agreement to receive a reward or other material benefits, to commit in favor of foreign states or powers one of the crimes provided for in this section, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 218

Placing oneself in the service of foreign states

The placing in the service of a foreign state or power of any Albanian citizen, with the purpose of committing acts against the independence and integrity of the Republic of Albania, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

SECTION II
CRIMES AGAINST THE CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER

Article 219

Assassination
(The words "or with death" removed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The commission of murders, kidnappings, torture or other acts of violence against the highest representatives of the state, with the purpose of overthrowing the constitutional order, is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

Article 220

Conspiracy

The making of decisions and creation of material conditions by a group of people to commit an assassination is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Article 221

Insurrection
(Words removed in the second paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Participation in massive violent actions, such as placing obstacles or barricades to stop the forces of order, armed resistance or their disarmament, forcible seizure of buildings, commission of looting, gathering or placing at disposal of weapons, ammunition and people, creation of facilities in favor of insurgents, done to overthrow the constitutional order, are punishable by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty-five years.
Participation as a leader or organizer in the above actions is punishable by life imprisonment.

Article 222

Calls for armament or unlawful taking of command

Calls for armament against the constitutional order, creation or organization of armed forces in violation of the law, unlawful taking of command of armed forces to carry out military actions, with the purpose of opposing the constitutional order, are punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Article 223

Public calls for violent actions

Calls made publicly to commit acts of violence against the constitutional order, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 224

Creation of anti-constitutional parties and associations

The creation of or participation in parties, organizations or associations that aim at the violent overthrow of the constitutional order, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The re-creation of a party, organization or association dissolved as anti-constitutional or the continuation of activity in a hidden or open manner, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 225

Distribution of anti-constitutional writings

The distribution of writings or use of symbols that belong to an anti-constitutional party, organization or association or that has been dissolved as such, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The distribution or introduction of materials, writings or symbols from outside into the Republic of Albania, which aim at the overthrow of the constitutional order or the violation of the territorial integrity of the country, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

CHAPTER VI

CRIMES THAT VIOLATE RELATIONS WITH OTHER STATES

Article 226

Acts of violence against internationally protected persons
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The commission of acts of violence against internationally protected persons, is punishable by imprisonment up to ten years.

Article 227

Insult to representatives of foreign states
(Repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Article 228

Acts of violence against the places of work of internationally protected persons
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The commission of acts of violence against the places of work, residence, means of transport of internationally protected persons, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
When the act has resulted in serious material consequences or has brought complications in bilateral relations, it is punishable by imprisonment up to ten years.

Article 229

Insulting acts against the anthem and flag
(Repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

CHAPTER VII

ACTS WITH TERRORIST PURPOSES
(Title amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Neni 230

Acts with terrorist purposes
(Words removed by law 8733, dated 24.1.2001, amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The commission of the following acts, with the purpose of spreading panic among the population or to compel state organs, Albanian or foreign, to perform or not perform a specific act, or to destroy or destabilize, in a serious manner, essential political, constitutional, economic or social structures of the Albanian state, of another state, international institution or organization, is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.

Acts with terrorist purposes include:
a) acts against the person, which may cause death or serious injury;
b) hijacking of aircraft, ships, other means of transport or fixed platforms or the unlawful exercise of control over them, by force or through the threat of use of force or by means of any other form of threat;
c) commission of acts of violence against a person on board an aircraft in flight, on board a ship or on board a fixed platform, when these acts may endanger the safety of the aircraft, the vessel or the fixed platform;
ç) destruction of an aircraft in operation, a ship or a fixed platform or causing such damage to the aircraft, ship or its cargo or fixed platform, that makes impossible or endangers or may endanger the safety of flight, navigation or the fixed platform;
d) placing, by any means, on an aircraft in service, on a ship or on a fixed platform, a device or substance that may destroy the aircraft, ship or fixed platform or that may cause damage to the aircraft, ship or its cargo or fixed platform and that endangers or may endanger the safety of flight, navigation of the ship or the fixed platform;
dh) destruction or damage of flight equipment or maritime navigation equipment or interference with their operation, when such an act may endanger the safety of the aircraft or ship;
e) dissemination of information known to be false, endangering the safety of an aircraft in flight or a ship in navigation;
ë) killing or kidnapping of an internationally protected person, according to Article 9 of this Code, or any other attack against him or his freedom;
f) violent attack against the office, private residence or means of transport of an internationally protected person, according to Article 9 of this Code, when this attack endangers the person or his freedom;
g) hostage-taking or kidnapping of a person and threatening to kill, to injure or to continue holding him hostage;
gj) taking possession of, possessing, using, transferring, alienating, disposing of or disseminating nuclear material, intentionally and without being legally authorized, when death or serious injury is caused or may be caused to any person or serious damage to property;
h) theft, misappropriation or obtaining through fraud of nuclear materials;
i) demanding nuclear materials, using coercion, violence or any other form of threat;
j) production, possession, purchase, transport or trade of explosive substances, firearms, biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, as well as scientific research for the production of weapons of mass destruction;
k) commission of acts of violence, using any device, substance or weapon, against a person at an international civil aviation airport, when these acts cause or may cause serious injury or death of persons;
l) destruction or serious damage of facilities or equipment at an international civil aviation airport or to an aircraft placed at this airport that is not in flight or interruption of airport services, using any device or weapon, when this act endangers or may endanger the safety of the airport;
ll) dissemination, placement, discharge or detonation of explosive substances or other deadly devices, in public places, in the offices of a state or government, public transport system or in public infrastructure, as well as distribution in the environment of hazardous substances, causing fires, floods, explosions, with the purpose of causing death or serious bodily injury or with the purpose of causing massive destruction of the aforementioned places, facilities or systems, when this destruction brings or may bring major economic losses;
m) serious and large-scale destruction of public property, public infrastructure, transport system, information system and private property, endangering the lives of persons;
n) causing interruption of the supply of water, electricity or any other important resource;

or any other act that aims to cause death or serious injury to civilians or any other person not taking active part in hostilities in a situation of armed conflict, committed for the purposes specified in the first paragraph of this article.
Actions that cause interruption of an important service, a system, a public or private activity, as a result of protest, civil disobedience, or strike, shall not be considered acts with terrorist purposes within the meaning of this article.

Neni 230/a

Financing of terrorism
(Added by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The provision or collection of funds, by any means, directly or indirectly, with the intention that they be used or knowing that they will be used, wholly or partially:
a) to commit acts with terrorist purposes;
b) by a terrorist organization;
c) by an individual terrorist;
is punishable by not less than fifteen years imprisonment or by life imprisonment. The provisions of this article apply:
a) to all funds, which include assets of any kind, corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, regardless of the manner of their acquisition, and legal documents or instruments of any kind, also in electronic or digital form, that demonstrate rights or interests over such assets, including bank credits, travellers' checks, bank checks, money orders, shares, securities, bonds, bank guaranteed checks, letters of credit, as well as any other financial instrument, similar to them;
b) regardless of whether the person who commits one of the acts provided for in the first paragraph of this article, is located in the same state or in a different state from that in which the terrorist organization or individual terrorist is located or from the state in which the act with terrorist purposes has been committed or will be committed;
c) in the case provided for by the first paragraph of this article, regardless of whether the funds were actually used to commit the act or acts, for which they were provided or collected, or whether a connection can be established between the funds and one or more concrete acts with terrorist purposes.
Knowledge and intent, according to the first paragraph of this article, are derived from objective factual circumstances.

Neni 230/b

Concealment of funds and other assets that finance terrorism
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The transfer, conversion, concealment, movement or alienation of funds and other assets, against which measures against the financing of terrorism are applied, in order to avoid their detection and location, is punished by imprisonment from four to twelve years.
When this act is committed during the exercise of a professional activity, in cooperation or more than once, it is punished by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years, while when the commission of this act has brought serious consequences, it is punished by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.

Neni 230/c

Provision of information by persons exercising public functions or in the exercise of duty or profession
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Informing designated persons or other persons of data concerning the verification or investigation of funds and other assets, against which measures against the financing of terrorism are applied, by persons exercising public functions or who are in the exercise of duty or profession, is punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Neni 230/ç

Performance of services and operations with designated persons
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The provision of funds and other assets, the performance of financial services, as well as other transactions with designated persons, against whom measures against the financing of terrorism are applied, is punished by imprisonment from four to ten years.

Neni 230/d

Collection of funds for the financing of terrorism
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Neni 231

Recruitment of persons for the commission of acts with terrorist purposes or of financing of terrorism
(Amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)
The recruitment of one or more persons for the commission of acts with terrorist purposes or of financing of terrorism, even when these acts are directed against another state, international institution or organization, if it does not constitute another criminal offence, is punished by imprisonment of not less than ten years.

Neni 232

Training for the commission of acts with terrorist purposes
(Amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

The preparation, training and provision in any form of instructions even anonymously or by electronic means, for the production or use of explosive substances, firearms and military ammunition, other weapons and chemical, bacteriological or nuclear substances or of any other nature, harmful and dangerous to people and property, as well as other techniques and methods for the commission of acts with terrorist purposes and participation in such activities, even when these acts are directed against another state, international institution or organization, if it does not constitute another criminal offence, is punished by imprisonment of not less than seven years.

Neni 232/a

Incitement, public call and propaganda for the commission of acts with terrorist purposes
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Incitement, public call, distribution of writings or propaganda in other forms, aimed at supporting or committing one or more acts for terrorist purposes and for the financing of terrorism, if it does not constitute another criminal offence, is punished by imprisonment from four to ten years.

Neni 232/b

Threat to commit acts with terrorist purposes
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

A serious threat to commit acts for terrorist purposes, made to a public authority, even of another state, international institution or organization, is punished by imprisonment from eight to fifteen years.

Neni 233

Creation of armed mobs

The creation of armed mobs to oppose public order by means of violent actions against life, health, personal liberty of the person, property, with the aim of arousing fear and insecurity on a mass scale, is punished by imprisonment up to ten years.

Neni 234

Production of military weapons

The production, possession, transportation of military, chemical, biological, nuclear weapons, with poisonous or explosive base, with the purpose of committing acts of terror, is punished by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 234/a

Terrorist organization
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

The creation, organization, direction and financing of a terrorist organization is punished by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.
Participation in terrorist organizations is punished by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

Neni 234/b

Armed gang
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

The creation, organization, direction and financing of an armed gang is punished by imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.
Participation in an armed gang is punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.

KREU VIII

CRIMES AGAINST STATE AUTHORITY

SEKSIONI I
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST STATE ACTIVITY COMMITTED BY CITIZENS

Neni 235

Resistance to an employee performing a state duty or a public service
(Amended second paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Resistance made to an employee performing a state duty or a public service, with the purpose of preventing him from performing the duty or service according to law, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.
The same act, when committed in cooperation or by exercising physical violence or more than once, is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 236

Resistance to an employee of the public order police
(Amended second paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended second paragraph by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Resistance made to an employee of the public order police, with the purpose of preventing him from performing the duty according to law, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
The same act, when committed in cooperation or by exercising physical violence or more than once, is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to seven years.

Neni 237

Beatings on account of duty
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Beatings or other acts of violence against an employee performing a state duty or a public service, on account of his state activity or public service, is punished by imprisonment from one to three years. When this act is committed against an elected person or public official, on account of his activity,
it is punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
When this act is committed against a police employee on account of his activity and when the qualities of the person are visible or known, it is punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
When this act is committed against a health professional on account of his activity and when the qualities of the person are visible or known, it is punished by imprisonment from one to five years.
The same act, when committed in the premises of the institution where the person exercises the state duty, public function or public service, is punished by imprisonment from three to five years.

Neni 238

Threat due to duty
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
A serious threat of murder or serious injury made to an employee who performs a state duty or a public service, because of his state activity or service, is punishable by imprisonment up to two years.
When this offense is committed against an elected person or public official because of his activity, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
When this offense is committed against a police employee because of his activity, when the qualities of the person are known or visible, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to four years.
When this offense is committed against a health professional because of his activity, when the qualities of the person are known or visible, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
When this offense is committed in the premises of the institution where the person exercises the state duty, function or public service, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.

Neni 239

Insult due to duty
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Neni 240

Defamation due to duty
(Second paragraph amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Neni 241

Defamation against the President of the Republic
(Repealed by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Neni 242

Disobedience to the order of a public order police employee

Disobedience to the lawful orders of a public order police employee constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 242/a

Non-implementation of measures of state authorities during a state of extraordinary measures or during a state of epidemic
(Added by law no. 35/2020, dated 16.4.2020)
Non-implementation or performance of actions in violation of legal or sub-legal acts issued by state bodies, in function of the state of epidemic or implementation of extraordinary measures, by a person against whom an administrative measure has been previously given, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to six months.
The same offense, when committed in the exercise of commercial activity, endangering the health of people, is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.
Non-implementation of the order given by competent bodies for quarantine or isolation, or violation of the rules of quarantine or isolation by a person who is a carrier or not of the infectious disease, to whom this obligation has been notified by the respective state authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from two to three years.

Neni 243

Assaults against family members of a person who performs a state duty

Assaults or other acts of violence committed against a family member of a person who performs a state duty or a public service, to prevent the performance of the duty or service or because of this activity, are punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 244

Active corruption of persons exercising public functions
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; amended by law no. 43/2021, dated 23.3.2021)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage up to the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency to a person exercising a public function, for himself or for other persons to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to one year.
The same offense, when the undue advantage of the person exercising the public function, for himself or for other persons, is above the value of 50,000 lekë, or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.

Neni 244/a

Active corruption of foreign public officials
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage, for himself or for other persons, to a foreign public official, an official of an international public organization, a member of a foreign public assembly or a member of an international parliamentary assembly, to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.

Neni 245

Active corruption of high state officials or local elected officials
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage to high state officials or local elected officials, for himself or for other persons to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Neni 245/1

Exercise of unlawful influence on persons exercising public functions (Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; amended by law no. 43/2021, dated 23.3.2021)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage up to the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, for himself or for other persons, to a person who promises or assures that he is able to exercise unlawful influence in the performance of duty and decision-making by persons exercising public functions, Albanian or foreign, regardless of whether the exercise of influence has been realized or the desired consequences have come or not, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to one year.
The same offense, when the undue advantage is above the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
The solicitation, receipt or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage up to the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, for himself or for other persons, by promising or assuring the ability to exercise unlawful influence in the performance of duty by persons exercising public functions, Albanian or foreign, regardless of whether the exercise of influence has been performed or the desired consequences have come or not, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to two years.
The same offense, when the undue advantage is above the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punishable by imprisonment from two to four years.

Neni 245/2

Exemption from serving the sentence
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Neni 246

Usurpation of title or state duty

Usurpation of a title or state duty accompanied by the performance of actions that belong to the holder of the title or duty, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to two years.
When the offense is committed with the purpose of gain or has affected the freedom, dignity or other fundamental rights of the citizen, it is punishable by fine or imprisonment up to five years.

Article 246/a

Exercise of the profession of certified accountant and audit firm without being registered
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The appropriation of the professional title of certified accountant, the exercise of the profession of certified accountant or the use of designations, such as audit firm, without being previously registered in the public register of certified accountants, as well as the use of any title that aims to create a similarity or confusion with these professional titles or designations, when an administrative measure has been previously given, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Article 247

Unlawful wearing of uniform

The unlawful wearing of a uniform, a document or a distinctive sign, which indicates the capacity of an employee who performs a state duty or a public service, accompanied by unlawful actions, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When the act is committed with the purpose of gain or has affected the freedom, dignity or other fundamental rights of the citizen, it is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
SECTION II
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST STATE ACTIVITY COMMITTED BY STATE EMPLOYEES OR IN PUBLIC SERVICE

Article 248

Abuse of duty
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed
by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The intentional commission or omission of actions or omissions in violation of the law, which constitutes irregular fulfilment of duty, by a person exercising public functions, when they have brought him or other persons unlawful material or non-material benefits or have damaged the lawful interests of the state, citizens and other legal persons, if it does not constitute another criminal offence, is punished by imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 248/a

Granting in violation of the law of pensions or other income from social insurance
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The granting in violation of the law of pensions or other income from social insurance by an employee who has the duty to grant them is punished by imprisonment from six months up to seven years.

Article 249

Performance of function after its termination

The continuation of the exercise of a state function or public service by a person who has been informed of the decision or circumstance that has terminated their exercise, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Article 250

Performance of arbitrary actions

The performance of actions or the giving of arbitrary orders by an employee who performs a state function or a public service during the exercise of his duty, which affect the freedom of citizens, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to seven years.

Article 251

Failure to take measures to interrupt the unlawful situation

The failure to take measures or to request from the competent person to interrupt the situation of unlawfulness as a result of an arbitrary action that has affected the freedom of a citizen, by a person charged with a state function or in public service who becomes aware of that situation due to the function or service, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 252

Detention in prison without a decision

Detention in prison without a decision of the competent body or beyond the time limit set in the decision or in the law, by a person charged with the duty of prison administrator, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Article 253

Violation of equality of citizens
(Words added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The performance by reason of duty and in its exercise, by an employee with a state function or in public service, of distinctions on the basis of origin, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity, health condition, religious or political beliefs, trade union activity or by reason of belonging to a particular ethnicity, nation, race or religion, which consists in the creation of unlawful privileges or in the refusal of a right or benefit arising from the law, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 254

Violation of inviolability of dwelling

Entry into a dwelling without the consent of the person who resides in it, by an employee charged with a state function or in public service during the exercise of his duty, except in cases when permitted by law, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Article 255

Obstruction and violation of secrecy of correspondence

The giving of orders or the performance of actions for the destruction, reading and dissemination of postal correspondence or which disrupts, hinders, places under control or intercepts telephone correspondence or any other means of communication, by an employee charged with a state function or in public service and in their exercise, except in cases when permitted by law, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 256

Misuse of contributions given by the state

The misuse of contributions, subsidies or financing given by the state or state institutions, to be used in works and activities of public interest, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 257

Unlawful obtaining of interests

The holding, keeping or taking directly or indirectly, by persons with state functions or public service, of any interest in an enterprise or operation in which at the time of performing the action they had the duty of supervision, administration or liquidation, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to four years.

Article 257/a

Refusal to declare, non-declaration, concealment or false declaration of assets, private interests of elected persons and public officials or any other person who has a legal obligation to declare
(Added by law no. 9030, dated 13.3.2003; second paragraph amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007;
amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; amended by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

Refusal to declare or non-declaration of assets, private interests of elected persons or public officials or any other person who has a legal obligation to declare according to the law, when administrative measures have been previously taken, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to 6 months.
Concealment or false declaration of assets, private interests of elected persons and public officials or any other person who has a legal obligation to declare, is punished by a fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 258

Violation of equality of participants in public tenders or auctions
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; amended by law no. 43/2021, dated 23.3.2021)

The performance by a person charged with state functions or in public service of actions in violation of the laws that regulate the freedom of participation and equality of citizens in public tenders and auctions, to create unlawful advantages or privileges for third parties, when the public tender or auction is up to the value of 800,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punished by imprisonment up to one year.
The same act, when committed in a public tender or auction with a value over 800,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punished by imprisonment from one to five years.

Neni 259

Passive corruption of persons exercising public functions
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal penalty, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; amended by law no. 43/2021, dated 23.3.2021)

The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of irregular benefit or such a promise up to the value of 50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an irregular benefit, by a person exercising public functions, to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punished by imprisonment from two to three years.
The same offence, when the irregular benefit or promise of such a benefit is above the value of
50,000 lekë or the equivalent in foreign currency, is punished by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Neni 259/a

Passive corruption of foreign public officials
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012, article 35; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal penalty, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013, article 48)

The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of irregular benefit or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an irregular benefit, by a foreign public official, an official of an international public organization, a member of a foreign public assembly or a member of an international parliamentary assembly, to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punished by imprisonment from two to eight years.

Neni 260

Passive corruption of high-ranking state officials or local elected officials
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal penalty, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of irregular benefit or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an irregular benefit, by a high-ranking state official or local elected official, to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punished by imprisonment from four to twelve years.

SEKSIONI III
CRIMINAL OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SECURITY

Neni 261

Obstruction of the exercise of the right to express oneself, assemble or demonstrate

The commission of acts to prevent citizens from exercising freedom of expression, assembly or demonstration, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.
When the acts are accompanied by the use of physical violence, they are punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three
years.

Neni 262

Organization and participation in unlawful assemblies and demonstrations
(added third paragraph by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; no. 9, dated 26.2.2016; repealed expression in the first paragraph by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 24, dated 4.5.2021)

The organization of assemblies and demonstrations of persons in squares and places of public passage, or when the organizers violate the conditions set forth in the request for granting permission, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
Participation in an unlawful assembly or demonstration even after a warning has been given for dispersal, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
The same offence, committed more than once or when it has caused serious consequences, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 263

Organization of unlawful assemblies and demonstrations with the participation of armed persons

The organization of unlawful assemblies and demonstrations with the participation of armed persons is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
Participation in unlawful assemblies and demonstrations by armed persons constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 264

Coercion to participate or not in a strike

The coercion of an employee to participate or not participate in a strike against his will or the creation of obstacles and difficulties to continue work when the employee wishes to work, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 265

Incitement to hatred or quarrels
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The incitement to hatred and quarrels, on grounds of race, ethnicity, religion or sexual orientation, as well as the preparation, dissemination or storage, with the purpose of dissemination, of writings with such content, committed by any means or form, is punished by imprisonment from two to ten years.

Neni 265/a

Participation in combat operations in a foreign state
(Added by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

Participation in combat formations, military or paramilitary organizations in an armed conflict taking place in the territory of a foreign state or participation in any kind of training conducted by these structures, without being a citizen of the foreign state, without being a member of the armed forces of one of the parties to the conflict or official military missions of the armed forces of a state that is not a party to the conflict or official military missions of an international organization, is punished by imprisonment from three to eight years.
When this criminal offence is committed with the purpose of overthrowing the constitutional order or violating the territorial integrity of a foreign state, it is punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Neni 265/b

Organization for participation in combat operations in a foreign state
(Added by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

The incitement, recruitment, organization, direction, training, provision of equipment, creation or use of funds or other means for financing, material support of persons, in any form and manner, to commit the criminal offence provided for by article 265/a is punished by imprisonment from eight to fifteen years.

Neni 265/c

Call for participation in violent combat operations in a foreign state
(Added by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

The public call by any form, means and manner to commit the criminal offence provided for by article 265/a or 265/b, is punished by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 266

Call for national hatred
(Added word by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Endangering public peace by calling for hatred against parts of the population, by insulting or slandering them, by calling for the use of violence or arbitrary actions against them, is punished by imprisonment from two to eight years.

Neni 267

Dissemination of false information causing panic

The dissemination of false information or notifications, by word, in writing or by any other means, with the purpose of causing a state of insecurity and panic among people, is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 268

Degradation of the Republic and its symbols
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
The intentional damage to the flag or emblem of the Republic, displayed in state institutions, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.
The public degradation of the flag or national anthem, during the conduct of an activity organized by state authorities, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 269

Violent obstruction of the activity of political parties

The violent obstruction of the lawful activity of parties, organizations or political associations constitutes a criminal contravention and is punished by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 270

Rebelimi i të burgosurve

The use of violence by prisoners against an employee performing a state duty or in public service, committed to prevent them from exercising their duty or service or because of their activity, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
When the violence is exercised by a group of persons or is accompanied by disturbances and disorder or by threats and intimidation, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.

Neni 271

Disinformation of emergency teams

Deliberate disinformation of emergency teams to disrupt their readiness, committed by any means of notification or calling, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 272

False notification to law enforcement authorities

False notification made to law enforcement authorities about the commission of a criminal offense, to put them in a state of readiness and alarm, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 273

Leaving the scene of an accident

Leaving the scene of an accident by the driver of a vehicle or any motorized means, to avoid criminal, civil or administrative liability, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 274

Disturbance of public peace
(A paragraph added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Throwing stones or other objects at a citizen's dwelling, creating disturbing noises such as by firing weapons or various explosions, using vehicle sirens outside the rules, or any other kind of unpleasant behavior, in streets, squares and public places, that significantly violate peace and morals or show open disregard for the environment, constitute a criminal contravention and are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
Conducting economic activity that emits/generates noise in violation of the law or in excess of the norms permitted by law, which significantly violates peace in residential areas or in public environments, when an administrative measure has been taken previously, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 274/a

Striking an athlete, coach, referee, sports intermediary
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Striking or other acts of violence against an athlete, coach, referee, sports intermediary, because of sports activity, by persons outside this activity, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
The same offense, when committed in sports environments, more than once, or is committed by directors or members of sports clubs, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Neni 274/b

Violent actions in sports activities
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Entering the playing field during the time of the sports activity, by unauthorized persons, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by a fine from 50,000 to 100,000 lekë.
When this offense has resulted in the obstruction of the normal conduct of the sports activity, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Throwing solid objects onto the playing field or at the crowd, holding or using pyrotechnic materials, fireworks, flares, during the conduct of a sports activity, are punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.

Neni 275

Malicious use of telephone calls

Malicious telephone calls made with the purpose of disturbing the peace of another, constitute a criminal contravention and are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 276

Unauthorized use of the Red Cross emblem

Unauthorized use of the emblem of the Red Cross or Red Crescent, when it has caused serious material consequences, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When the criminal offense has resulted in death or serious injury to the health of persons, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.

Neni 277

Self-justice

The exercise of a right by a person that belongs to them or that they believe belongs to them and that is not recognized by another without addressing the competent state authority, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 278

Unlicensed possession and production of weapons, explosive weapons and ammunition
(First and second paragraphs added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998;
first, second and third paragraphs amended, and fourth paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; added and amended by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014;
two paragraphs added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015; fifth and sixth paragraphs repealed by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 9, dated 26.2.2016; completely amended by law no. 82/2016, dated 25.7.2016, first paragraph amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Possession of weapons, explosive weapons or explosive substances in vehicles or in any other motorized means, in public environments or in environments open to the public, without the permission of the competent state authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from five to seven years.
The same offense, when committed more than once or in large quantities, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
Possession of military ammunition, without the permission of the competent state authorities, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
fPossession of weapons at home, without the permission of the competent state authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
Possession of explosive weapons or explosive substances at home, without the permission of the competent state authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.
Production, sale, purchase, offering for sale, trading and transportation of weapons and military ammunition, explosive substances, explosive weapons, without the permission of the competent state authorities, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
The same offense provided for in the fifth paragraph of this article, when committed in large quantities, in cooperation, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

Falsification or erasure, displacement or illegal alteration of markings on weapons and military ammunition is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Neni 278/a

Trafficking of weapons and ammunition
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; words added by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Import, export, transit and trade, in violation of the law, of weapons and military ammunition, or of their component parts with the purpose of material gain or any other benefit, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The same offense, when committed in cooperation or more than once or causes serious consequences, is punishable from ten to twenty years.

Neni 278/b

Production, possession, trade of nuclear or chemical weapons
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Production, possession, trade of nuclear or chemical weapons of mass destruction of the population, is punishable by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty years.

Neni 279

Production, possession, purchase or sale without license of cold weapons
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; words amended in the second paragraph by law no. 82/2016, dated 25.7.2016)

Production, possession, purchase or sale of cold weapons such as swords, bayonets, knives and other tools prepared and intended specifically for attack against persons or for self-defense, without the permission of the competent authorities, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
Possession, purchase or sale in vehicles or in any other motorized means, in public environments or in environments open to the public, of cold weapons such as swords, bayonets, knives and other tools prepared and intended specifically for attack against persons or for self-defense, without the permission of the competent authorities, are punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 280

Production and possession without permit of hunting and sporting weapons

The production, possession, sale or purchase of hunting or sporting weapons, as well as their ammunition, without a permit from the competent state authorities, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Article 281

Violation of rules on poisonous substances

The violation of rules established for the possession, production, use, storage, transportation and sale of poisonous substances with strong effect, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When the criminal offense has resulted in death or serious injury to people's health or serious material consequences have occurred, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.

Article 282

Violation of rules on explosive and flammable substances

(Amended by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014; amended wording by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015, amended title, amended wording in the first paragraph by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The violation of rules established for the possession, production, use, storage, transportation and trading of explosive or flammable substances, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
When the criminal offense has resulted in death or serious injury to people's health or serious material consequences have occurred, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.

Article 282/a

Trafficking of explosive, flammable and poisonous substances
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended title, amended wording in the first paragraph by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The import, export, transit and trading, in violation of the law, of explosive, flammable or poisonous substances, with the purpose of material gain or any other benefit, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once or brings serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 282/b

Training for the production and illegal use of weapons and other dangerous substances
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

The preparation, training and giving of instructions, in any form, even anonymously or by electronic means, in violation of the law, for the production or use of explosive substances, firearms and military ammunition, other weapons and chemical, bacteriological, nuclear or any other nature substances, harmful and dangerous to people and property, if it does not constitute another criminal offense, is punishable by imprisonment from two to seven years.

Article 282/c

(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The import, export, transit, trading, production, possession, transportation or distribution of basic chemical substances or any other substances, technologies, equipment and materials, in case it is known that they are used or will be used for the production or trafficking of weapons of mass destruction and chemical and biological weapons, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 283

Production and sale of narcotics
(Amended first paragraph, added second paragraph, by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The sale, offering for sale, giving or taking in any form, distribution, trading, transportation, sending, delivery, as well as possession, except in the case of personal use and in small doses, of narcotic and psychotropic substances, as well as of seeds of narcotic plants, in violation of the law or in excess of their content, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 283/a

Trafficking of narcotics
(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The import, export, transit and trading, in violation of the law, of narcotic or psychotropic substances, as well as of seeds of narcotic plants, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity is punishable by imprisonment not less than fifteen years.

Article 283/b

Creation of facilities for taking and using drugs
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The creation by persons, who by reason of duty administer narcotic or psychotropic substances, of facilities for taking and using these substances, in violation of the relevant legal provisions, is punishable from three to seven years.

Article 284

Cultivation of narcotic plants
(Amended first and third paragraph, added second paragraph, by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
The cultivation of plants, which serve or are known to serve for the production and extraction of narcotic and psychotropic substances, without permit and authorization according to law, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

Article 284/a

Organization and direction of criminal organizations
(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998)
The organization, direction and financing of criminal organizations with the purpose of cultivation, production, manufacturing or illegal trafficking of narcotics is punishable by imprisonment from 10 to 20 years.
The creation of conditions or facilities for such activities by persons with state functions, is punishable by imprisonment from 5 to 15 years.

Article 284/b

Assistance in the detection of crimes
(Added by law no. 8279 dated 15.1.1998; repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Article 284/c

Production and manufacturing of narcotic and psychotropic substances
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The production, manufacturing, extraction, refining, preparation without license or in excess of its content of narcotic and psychotropic substances, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity is punishable by imprisonment from ten to twenty years.

Article 284/ç

Production, trading and illegal use of precursors
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The production, import, export, transit, trading and possession, in violation of the relevant legal provisions, of precursors indicated by law in the relevant tables, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, when committed in collaboration or more than once, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
The organization, direction or financing of this activity is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 284/d

Production and trade of counterfeit or dangerous medicines and medical devices
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The production, possession for trading purposes, sale or offering for sale, supply, distribution, export, import of medicines, active substances or auxiliary materials for their production, as well as medical products and devices, accessories, component parts or their materials that are counterfeit or dangerous to life and health, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
When this offense is committed during the exercise of a professional activity, through the internet, in cooperation or more than once, it shall be punished by imprisonment from three to seven years.
The same offense, when it has caused serious consequences to life or health, shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than ten years.

Neni 285

Possession, production and transportation of chemical substances
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The production, possession, transportation or distribution of basic chemical substances or any other substances, equipment, materials, in case it is known that they are used or will be used for the production or illegal trafficking of narcotic or psychotropic substances, shall be punished by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 285/a

Adaptation of premises for drug use (Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
The adaptation or permission for adaptation of premises, dwellings, motor vehicles and any other public or private means for the gathering of persons with the purpose that they consume narcotic or psychotropic substances, shall be punished by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 285/b

Throwing or abandoning syringes
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
The throwing or abandoning of syringes, in public places or places open to the public, as well as in private environments of shared use of syringes or dangerous instruments, used for taking narcotic or psychotropic substances, constitutes a criminal contravention and shall be punished by fine or imprisonment up to one year.

Neni 286

Incitement to drug use
(Amended by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)
The incitement of others to use narcotic and psychotropic substances or giving them for use or injecting them to others, without their knowledge and consent, shall be punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When the incitement or forced injection is done to children or in penal, school, sports institutions or any other social activity, it shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years.

Neni 286/a

Illegal use of high technology
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The production and use of telematic systems, means and equipment of high technology, in cases of criminal offenses provided for in articles 283 to 286/a of this Code or to enable or facilitate the consumption of narcotic and psychotropic substances or to transmit or disseminate advertising notices for stimulating their use, shall be punished by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 287

Laundering of proceeds of criminal offense or criminal activity
(Amended by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; added letter "dh", by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended letter "a" of point 1, repealed letter "ç" by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no.
23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The laundering of proceeds of criminal offense or criminal activity, through:
a)	the exchange or transfer of property, with the purpose of concealing or covering its illegal origin, knowing that this property is a product of criminal offense or criminal activity;
b)	the concealment or covering of the true nature, source, location, disposition, movement, ownership or rights in relation to property, knowing that this property is a product of criminal offense or criminal activity;
c)	the acquisition of ownership, possession or use of property, knowing at the moment of taking it into possession, that this property is a product of criminal offense or criminal activity;
ç) the performance of financial operations or fragmented transactions to avoid reporting, according to the legislation for the prevention of money laundering;
d)	the investment in economic or financial activity of money or objects, knowing that they are products of criminal offense or criminal activity;
dh) the counseling, assistance, incitement or public call for the commission of each of the acts specified above;
shall be punished by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When this offense is committed during the exercise of a professional activity, in cooperation or more than once, it shall be punished by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.
The same offense, when it has caused serious consequences, shall be punished by not less than fifteen years of imprisonment. The provisions of this article shall also apply when:
a)	the criminal offense, the proceeds of which are laundered, was committed by a person who cannot be taken as a defendant or who cannot be punished;

b)	the criminal prosecution for the offense, the proceeds of which are laundered, has been prescribed or amnestied;
c)	the person who commits the laundering of proceeds is the same as the person who committed the offense, from which the proceeds resulted;
ç) for the criminal offense, from which the proceeds came, no criminal case has ever been initiated or no sentence has been given by final criminal decision;
d)	the criminal offense, the proceeds of which are laundered, was committed by a person, regardless of his nationality, outside the territory of the Republic of Albania and is simultaneously punishable, both in the foreign state and in the Republic of Albania.
The knowledge and purpose, according to the first paragraph of this article, are derived from objective circumstances of fact.

Neni 287/a

Opening of anonymous accounts
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9086, dated 19.6.2003; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The opening of deposits or bank accounts, anonymous or with fictitious names, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 287/b

Appropriation of money or goods resulting from criminal offense or criminal activity
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

Whoever buys, takes, conceals or, in another manner, appropriates for himself or a third party, or assists in the purchase, taking, concealment or use of money or other goods, knowing that another person has obtained this money or goods, as a result of committing a criminal offense or criminal activity, shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years.
The first paragraph of this article shall apply regardless of the legal prohibition to hold criminally liable the person who committed the criminal offense, from which the appropriation of money or other goods results.

Neni 288

Import, production, sale and storage of food dangerous to the health or life of people
(Amended by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
The import, production, storage, sale or placing into circulation in any other manner of food or the introduction into the production of food articles of chemicals, materials or additives, that endanger the health or life of people, in violation of the requirements of special legislation, shall be punished by imprisonment up to three years.
When from this offense has resulted death or serious damage to the health of a person, it shall be punished by imprisonment from three to ten years.
When from the offense has been caused death or serious damage to the health of several persons, it shall be punished by imprisonment from ten to twenty-five years.

Article 288/a

Illegal production of industrial and food articles and goods
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

The illegal production of industrial and food articles and goods constitutes a criminal offence and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 288/b

Trading and release for consumption of combustible materials in violation of legal quality standards
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
Falsification, trading or release for consumption of falsified petroleum by-products, which are used as combustible materials, as provided in the legislation in force for the processing, transportation and trading of petroleum and its by-products, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious material consequences for health or has damaged the ecosystem, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 288/c

Fraud with food products
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Importation, production, storage, offering for sale, falsification, sale or placing into circulation in any other manner of foodstuffs, materials or additives in the production or processing of food articles, in which data are marked that do not correspond to the content, type, categorization, origin, quantity or quality of the product or products without the above data, as provided in the legislation in force, or presentation of false data in the labelling of food products, which endanger the health or life of people, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offence, when committed in collaboration, more than once or has caused serious consequences for human health, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Article 288/ç

Tampering with security marks of state bodies in the field of food safety
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)
Deliberate tampering with security marks, placed by state bodies in the field of food safety for purposes of supervision, control or suspension of commercial activity in economic premises, on means of transport or on goods, with the aim of moving food goods or resuming activity, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 289

Violation of occupational safety rules

Causing death or serious injury to the health of a person resulting from non-compliance with rules relating to work, production, service, defined in law, in acts of the Council of Ministers or in relevant regulations on technical safety, technical discipline, occupational safety, hygiene and fire safety by persons charged with compliance with the rules and taking measures for their implementation, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.
When the criminal offence has caused death or serious injury to the health of several persons, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 290

Violation of road traffic rules
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Violation of road traffic rules, when it has caused slight injury to several persons, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
Violation of road traffic rules, when it has caused serious injury to one person, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
Violation of road traffic rules, when it has caused the death of one person, is punishable by imprisonment from two to ten years.
When the criminal offence has caused death or serious injury to several persons, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to twenty years.

Article 291

Driving vehicles irregularly
(Amended by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013; amended by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

Driving vehicles or other motorized means in an intoxicated state, under the influence of narcotic substances or without the relevant certificate of competence is punishable by imprisonment from ten days to three years.
The court may decide to replace the imprisonment sentence with payment of a sum of money in favour of the state.

Article 292

Violation of work discipline in transport

Violation of work discipline in railway, water or air transport by employees of such transport, which has caused death or serious injury to the health of a person, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.
When the criminal offence has caused death or serious injury to the health of several persons, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 293

Obstruction of circulation of means of transport
(Added by law no. 44/2019, dated 18.7.2019)

Placing obstacles or preventing, by any means and manner, the circulation of means of automobile, railway, water and air transport, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Article 293/a

Illegal interception of computer data
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Illegal interception by technical means of non-public transmissions, of computer data from/or within a computer system, including electromagnetic emissions from a computer system, which carries such computer data, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When this offence is committed from/or within military computer systems, of national security, of public order, of civil protection or in any other computer system, of public importance, it is punishable by imprisonment from seven to fifteen years.

Article 293/b

Interference with computer data
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; third paragraph added by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

Damaging, distorting, altering, deleting or unauthorized suppression of computer data is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When this offence is committed on military computer data, of national security, of public order, of civil protection, of health or on any other computer data, of public importance, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.
In cases when the actions provided in the first paragraph have been committed by a minor, the provisions of the Code of Justice for Minors shall be applied to him.

Article 293/c

Interference with computer systems
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008; third paragraph added by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)

Creating serious and unauthorized obstacles to impair the functioning of a computer system, through the input, damaging, distorting, altering, deleting or suppression of data, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When this offence is committed on military computer systems, of national security, of public order, of civil protection, of health or on any other computer system, of public importance, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
In cases when the actions provided in the first paragraph have been committed by a minor, the provisions of the Code of Justice for Minors shall be applied to him.

Article 293/ç

Misuse of devices
(Added by law no. 10 023, dated 27.11.2008)

Production, possession, sale, giving for use, distribution or any other action, for making available a device, which also includes a computer program, a computer password, an access code or such similar data, which have been created or adapted for entry into a computer system or a part thereof, with the aim of committing criminal offences, provided in articles 192/b, 293/a, 293/b and 293/c of this Code, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.

Neni 293/d

Unauthorized sale of SIM cards
(Added by law no. 98, dated 31.7.2014)

Violation of the rules established for the distribution, sale and provision of SIM products/cards constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment from thirty days to six months.
SECTION IV
CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST STATE SECRETS AND STATE BORDERS

Neni 294

Disclosure of state secrets by a person entrusted with them

The disclosure, dissemination and communication of facts, figures, contents of documents or materials which, according to publicly known law, constitute state secrets, by a person entrusted with them or who has been able to learn of them due to duty, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense, committed publicly, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to ten years.

Neni 295

Disclosure of state secrets by citizens

The disclosure, dissemination and communication of facts, figures, contents of documents or materials which, according to publicly known law, constitute state secrets, by anyone who has been able to learn of them, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offense, committed publicly, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 295/a

Disclosure of secret acts or data
(Added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)
The disclosure to third parties of data or assistance in disclosing data which the law defines as secret, by a public official or a person charged with a public service, in violation of the proper performance of duty or by abusing one's qualities, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
The disclosure to third parties of data which constitute industrial or professional trade secrets, by public persons who have a duty to protect them, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The disclosure of secret acts or data containing secret acts by the prosecutor or judicial police officer, as well as failure to comply with the obligations set forth in article 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
The disclosure of secret acts or data contained in secret acts by other persons who have knowledge of data about criminal proceedings and who have been warned by the prosecutor or judicial police officer not to disclose them, is punishable by imprisonment up to three years.
The disclosure of secret data relating to the identity, cooperation process, protection or location of witnesses and justice collaborators who benefit from special protection, according to laws in force, is punishable by imprisonment from two to six years.
The disclosure of secrets that has resulted in death, serious injury or has seriously endangered the life or health of witnesses or justice collaborators, their family members or police officers charged with their protection, is punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Neni 295/b

Unlawful exploitation of commercial data
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Trading in goods or offering a service through the use of information or data that constitutes a trade secret or privileged information by persons who have or should have this information or data, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to four years.

Neni 296

Loss of secret documents

The loss of documents or other materials which, according to publicly known law, constitute state secrets, by the person entrusted with them for safekeeping or use, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 297

Illegal crossing of the state border
(Added by law no. 8279, dated 15.1.1998; amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004)

Illegal crossing of state borders constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 298

Assistance for illegal border crossing
(A paragraph added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9188, dated 12.2.2004; title and first paragraph amended by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Sheltering, accompanying, making available or using means of navigation, flight or other means of transport or any other assistance, with the purpose of illegally crossing the border of the Republic of Albania or for the illegal entry of a person into another state, without being a citizen thereof or who does not have a residence permit in that state, is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.
When assistance is given for profit purposes, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When this offense is committed in cooperation or more than once, or has caused serious consequences, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.
When the offense has resulted in the death of the victim, it is punishable by imprisonment of not less than fifteen years or by life imprisonment.
When the criminal offense is committed through exploitation of state function or public service, the imprisonment sentence is increased by ¼ of the sentence given.

Neni 299

Violation of rules on flights

Violation of rules on international flights such as entry or exit from the territory of the Republic of Albania without flight permission, failure to comply with flight routes, landing places, air corridors or designated flight altitude, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

KREU IX

CRIMINAL OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE

Neni 300

Failure to report a crime

Failure to report to criminal prosecution bodies, to court, to public order bodies, to authorities or to the administration, of a crime that is being committed or has been committed, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
Exempted from the obligation to report are ascendants and descendants, brothers and sisters, the spouse, the adopter and the adopted, as well as persons who are obliged to keep a secret known due to duty or profession.

Neni 301

Actions that hinder the discovery of truth

Carrying out actions to change the place where the criminal offense was committed by destroying, altering or erasing its traces or by moving, hiding, destroying, stealing, falsifying an object or a document with the purpose of making it difficult and preventing the discovery of the criminal offense and its perpetrator, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 302

Support of the perpetrator of a crime
(Second paragraph added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; second paragraph added by law no. 9686, dated 26.2.2007)

Supplying the perpetrator of a crime with food, with other means of subsistence or securing a dwelling, residence or in any other way with the purpose of helping him escape search, capture or arrest, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
The same offense when committed in connection with the criminal offenses provided for in articles 73, 74, 75, 79, 219, 220, 221, 230, 230/a, 230/b, 231, 232, 232/a, 234/a, 234/b, 284/a, 333 and 333/a of this Code, is punishable by imprisonment from two to seven years.
Exempted from criminal liability are ascendants and descendants, brothers and sisters, the spouse, adopters and the adopted.

Neni 303

Concealment or destruction of a corpse

Concealment or destruction of the corpse of a person, victim of murder or other violent offenses, done with the purpose of helping the perpetrator of the crime escape search, capture and arrest, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 304

Detyrimi për të kallëzuar provën

Failure to appear immediately to report or testify before the prosecution authorities, the court or law enforcement authorities, regarding known evidence that proves another person innocent who is accused or has been convicted of a criminal offense, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.
Exempted from the obligation to report are the perpetrator of the criminal offense, as well as persons who become aware of the evidence due to their duty or profession and are obligated not to report or testify about it.

Neni 305

Kallëzimi i rremë

Reporting the commission of a crime that is known not to have been committed or the commission of a crime by a person who is known not to have committed it, as well as the creation of false evidence with the intent to initiate criminal prosecution, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 305/a

Deklaratat e rreme përpara prokurorit
(Shtuar me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007)

Anyone who, during investigations or criminal proceedings, when asked by a prosecutor to provide appropriate information related to the investigation, provides information, orally or in writing, that he knows to be, wholly or partially, false or conceals facts or evidence, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
The provisions of this article are not applicable if the act is committed at any stage of criminal proceedings by a person suspected or accused of the criminal offense or by someone who should have been exempted from the request for information or to testify, for any lawful reason, or who was not warned of the right not to testify or to answer questions.

Neni 305/b

Deklaratat e rreme përpara oficerit të policisë gjyqësore
(Shtuar me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007)

Anyone who, during an investigation, when asked by a judicial police officer to provide appropriate information, provides information, orally or in writing, that he knows to be, wholly or partially, false or conceals facts or evidence, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.
The provisions of this article are not applicable if the act is committed at any stage of criminal proceedings by a person suspected or accused of the criminal offense or by someone who should have been exempted from the request for information or to testify, for any lawful reason, or who was not warned of the right not to testify or to answer questions.

Neni 306

Dëshmia e rreme
(Ndryshuar paragrafi i parë me ligjin nr. 8733, datë 24.1.2001; shtuar paragrafi i tretë, me ligjin nr. 9275, datë 16.9.2004; ndryshuar fjalë në paragrafin e tretë me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007)

False testimony given before the court constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When false testimony is given for the purpose of gain or any other interest given or promised, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
The same offense when committed in connection with the criminal offenses provided for in articles 234/a, 234/b, 284/a, 333 and 333/a of this Code, is punishable by imprisonment from two to six years.

Neni 307

Refuzimi për të dëshmuar
(Ndryshuar paragrafi i dytë, shtuar paragrafi i fundit, me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007)

Refusal to answer questions regarding knowledge of the commission of a criminal offense or its perpetrator, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to one year.
When refusal to testify is done for the purpose of gain or any other interest given or promised, it is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.
The provisions of this article are not applicable if the act is committed at any stage of criminal proceedings by a person suspected or accused of the criminal offense or by someone who should have been exempted from the request for information or to testify, for any lawful reason, or who was not warned of the right not to testify or to answer questions.

Neni 308

Përkthimi i rremë

Intentional distortion of the content of a document or writing given for translation by the criminal prosecution authorities or the court or false translation before them, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When false translation is done for the purpose of gain or any other interest given or promised, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 309

Ekspertimi i rremë

Intentional provision of false results in expert reports made in writing or orally before the criminal prosecution authorities or the court, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.
When false expert examination is done for the purpose of gain or any other interest given or promised, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 310

Mosparaqitja e dëshmitarit, ekspertit apo përkthyesit

Failure to appear of the witness, expert or translator, without reasonable cause or their refusal to perform the duties assigned by the criminal prosecution authority or the court, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Neni 311

Kanosja për të mos kallëzuar
(Ndryshuar me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007; ndryshuar me ligjin nr. 23/2012, datë 1.3.2012)

Threat made to the victim of a criminal offense, with the intent that he not report, complain or withdraw the report or complaint made, is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.

Neni 312

Korrupsioni aktiv i dëshmitarit, i ekspertit ose përkthyesit
(Ndryshuar me ligjin nr. 8733, datë 24.1.2001; nr. 9275, datë 16.9.2004; shfuqizuar pjesa që parashikon edhe dënimin me gjobë, si dënim kryesor, krahas dënimit me burgim, me ligjin nr. 144, datë 2.5.2013)

The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any irregular benefit, for oneself or for third parties, to a witness, expert or translator, to secure false statements or testimony, expert examination or translation or to refuse the performance of their duties before the criminal prosecution authorities and the court, are punishable by imprisonment up to four years.

Neni 312/a

Kanosja për deklarime a dëshmi, ekspertim ose përkthim të rremë
(Shtuar me ligjin nr. 9275, datë 16.9.2004; ndryshuar me ligjin nr. 9686, datë 26.2.2007)

Threat or other acts of violence committed against a person to secure false statements or testimony, expert examination or translation or to refuse the performance of their duties before the criminal prosecution authorities and the court is punishable by imprisonment from one to four years.

Neni 313

Fillimi i paligjshëm i ndjekjes penale

Unlawful initiation of criminal prosecution by the prosecutor against a person who is known to be innocent is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 313/a

Zhdukja ose humbja e fashikullit
(Shtuar me ligjin nr. 8733, datë 24.1.2001)

Disappearance or loss by any means of the investigation or trial file, as well as removal from them of documents, writings or other data that are attached to them, when it has caused serious consequences to the detriment of the interests of citizens or the state, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to five years.

Neni 313/b

Prohibition of disclosure and publication of data in violation of the law
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; amended point 1, added points 2 and 3, and renumbered paragraphs, by law no. 36/2017, dated 30.3.2017)
1.	The disclosure or publication in any form, in violation of the law, of data of a classified and confidential nature that endangers the life, physical integrity or freedom of protected persons, according to the legislation in force for the protection of witnesses and collaborators of justice, with the purpose of revealing these persons, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
2.	When the commission of this criminal offense has resulted in serious consequences for their health, it is punishable by imprisonment from 6 months to three years.
3.	When this offense is committed by one of the persons who have the responsibility to preserve the classified and confidential nature of the data, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years and, when the commission of this offense has resulted in serious consequences for their health, by imprisonment from two to five years.
4.	When the offense has resulted in death, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 314

Use of violence during investigations

The use of violence by the person charged with conducting investigations to force a citizen to make a statement, to testify or to admit his or another's guilt, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 315

Rendering an unjust decision
(Repealed by decision of the Constitutional Court no. 11, dated 2.4.2008)

Neni 316

Resistance and assault of a judge

Violent resistance, assault and other acts of violence committed against a judge or members of the adjudicating body, prosecutor, lawyer, experts, any arbitrator appointed for a case, to prevent them from performing their duty or because of it, are punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to seven years.

Neni 317

Threat against a judge

A threat made against a judge or members of the adjudicating body, prosecutor, lawyer or any arbitrator appointed for a case because of their activity, is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 318

Insult of a judge
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Insult of a judge or members of the adjudicating body, prosecutor, lawyer or member of arbitration, because of their activity in a case, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three months.

Neni 319

Active corruption of a judge, prosecutor and other justice officials
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for oneself or for other persons, to a judge, prosecutor or any other employee of the justice bodies, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to four years.

Neni 319/a

Active corruption of a judge or official of international courts
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for oneself or for other persons, to a judge or official of international courts, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to four years.

Neni 319/b

Active corruption of domestic and foreign arbitrators
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for oneself or for other persons, to a domestic or foreign arbitrator, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to four years.

Neni 319/c

Active corruption of members of foreign judicial juries
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The promise, proposal or giving, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for oneself or for other persons, to members of foreign judicial juries, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to four years.

Neni 319/ç

Passive corruption of judges, prosecutors and other officials of justice bodies (Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004; numbered by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise, arising from an undue advantage, by a judge, prosecutor or other officials of justice bodies, to perform or not perform an act related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 319/d

Passive corruption of a judge or official of international courts
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an undue advantage, by a judge or official of an international court, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from three to ten years.

Neni 319/dh

Passive corruption of domestic and foreign arbitrators
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)

The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an undue advantage, by a domestic or foreign arbitrator to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from two to eight years.

Neni 319/e

Passive corruption of members of foreign judicial juries
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; repealed the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The solicitation or acceptance, directly or indirectly, of any kind of undue advantage or such a promise, for oneself or for other persons, or the acceptance of an offer or promise arising from an undue advantage, by a member of foreign judicial juries, to perform or not perform an act, which is related to his duty or function, is punishable by imprisonment from two to eight years.

Neni 320

Obstruction of the execution of court decisions

Concealment, alienation, consumption, damage or destruction of property for which a decision has been taken by the court, or the commission of other acts done with the purpose of preventing or obstructing the

execution of the judicial decision, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 320/a

Non-execution without justified grounds of a court decision
(Added by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001)

Non-execution without justified grounds of a criminal or civil court decision, by the official charged with the execution of decisions, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
When this act is committed with the purpose of gain or any other interest given or promised, as well as to favor persons who have an interest in the non-execution of the decision, it is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to three years.

Neni 321

Actions in contravention of a court decision
(Paragraph added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

The commission of actions in contravention of a court decision in relation to obligations arising from supplementary punishments given by it, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to two years.
The commission of actions in contravention of a court decision, in relation to duties arising from protection orders given by it, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by imprisonment up to two years.

Neni 322

Breaking of seals and marks

The intentional breaking of seals and other marks placed on various objects by criminal prosecution and judicial authorities, constitutes a criminal contravention and is punishable by fine or by imprisonment up to six months.

Neni 323

Removal of a prisoner from the place of stay

The removal of a detainee, arrestee or person sentenced to imprisonment from the place of compulsory stay or during his transport from one place to another, is punishable by imprisonment up to five years.
When the criminal offense is committed with violence or with the use of weapons, incendiary, explosive and poisonous substances, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.

Neni 324

Providing assistance to a prisoner for removal
(First paragraph amended by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The provision of advice, information, means to a detainee, arrestee or prisoner, with the purpose of removing them from the place of compulsory stay, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.
When the provision of assistance is made by a person charged with guarding, supervising or transporting, or who by reason of function has the right to enter prison institutions or to have contact with detainees, arrestees or prisoners, it is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Neni 324/a

Introduction or possession of prohibited items in the institution for execution of imprisonment decisions
(Added by law no. 135/2015, dated 5.12.2015)
The introduction or possession of prohibited items in the institution for execution of imprisonment decisions, which, according to legislation in force, are prohibited, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
The same act, when committed in cooperation, more than once or by a person who has the duty of guarding and physical security or who by reason of duty or profession has the right to enter prison institutions, is punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

KREU X

CRIMINAL OFFENSES AFFECTING FREE ELECTIONS AND THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM OF ELECTIONS

Neni 325

Obstruction of electoral subjects
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012, word amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

Obstruction by means of threat, violence, or in any other manner of electoral subjects or candidates to carry out their activity in accordance with the law during the electoral campaign, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to five years.

Neni 326

Falsification of electoral material and election results
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Falsification, distribution or use of ballots, documents and electoral material, with the purpose of changing the election result through the presentation therein of data known to be inaccurate, the replacement of accurate with false, or through the insertion into the ballot box of ballots in an illegal manner, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
The same act when committed by persons who have the duty to administer the electoral process, or has brought serious consequences to the proper conduct of voting, has violated the integrity of the election result or has brought about their invalidity, is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Neni 326/a

Intentional damage to electoral material
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
Damage, destruction, intentional demolition, or replacement in contravention of the law of equipment, seals, security codes or any other electoral material provided for by law, is punishable by imprisonment from six months to five years.
The same acts when committed by persons responsible for electoral administration or in cooperation, or more than once, or when they have brought serious consequences to the proper conduct of elections, have brought about their invalidity or have violated the voting result, are punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.

Neni 327

Violation of voting secrecy
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012 and by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)
Violation of the rules guaranteeing voting secrecy by the voter, through photographing the ballot, or filming it, or documenting by any means and form the manner in which he has voted, displaying them to other persons, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from three months to three years. Violation of the rules guaranteeing voting secrecy by persons charged with elections,
constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
Incitement with or without reward, or coercion of the voter to violate the rules guaranteeing voting secrecy, according to the first paragraph of this article, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable from one year to four years by imprisonment.

Neni 327/a

Voting more than once or without being identified
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; third paragraph amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

Voting more than once in the same elections, voting for other persons, by presenting false identification documents or by using documents of other voters, is punishable by imprisonment from one to three years.
Intentional permission of the commission of this act by electoral commissioners is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
Intentional permission by electoral commissioners of voting, without carrying out the identification of the citizen according to law, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.

Neni 328

Active corruption in elections
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012 and by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017, word removed by law no.
146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)
Offering or giving of money, material goods, promise of employment or other favoritism in any form, to the voter or other persons connected with him, with the purpose of obtaining the signature for the presentation of a candidate in elections, to vote in a certain manner, to participate or not in voting, or to engage in illegal activity for the support of a candidate or political party, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one year to five years.

Article 328/a

Use of public office for political or electoral activities
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017, words removed in the last paragraph by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)
The participation of an employee who performs a state duty in the civil service or in a non-political function in the state administration, in violation of the law, in the activities or electoral campaign of a political party or candidate in elections, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
The coercion or organization to participate in electoral activities of an electoral subject of pre-university education students by employees who perform a state duty in public education, or a duty or function in non-public education, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
The coercion or demand directed at citizens, by an employee who performs a state duty, that against their will or under the threat of using administrative or disciplinary measures, to participate

in electoral activities of an electoral subject, to participate or not participate in elections, to support or not support a political party or a candidate in elections, or to vote in a certain manner, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one year to three years.
The use by an employee who performs a state duty, of public goods, function or state activity, or of financial or human resources, with the aim of favoring a political party or candidate in elections, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one year to three years.

Article 328/b

Passive corruption in elections
(Added by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017, words removed by law no. 146/2020, dated 17.12.2020)

The solicitation or acceptance by a voter of money, material goods, or other favors in any form, for oneself or others, with the aim of giving a signature for the presentation of a candidate in elections, to vote in a certain manner, to participate or not participate in voting, or to engage in unlawful activities in support of a candidate or political party, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 329

Threat or violence against participants in elections
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

The threat made to a voter to vote in a certain manner or to participate or not participate in voting, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
The threat or use of violence made to a commissioner, observer, counter as well as any other official charged with elections to prevent him from performing his duty or because of his activity in electoral administration is punishable by imprisonment from one year to four years.
When this offense is committed in cooperation or more than once it is punishable by imprisonment from two to five
years.

Article 330

Obstruction of the voter
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; words amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

The obstruction of a voter from voting at his voting center, by violating voting rules, by taking or damaging his identification document, or in any other form, is punishable by imprisonment from one year to five years.
When this offense is committed more than once, against more than one voter or when committed by electoral commissioners, it is punishable by imprisonment from three to seven years.

Article 330/a

Abandonment of duty by members of electoral commissions
(Added by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; words amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

The abandonment of duty or refusal to perform duty by persons charged with administering the voting and counting process, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.
When the above actions are committed by taking away or destroying electoral materials, or when they have brought serious consequences for the voting process or have led to the invalidity of elections, it is punishable by imprisonment from two to seven years.

Article 331

Violation of the right to vote
(Amended by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012; the part providing for punishment by fine, as a principal punishment, alongside imprisonment, repealed by law no. 144, dated 2.5.2013)
The deliberate non-inclusion in the voters' lists of persons who have the right to vote or the deliberate registration in them of persons who do not have this right, is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.
The same offense committed in cooperation, when it has brought serious consequences for the interests of voters or the proper conduct of the electoral process is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.

Article 331/a

Unlawful taking or use of identification documents
(Added by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)
The giving of an identification document with the aim of using it unlawfully for elections, guaranteeing non-participation in voting, to influence the manner of voting, or for any other unlawful purpose related to elections, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one year to three years.
The taking of identification documents of other citizens, with the aim of using it unlawfully for elections, not allowing them to vote, to influence the manner of voting, or for any other unlawful purpose related to elections, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one to five years.

Article 332

Abuse of military authority
(Words amended by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

The abuse of military authority by an officer or military cadre to influence the voting of other military personnel under his command, by giving orders, advice or with any kind of propaganda, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years.

Article 332/a

Abuse of police authority
(Added by law no. 89/2017, dated 22.5.2017)

The abuse of police authority by an employee of the State Police or Prison Police to influence the support of a political party or candidate in elections, through non-exercise of the function with impartiality according to law, participation in political activities of a political party or candidate in elections, by performing any action or giving orders, advice or any other type of propaganda that favors a political party or candidate in elections, constitutes a criminal offense and is punishable by imprisonment from one year to five years.

CHAPTER XI

CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED BY ARMED GANGS AND CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS

Article 333

Criminal organization
(Amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

The creation, organization or direction of criminal organizations are punishable by imprisonment from five to fifteen years.
Participation in a criminal organization is punishable by imprisonment from four to eight years.

If the criminal organization is armed and its members possess weapons and explosives for purposes of fulfilling its criminal activity, even if they are hidden or kept in separate places, the imprisonment is increased by one third.
When economic activities, undertaken or controlled by members of the criminal organization, are financed wholly or partially with proceeds of criminal offenses, the measure of punishment, according to the above-mentioned paragraphs in this article, is increased by one third to one half of it.

Article 333/a

Structured criminal group
(Added by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

The creation, organization or direction of a structured criminal group for the commission of criminal offenses are punishable by imprisonment from three to eight years.
Participation in a structured criminal group is punishable by imprisonment from two to five years.

This excerpt sits under: LAW > CHAPTER X

Article 334

Commission of criminal offenses by criminal organizations and structured criminal groups
(Words removed by law no. 8733, dated 24.1.2001; amended by law no. 9275, dated 16.9.2004)

1.	The commission of criminal offenses by members of a criminal organization and structured criminal group shall be punished according to the relevant penal provisions, adding to the sentence for the criminal offense committed an additional five years of imprisonment, as well as a fine in the amount of one third, but without exceeding the maximum limit of the imprisonment sentence.
2.	When the relevant reference provision contains a sentence of imprisonment or life imprisonment, it shall be punished with twenty-five years of imprisonment or life imprisonment.
3.	When the relevant reference provision contains only a sentence of life imprisonment, it shall be punished with life imprisonment.

Article 334/1

(Added by law no. 9017, dated 6.3.2003)

Notwithstanding article 278, persons who, in accordance with the legislation in force, voluntarily surrender weapons by the date of 31.5.2005, are exempted from criminal prosecution for unlawful possession of weapons and military ammunition.
In any case, persons who have committed a criminal offense using weapons and military ammunition as a means for this purpose are not exempted from criminal prosecution for unlawful possession of weapons.
Persons who, after the entry into force of this law, declare that they do not have weapons and military ammunition and from inspections carried out in support of the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure are found to have hidden weapons and ammunition, are also not exempted from criminal prosecution.

Article 335

This code enters into force on 1 June 1995. The legal acts that are repealed, as well as the effects and manner of its entry into force, shall be determined by a special law.
Transitional provision
(provided by law no. 23/2012, dated 1.3.2012)

Criminal prosecutions are terminated for cases under investigation, for cases not reviewed by the courts, as well as for complaints that are in these bodies and in the public order bodies, for criminal offenses that are repealed with the entry into force of this law.
